The Project Gutenberg EBook of Crankisms, by Lisle de Vaux Matthewman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Crankisms

Author: Lisle de Vaux Matthewman

Illustrator: Clare Victor Dwiggins

Release Date: December 5, 2006 [EBook #20024]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRANKISMS ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Mark C. Orton, Fox in the Stars
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note:

Illustrations are explained at the end of the text.]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Crankisms

By
Lisle
de
Vaux
MATTHEWMAN

Pictured
By
Clare
Victor
DWIGGINS


* MCMI *
HENRY T.
COATES & CO.
PHILADELPHIA




Copyright, 1901, by
Henry T. Coates & Company.
_All rights reserved._




If I may be permitted to offer a suggestion, the Crankisms
should be read in the spirit in which sermons are listened
to--with the object of discovering whom they hit. This will
furnish amusement, for what is more entertaining than trying
the cap on others?

The settings speak for themselves; but the author desires
to express his indebtedness to the artist for having infused
life into and lent grace to dead bones of words, and for
having, in many cases, given to those words a deeper and
more subtle meaning than they themselves could be made to
express.

L. de V. M.

May,
1901.




1

The kisses of an enemy are deceitful, but not as deceitful
as the advice of the friend who is always counseling you for
your own good.


2

The best and the worst in man respond only to woman's
touch--unfortunately for man.


3

Men reason; women do not. Woman has no logic, and judging
from the use it is to man, is better off without it.


4

The present arrangement of society refuses to many the
means to live, while forbidding them the right to die when
they wish.


5

Woman generally tries to attract a man's eye, and then
blames him for being caught by prettiness and superficial
charms. But she rarely tries to appeal to his better self.


6

The man who is pockmarked has most to say against freckles.


7

Charity covers a multitude of sins which are committed in
her name.


8

Life is full of golden opportunities for doing what we do
not want to do.


9

Never compliment a woman and you will earn her undying
enmity. Respect is rarely appreciated by her; but
compliments are always at a premium, even counterfeits being
accepted as greedily as the real.


10

When we grow old we walk unfeelingly over that which we,
in our youth, madly chased.


11

The biggest fool is the one who thinks he can fool others
with impunity without them knowing and resenting it.


12

When we get what we want we are always disappointed to find
that it is not what we wanted.


13

Like does not always worship like: Beauty often worships the
Beast.


14

We were all in the front row when modesty was served out--at
least we think so.


15

Because some men are ruined by intemperance it does not
follow that all should become abstainers, any more than
because some men are ruined by marriage all men should
remain single.


16

What men see in women or women in men to admire is generally
a puzzle to those who know the men and women in question
intimately.


17

The only compliment which a woman really dislikes is that
which is paid to another.


18

Things have changed since Shakespeare's time: men's evil
deeds we write in sympathetic ink; their virtues on marble
tombstones.


19

Our own weaknesses we regard as misfortunes from which we
cannot escape; the weaknesses of others we consider crimes.


20

No matter how well we do, we are sure to be anxious to
impress upon others that what we have achieved is trifling--
compared with that of which we are capable.


21

A woman is not a woman merely by reason of her sex, any more
than an angel is of necessity an angel of light.


22

We are quite able, while hating sin, to pity and be
charitable to the sinner--when we happen to be the sinner
concerned.


23

The commonly accepted idea that a woman of beauty is of
necessity lacking in mental qualities, must have originated
in the head of some woman who possessed neither.


24

The Devil is not as black as he is painted. In fact, he is
more like us than we care to admit.


25

Faithful are the wounds of a friend; and as it is more
blessed to give than to receive, we prefer to do the
wounding.


26

  The naked truth and a naked lie
  Are shocking alike to society.


27

A man often envies another man his physical
qualities--rarely his mental. As we have no soul mirror we
cannot see the reflection of our spiritual deformities.


28

It is easy to have conscientious scruples when they are
profitable.


29

The man who marries for money is a fool, but rarely as big a
fool as he who marries for love.


30

When you have done a man a favor do not insist too earnestly
that it is a mere trifle, or he may take you at your word
and not trouble to repay it; which would be very
disappointing.


31

The gentle art of making enemies is the one natural
accomplishment which is common to all sorts and conditions
of men--and women.


32

What we think of ourselves combined with what others think
of us is a very fair estimate.


33

If a girl cannot make up her mind between two men it is
because she has no mind worth making up.

Besides, any man who will knowingly be one of two is not
worth the trouble of thinking about.


34

If we devoted as much attention to our own affairs as we
freely give to those of others, we and others would be
gainers.


35

Merit, like the show inside a circus, is of comparatively
little use as a drawing card; it is the bluff and buncombe
the banging drum and megaphone of the barker which is the
successful magnet.


36

We always know what we should do under certain
circumstances, but unfortunately we never find circumstances
arranged so as to suit what we do.


37

An over sensitive conscience is simply the evidence of
spiritual dyspepsia. The man who has it is no better than
his fellows.


38

Generosity, as commonly understood, consists in forcing upon
others that for which one has no use.


39

There is a greater difference between really thinking and
only thinking that we think than most of us think.


40

We rashly demand that the devil shall have his due,
forgetting that if that gentleman gets all that is coming to
him it will go badly with some of us.


41

If women knew themselves as well as they know men--and if
men knew women as well as they know themselves--things would
be very much as they are.


42

Before he knows a woman a man often thinks her an angel;
when he knows her he knows--er--better.


43

A critic is one who knows perfectly well how a thing should
be done, but is unable to do it. Therefore we are all the
keenest critics in matters of which we know least.


44

From all enemies and most friends, good Lord, deliver us!


45

Everything comes to the man who waits

but that is no inducement to wait-- for no man wants
everything.

He usually wants one thing in particular-- just that one
which he never gets, no matter how long he waits.


46

When a man has drained the dregs of the bitterness of life,
hope and fear no longer exist in him, only indifference
which produces stupefaction.


47

Forbidden fruit has no attraction until we know that it is
forbidden.


48

A man can be judged from the theatres he frequents and the
ladies who accompany him there.


49

Criticism grows faint in the presence of successful
achievement.


50-51

A man may confess that his judgment was at fault,
but

never that his intentions were other than strictly
honorable.


52

Our last match never ignites except when we are sure it will
not, and are prepared for the worst.


53

It is impossible to serve two masters, and few of us try.
We are satisfied to praise God from whom all blessings flow
while we cash the checks of Mammon.


54

Our own success is due to our indomitable energy and other
deserving traits; that of others largely to blind luck. With
our energy and the good luck of others what could we not
achieve!


55

The trouble with most reformers that they waste their time
and energy trying to reform somebody else.


56

We are convinced in our own minds that every man deserves
what he gets; but, judging from ourselves, not every one
gets what he deserves.


57

If we saw ourselves as others see us we should not believe
our own eyes; but we should have a still lower opinion of
the rest of the world than we now have.


58

When we care we usually don't dare; when we dare we don't
often care.


59

What sounds so sweet as the human voice--to the one who is
doing the talking!


60

Words may be mere wind, but then so is a tornado.


61

Laugh, and the world laughs with you; cry, and the world
laughs at you.


62

A proverbial expression is often a crystallized lie which we
should like to believe.


63

Because everything is for the best it does not follow that
it is for our best.


64

It is easier to moralize than to be moral.


65

The difference between an actress on the stage and a woman
not on the stage is a matter of here and there.


66

Ignorance is not so surprising, nor such a mark of
inferiority, as unwillingness to learn.


67

He who grows indignant when his veracity is questioned
generally has good and sufficient reason therefor.


68

Our joys are mainly those of prospect and retrospect.


69

It is not to be expected that the average man should know
what a real woman is like--he so rarely sees one.


70

The Chinese promise and never intend to perform; we promise
and do intend to perform.

The result is about the same.


71

Woman regards the criticizing of her sex as her own
prerogative, and criticizes more bitterly than any man would
think of doing; but she resents any criticism, no matter how
just, from man.


72

Lambs, it is true, gambol, but in due time they all get
fleeced.


73

What we need is some philosopher to tell us how to be happy
when we have every reason for being unhappy.


74

The most striking trait of the average man is unwillingness
to be convinced--that we are right and he is wrong.


75

If man were so constituted that he could pat himself on the
back gracefully, or kick himself effectively, he would spend
most of his spare time doing one or the other.


76

Most of us live as if we expected to be judged from our
epitaph rather than from our conduct.


77

The world is a paradise for fools, a purgatory or worse for
others.


78

When we have the capacity of enjoying we have not the reason
for enjoyment; when we do have good and sufficient grounds
we no longer have the capacity.


79

To be happy, give; to be successful, take; to be happy and
successful, give and take.


80

What a woman admires in a man depends on whether she is
married or single.


81

Confidence given is usually confidence misplaced.


82

Women admire the gilded youth because he is a golden calf.


83

Even those who do not repeat scandal are generally willing
to listen to it. Talk of the virtues of another, and, as a
rule, your hearers will get bored; only hint that you could
a tale unfold and you will secure perfect attention.


84

We forget that once upon a time we were little children; but
the unpleasant fact that we are big children is being
constantly forced upon us, together with the moral certainty
that we shall never be anything else.


85

A man considers his little weaknesses amiable traits;
a woman--a woman will not admit that she has a weakness.


86

God's call, through the still small voice, to preach, is
much more irresistible when megaphoned by a wealthy church.


87

Many who sing loud praises to God, pay heavy tribute to the
devil.


88

If the world is, as is so often whined, growing worse, it is
partly because of our presence in it.


89

The counsel of a good book is far superior to that of a man
who says one thing and does another.


90

If other people would only be as reasonable as we are, what
a heaven this earth would be.


91

The world has no sympathy for the gambler who loses.


92

Trust in God, but keep a sharp lookout on your friends.


93

Tell the truth and you will shame the devil; you will also
surprise him very often.


94

The knowledge that virtue is its own reward is what deters
many from well doing.


95

It requires no particular skill to win the game when Fortune
has dealt you all the trumps.


96

We give much more thought to what is due to us than to what
is due from us.


97

A camel may not be able to pass through the eye of a needle,
but that does not deter many a lobster from trying to do so.


98

The man who sees things as they are is regarded as a madman,
just as those were formerly looked upon who maintained that
the earth was round. The average man sees things as they
seem to be.


99

We are all convinced of the righteousness and reasonableness
of majority rule--when we happen to belong to the majority.


100

The greater his trouble, the more a man hugs it to his
heart.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustrations:

Readers who are unable to use the fully illustrated html
version of this text may wish to view some individual
pictures, located within the "images" directory of the
html file. Complete page images are named in the form
"pageN.png", using the number of each "Crankism" as
the page number. Drawings alone--without text and its
surrounding decoration--are named in the form "picN.png",
or "picNa.png," "picNb.png" for illustrations that were
made up of separate elements.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Crankisms, by Lisle de Vaux Matthewman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRANKISMS ***

***** This file should be named 20024.txt or 20024.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/0/2/20024/

Produced by Louise Hope, Mark C. Orton, Fox in the Stars
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
