The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Oahu College at the Sandwich Islands, by 
Trustees of the Punahou School and Oahu College

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Oahu College at the Sandwich Islands

Author: Trustees of the Punahou School and Oahu College

Release Date: February 25, 2007 [EBook #20669]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OAHU COLLEGE ***




Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from public domain images available in the
University of Michigan Making of America Collection)









THE

OAHU COLLEGE

AT THE

SANDWICH ISLANDS.



BOSTON:
PRESS OF T. R. MARVIN, 42 CONGRESS STREET.
1856.




THE OAHU COLLEGE.


In the year 1841, a school was commenced, for the children of
missionaries, at Punahou, near Honolulu, Sandwich Islands. Five year
ago, it was opened to others besides the children of missionaries. The
number of pupils has varied from thirty to sixty, and the whole number
of pupils, up to September, 1854, was one hundred and twenty-two. In
May, 1853, the Hawaiian Government incorporated twelve persons, all of
them except one either then or formerly connected with the mission, as a
corporate body by the name of "_The Trustees of the Punahou School and
Oahu College_." It is probable that the legal name of the institution
will be shortened, and that it will be called simply the "_Oahu
College_."

The charter recognizes the design of the institution to be "the training
of youth in the various branches of a Christian education, teaching them
sound and useful knowledge." It further states, that, "as it is
reasonable that the Christian education should be in conformity to the
general views of the founders and patrons of the institution, no course
of instruction shall be deemed lawful in said institution, which is not
accordant with the principles of Protestant Evangelical Christianity, as
held by that body of Protestant Christians in the United States of
America, which originated the Christian mission to the Islands, and to
whose labors and benevolent contributions the people of these Islands
are so greatly indebted." There is also an additional security for the
institution in the following article, namely,--"Whenever a vacancy shall
occur in said corporation, it shall be the duty of the Trustees to fill
the same with all reasonable and convenient dispatch. And every new
election shall be immediately made known to the Prudential Committee of
the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, and be subject
to their approval or rejection, and this power of revision shall be
continued to the American Board for twenty years from the date of this
charter."


_The Sandwich Islands Christianized._

The effort to christianize the Sandwich Islands was begun in the year
1820, and has succeeded beyond any similar efforts recorded in history.
In the year 1853, a little more than thirty years from the commencement
of the mission, the Board was able to make proclamation in the Annual
Report, that the people of the Sandwich Islands had become a Christian
nation. The proofs then adduced of this fact were beyond all
controversy; such as entitled the Hawaiian nation to the Christian name,
if any people on earth might claim it; though without that intellectual
development and social culture, which enter so deeply into the modern
idea of civilization. But even in respect to these things a vast work
had been accomplished.

It was evident to the Prudential Committee, as early as the year 1848,
that the time had come for a change of some sort in the relations of the
missionaries to the people of the Islands and to the Board. They saw
that new and additional motives must be presented to induce the married
missionaries to remain at the Islands, or the greater part of them might
feel constrained to return to this country within a few years, to make
provision for their children. This was not owing simply, nor chiefly,
to the number and age of their children, (for such a result was nowhere
seen in the older missions elsewhere,) but to the novel and remarkable
relations, at that time, of the mission to the people of the Sandwich
Islands.

The problem, as then presented, was, how to give scope to the parental
feelings in missionaries, without increasing burdens and expenses that
could not be borne; though it soon appeared that there was really a
higher problem to be solved, and one that was novel in missions,
namely, how to bring the mission itself, as such, to a termination,
dissolving its relations to the Board, and merging its members in the
newly created Christian community. The first problem stated came first
in the order of time, and it involved the solution of the other. It was,
how to convert the Islands into the home of the missionaries, (which the
peculiar relation of the Islands to the commercial world then rendered
possible,) and the missionaries into citizens and pastors. This was
effected, so far as the action of the Prudential Committee was
concerned, by a series of resolutions made public in the Report of the
Board for the year 1849. The response of the missionaries was in general
favorable, though it required five years was complete the arrangement.
The case was unprecedented; there was no experience; every step had to
be considered in its principles, its equity, and its expediency. The
transition was at length effected, and the mission was merged in the
general Christian community of the Islands. The meeting of the mission
in May, 1853, was its last meeting in its associated, corporate
character as a mission,--responsible, as such, to the Board,
controlling, as such, the operations of its members. The relations of
the ministry and churches of the Sandwich Islands towards the Board and
its patrons, and towards other foreign missions and the Christian
church at large, then became those of an independent Christian
community. The salaries of the native pastors, the cost of church
buildings, and the greater part of the cost of schools, were to be met
(as in fact they have been) by the natives. So was the support of
Hawaiian missionaries, whether sent to Micronesia, or to the Marquesas
Islands. It was only in _part_, however, that the natives could support
their _foreign_ pastors. The Board, in this new relation of things,
would have to sustain to the new Christian community a relation like
that, which the Home Missionary Society sustains to the Christian
community in Oregon or California; and it might be necessary to continue
this relation for some time.


_Native College at Lahainaluna._

The first important step taken at the Islands after the mission had
responded, in the year 1849, to the proposals of the Prudential
Committee, was the transfer, by the Board, of the native Seminary or
College at Lahainaluna to the Hawaiian Government. This is wholly for
natives. The transfer was made on the condition, that the institution
should continue to cultivate sound literature and science, and not allow
to be taught religious doctrines contrary to those heretofore inculcated
by the mission. In case of the non-fulfillment of the conditions, the
whole property, with any additions and improvements made upon the
premises, was to revert to the Board. The government have since
sustained two clerical professors obtained from the company of
missionaries, and the institution answers the purpose of a College for
the native community. It is not adapted, however, nor can it be, to the
wants of the foreign community.


_Necessity for the College at Punahou._

The Oahu College is open to natives speaking the English language; but
it is especially designed for pupils from that increasing and important
portion of the Hawaiian community, which is of foreign origin. This of
course includes those who have heretofore constituted the mission.
These, with their families, must be regarded as in the highest degree
essential to the religious welfare of the Islands. Their children, now
at the Islands in a course of education, not including those too young
for school, nor those in the colleges and schools of the United States,
number one hundred and forty-five. To remove even a considerable portion
of these for education to the United States, would be at great expense
and inconvenience, and there is a growing conviction among the parents,
that their children must be chiefly educated there. "They can there,"
says one of the most experienced of the parents, "be under parental
guardianship and home influences; and this will help to retain both
parents and children in the field. The education will be less perfect
than in the United States, but it will fit them better, in some
respects, to labor in the land of their birth, than an education in a
foreign country. The parents will seek an education for their children
elsewhere, if it be not provided for them at the Islands; but it is
believed that most of them will retain their children there, if a
college be there provided."

The number of foreign residents and their descendants is increasing at
the Sandwich Islands. An intelligent glance at the future will show,
that this enterprising community is destined to exert a very commanding
influence in that increasingly important part of the world, and that the
necessity of its being well educated cannot be over-estimated. The
foreign community now springing up at the Sandwich Islands will
inevitably shape the character and destiny of the whole northern
Pacific. The missionary part of this community has now the vantage
ground as regards all good influences, and with the divine blessing is
able to mould the literary and religious institutions of the Hawaiian
nation. Religion, just now, has a strong hold on those Islands. The
present is, therefore, a favorable time to institute a College, and put
it into a working condition.

The necessity for an institution, such as it is proposed to make of the
_Oahu College_, is one of the most obvious and interesting facts now
presented to our view in that part of the world.

1. The College is essential to the development and continued existence
of the Hawaiian nation. It is so because the missionary portion is
really the _palladium_ of the nation, and because a College is essential
to that part of the community. The religious foreign community cannot
otherwise long continue to perform its functions. It must have the means
of liberally educating its children on the ground. Without a College,
its moral, social and civil influence will tend constantly to decay.
This most precious Christian influence, now rooted on the Islands, now
no longer exotic, needs only the proper culture to perpetuate itself.
The cheapest thing we can do for the Islands and for that part of the
world, is to furnish this culture. It is better to educate our ministry
there, than to send it thither from these remote shores. Indeed we are
shut up to this, as our main policy. The providential indications are
perfectly clear. Through the grace of God and the gospel of his Son, all
the means, excepting such as are pecuniary, for perpetuating
Christianity at the Islands, are already there. Mr. Armstrong, the
Minister of Instruction at the Islands, writing to one of the
Secretaries of the American Board under date of January 2, 1856, bears
this remarkable testimony:--

"During the year 1855, just closed," he says, "I visited all the
Islands, and every missionary station, in the course of my official
duty, and had good opportunities for seeing how the brethren conduct
the affairs of their respective stations, and the success that has
crowned their labors. I found them all at their posts, hard at work,
watching for souls, and promoting the welfare of their people in various
ways. As a class, they are very laborious and self-denying, and the
advancement of their people in knowledge, industry, civilization and
religion, is the best evidence of their success. I have lived for weeks
on weeks among the natives, lodging with them in their huts, partaking
of their homely fare and sleeping on their mats; and the more I see of
them, the more I bless God for what he has done for them. I do not
believe there is a community on earth, of the same number, more entirely
pervaded by the blessed gospel. In the remotest corners of the land, I
find a Bible and Hymn-book in nearly every house, if there was nothing
else."

We may say of the faithful men, who, ceasing to be missionaries in the
technical sense, are now laboring as pastors of churches,
superintendents of education, or professors in the native College, or as
physicians, teachers, editors, or Christian merchants:--"Except these
abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved." Had the great body of these men
left the Islands in the year 1848, the native government could not long
have survived the catastrophe; and now, and for years to come, they will
be, under God, the most effectual safeguard the Hawaiian Government and
people can possibly have. Remaining there, with their numerous and
healthy families of children, and furnished with facilities for
educating those children, the government, the nation, the Islands will
continue, with the ordinary blessing of Heaven, to be Christian,
evangelical, a glorious monument of the triumphs of the gospel, a light
enlightening the benighted groups lying far to the westward, and a cause
for admiring gratitude to the whole Christian world!

Surely results like these are worth a great outlay for their
preservation; but this cannot be effectually done without the speedy
institution of a _College at the Islands_, where a portion of the
children of foreign parents, and some of the more promising of the
native youth, may receive that liberal education which is deemed so
important in this country.

2. There is another and highly interesting view of the subject. This
Christian community at the Sandwich Islands,--mixed in blood, but one in
Christ,--should be regarded as a centre of light and influence for the
large number of inhabited but benighted Islands scattered over the far
and vast WEST of the Pacific Ocean. This missionary enterprise in the
insular world beyond, besides its intrinsic importance, is among the
necessary means, by its reacting influence, of raising the Hawaiian
churches to the point of self-support and self-control; and its value,
in this view, is already delightfully evident. The pecuniary means for
supporting missionaries in Micronesia who are sent from the United
States, must of course come in great measure from this country; but the
support of missionaries and native assistants drawn from the Hawaiian
churches, (as well as much of the labor connected with the details of
the business,) may be thrown upon the 'Hawaiian Missionary Society,'
which is independent of the American Board; and no small portion of the
missionaries may at length be obtained from among the _alumni_ of the
_Oahu College_. Dr. Gulick, one of the first missionaries to Micronesia,
is the son of a missionary at the Sandwich Islands, though educated in
the United States; and the missionary children at the Islands are
associated together to provide among themselves the means for his
support. When the missionary ship, to be called the 'Morning Star,'
which has been requested for the mission in Micronesia, is actually in
those seas, the proposed institution for educating missionaries inured
to the people and climate, will become a still more valuable auxiliary.


Thus we see, that the reasonable endowment of the Oahu College will be a
good use of money for the upbuilding of Christ's kingdom at the Sandwich
Islands, and for extending that kingdom through the islands of the great
ocean beyond.


_Funds and Buildings of the College._

The value of the property now belonging to the Oahu College, derived
chiefly through the American Board, is estimated as follows:

     Three hundred acres of land,       $9,000
     College building, two stories,      7,000
     Two dwelling houses,                6,000
     Twelve lodging rooms,               2,000
     Dining room, kitchen, etc.,         1,000
     Out-houses,                           500
     Farming implements, herds, etc.,    1,500
                                       -------
     Total,                            $27,000

The land on which the buildings stand has an excellent and valuable
spring of water, sufficient to irrigate it. There are one hundred acres
in this lot, all enclosed by a good stone wall, and in part under
cultivation. Another hundred acres adjoining, is also enclosed with a
stone wall, and is devoted to pasturage. Another hundred acres of
woodland lies about two miles distant. The buildings will suffice for
the present.

An observer, familiar with the college edifices of the United States,
may hardly be able to recognize a _College_ in what he sees at Punahou.
But what there is surpasses what were the _visible beginnings_ of either
Harvard, or Yale. Until the present time, moreover, there has been only
a preparatory school. The first college class, and that a small one,
commences the present year. A number of young men, once at Punahou, who
would perhaps have been in the College had there been one, are at
Williams, Yale, or some other of our American Colleges. Some have
completed their preparations for life's business, and are preachers,
missionaries, merchants, or connected with the government of the
Islands.


_The Endowment._

The cost of living at the Sandwich Islands has been materially increased
by the settlement and mines of California. Just at present, it may not
be easy to bring the expenses of a family at Punahou within the bounds
recommended for the salaries of the officers of College. The arrangement
for salaries should be based, however, on what we know to be the general
course of things in the world. Fifteen hundred dollars, with the use of
a house, is thought not to be too large a salary for the President of
the Oahu College; and twelve hundred dollars, with the use of a house,
for a Professor. The American Board will pay these two salaries for the
years 1856 and 1857.

The Trustees propose to raise the sum of _fifty thousand dollars_. This
is not too large a beginning. Of this sum the Hawaiian government
engages to give ten thousand dollars, or one fifth part; on condition
that the remaining forty thousand dollars be raised before July 6, 1858,
and that the King have the right of nominating two of the twelve
trustees of the College. The Prudential Committee have voted to
subscribe five thousand dollars towards the endowment, on behalf of the
American Board, payable in the year 1858.

It should be understood that, excepting the duty of approval or
disapproval in respect to the election of members on the Board of
Trustees, laid upon the American Board by the Charter for the space of
twenty years, that Board has no connection whatever with the College,
or control of its proceedings. The College is an independent
institution, sustaining no other relation to the Board, than it does to
every other benefactor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Colleges of New England had generally some benevolent patron
provided for them by Divine Providence;--a Harvard, a Yale, a Dartmouth,
a Brown, a Bowdoin, a Williams; and the Colleges very properly took and
embalmed their names in memory of an enlightened and refined Christian
community. These provided the general endowment. Many liberal men also
funded particular professorships; or gave funds for the education of
young men of talents and character, without the means of obtaining a
liberal education. May the Lord raise up such benefactors for the Oahu
College. That has grown, as the New England Colleges did, out of a great
religious movement and the wonderful blessing of God on that movement.
It has a religious object, and is controlled by a religious influence.
The funds have every practicable guard from perversion. The permanent
necessity for such an institution is apparent in the certainty of a
permanent, rising, influential community on those admirably situated
Islands. The independence of the Hawaiian Nation,--which, under present
circumstances, is most favorable to its development,--is guaranteed by
the United States, Great Britain and France; and the presumption of its
falling under the dominion of a power foreign to us, is too small to
deserve notice; and the influence of the College itself, as already
described, will be one of the most effectual guards against such a
result. There is not a finer climate in all the world. Were it true,
that the native population is still wasting away, the effect of corrupt
commerce in old heathen times, still greater would be the need of such
an institution. A flourishing community of some kind at the Sandwich
Islands, then certainly will be; and the religious influences now at the
Islands will be as available for that community, as hereafter developed,
with whatever elements, as it will be for the one now existing.

A number of gentlemen have kindly consented, at the request of the
Prudential Committee of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign
Missions, acting for the Trustees of the College, to take charge of the
funds contributed in this country for the Oahu College, (where the
donors do not direct them to be remitted directly to the Trustees at the
Islands;) and they will invest such funds in the United States, and
cause the interest to be remitted annually to the officer of the
corporation legally authorized to receive it. The Trustees for the Fund,
appointed in the first instance by the Prudential Committee, will fill
the vacancies occurring in their own number; and they will be authorized
to transfer the investment of the funds to the Sandwich Islands whenever
they and the Trustees of the College concur in the opinion, that this
can be safely and advantageously effected.

The following gentlemen compose the Trustees for the Funds to be
invested in the United States; namely,--


     HENRY HILL, Esq., of Boston, Mass.
     PELATIAH PERIT, Esq., of New York city.
     Gen. WILLIAM WILLIAMS, of Norwich, Conn.
     Hon. THOMAS W. WILLIAMS, of New London, Conn.
     HENRY P. HAVEN, Esq., of New London, Conn.
     JAMES HUNNEWELL, Esq., of Charlestown, Mass.
     WILLIAM E. DODGE, Esq., of New York city.
     ABNER KINGMAN, Esq., of Boston, Mass.


_Boston, August_ 1856.


At a meeting of the Trustees of Oahu College, held at Honolulu, Oct. 27,
1856, the following resolutions were adopted with reference to the
appointment of the Trustees for the Funds:

_Resolved_, 1. That the following gentlemen be and are hereby appointed
Trustees, to receive, take charge of, and invest any funds that may have
been, or hereafter may be contributed, in the United States, for the
endowment of Oahu College; viz.,


     HENRY HILL, Esq., of Boston, Mass.
     PELATIAH PERIT, Esq., of New York city.
     Gen. WILLIAM WILLIAMS, of Norwich, Conn.
     Hon. THOMAS W. WILLIAMS, of New London, Conn.
     HENRY P. HAVEN, Esq., of New London, Conn.
     JAMES HUNNEWELL, Esq., of Charlestown, Mass.
     WILLIAM E. DODGE, Esq., of New York city.
     ABNER KINGMAN, Esq., of Boston, Mass.


_Resolved_, 2. That the Trustees appointed by the foregoing resolution
be and are hereby authorized to fill all vacancies occurring in their
own number; and that they be and are also further authorized to transfer
the investment of any funds that may be received by them for the
endowment of Oahu College, to the Sandwich Islands, whenever they and
the Trustees of the said College concur in the opinion, that this can be
safely and advantageously done.

       *       *       *       *       *

The President of the College is now in this country
to act for the Board of Trustees, under the following
commission:


                         _Honolulu, Sandwich Islands, Feb_. 26, 1857.

Know all persons to whom these presents may come, that the Rev. Edward
Griffin Beckwith, President of Oahu College, is duly appointed and
authorized by the Board of Trustees of this Institution to act as their
agent in procuring funds, instructors, and books for the same; and to
promote its general interests in all such ways as may be in his power,
during his contemplated visit to the United States.

To this end, the Trustees of the College hereby bespeak for him the kind
regards and co-operation of all the friends of education and religion
with whom he may meet during his mission.

                                  R. ARMSTRONG,

                                          _Sec'y of Board of Trustees_.


At a meeting of the Trustees for the Fund, held in Boston, May 28, 1857,
it was

_Resolved_, That the Rev. E. G. Beckwith, President of Oahu College, now
in this country for the purpose of obtaining an endowment for that now
and important Institution at the Sandwich Islands, be earnestly
commended, by the Trustees for the Fund it is proposed to raise for the
College in this country, to the liberal patronage of those who would
promote the cause of education at the Islands, and thus give stability
and perpetuity to the civil and Christian institutions which have been
so successfully introduced into that part of the world; with the
understanding, that the investment of the Fund be made under the
direction of the aforesaid Trustees residing in the United States.

                                ABNER KINGMAN, _Clerk_.


The following is the form of subscription, which it is proposed to
circulate among the friends of this enterprise:

We, the undersigned, subscribe the several sums set to our respective
names, towards a Fund for the endowment of the Oahu College, in the
Sandwich Islands, which Fund is to be invested under the direction of a
Board of Trustees in the United States appointed for this purpose by the
Trustees of the College; and the income arising therefrom to be annually
appropriated to the support of said institution. Provided always, that
no portion of said subscriptions, or any of the income arising
therefrom, shall be used for the promotion of any system or course of
education not in accordance with the Sixth Article of the present
Charter of the said College.

       *       *       *       *       *

Article Sixth of the Charter, reads as follows:

"Be it hereby further known, that, as the object of the Institution is
the training of youth in the various branches of a Christian education,
and, as it is reasonable that the Christian education should be in
conformity to the general views of the founders and patrons of the
Institution, no course of instruction shall be deemed lawful in said
Institution, which is not accordant with the principles of Protestant
Evangelical Christianity, as held by that body of Protestant Christians,
in the United States of America, which originated the Christian Mission
to these Islands, and to whose labors and benevolent contributions the
people of these Islands are so greatly indebted."

       *       *       *       *       *

HENRY HILL, Esq., of Boston, Mass., Chairman of the Trustees for the
Fund, is Treasurer of said Board of Trustees, and all remittances for
the College can be made to him, at his office, 118 Milk St.


_Boston, June_ 1, 1857.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Oahu College at the Sandwich
Islands, by Punahou School

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OAHU COLLEGE ***

***** This file should be named 20669.txt or 20669.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/6/6/20669/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
University of Michigan Making of America Collection)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
