The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume 104,
January 21, 1893, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume 104, January 21, 1893

Author: Various

Editor: Francis Burnand

Release Date: February 27, 2007 [EBook #20704]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***




Produced by Matt Whittaker, Juliet Sutherland and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









PUNCH,

OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 104.




January 21, 1893.




CONVERSATIONAL HINTS FOR YOUNG SHOOTERS.

THE KEEPER.

(_With an Excursus on Beaters._)

Of the many varieties of keeper, I propose, at present, to consider only
the average sort of keeper, who looks after a shooting, comprising
partridges, pheasants, hares, and rabbits, in an English county. Now it is
to be observed that your ordinary keeper is not a conversational animal. He
has, as a rule, too much to do to waste time in unnecessary talk. To begin
with, he has to control his staff, the men and boys who walk in line with
you through the root-fields, or beat the coverts for pheasants. That might
seem at first sight to be an easy business, but it is actually one of the
most difficult in the world. For thorough perverse stupidity, you will not
easily match the autochthonous beater. Watch him as he trudges along, slow,
expressionless, clod-resembling, lethargic, and say how you would like to
be the chief of such an army. He is always getting out of line, pressing
forward unduly, or hanging back too much, and the loud voice of the keeper
makes the woods resound with remonstrance, entreaty, and blame, hurled at
his bovine head. After lunch, it is true, the beater wakes up for a little.
Then shall you hear WILLIAM exchanging confidences from one end of the line
to the other with JARGE, while the startled pheasant rises too soon and
goes back, to the despair of the keeper and the guns. Then, too, are heard
the shouts of laughter which greet the appearance of a rabbit, and the air
is thick with the sticks that the joyous, beery beaters fling at the
scurrying form of their hereditary foe. It is marvellous to note with what
a venomous hatred the beater regards the bunny. Pheasant or partridge he is
careless of; even the hare is, in comparison, a thing of nought, but let
him once set eyes on a rabbit, and his whole being seems to change. His eye
absolutely flashes, his chest heaves with excitement beneath the ancient
piece of sacking that protects his form from thorns. If the rabbit falls to
the shot, he yells with exultation; if it be missed, an expression of
morose and gloomy disappointment settles on his face, as who should say,
"Things are played out; the world is worthless!"

[Illustration: On their Beat.]

All these characteristics are the keeper's despair; though, to be sure, he
has staunch lieutenants in his under-keepers; and towards the end of the
day he can always count on two sympathising allies in the postman and the
policeman. These two never fail to come out in the afternoon to join the
beaters. It is amusing to watch the demeanour of the beaters in the
policeman's presence. Some of them, it is possible, have been immeshed by
the law, and have made the constable's acquaintance in his professional
capacity. Others are conscious of undiscovered peccadilloes, or they feel
that on some future day they may be led to transgress rules, of which the
policeman is the sturdy embodiment. None of them is, therefore, quite at
his best in the policeman's presence. Their attitude may be described
as one of uneasy familiarity, bursting here and there into jocular
nervousness, but never quite attaining the rollicking point. You may
sometimes take advantage of this feeling to let off a joke on a beater.
Select a stout, plethoric one, and say to him, "Mind you keep your eye on
the policeman, or he'll poach a rabbit before you can say knife." This
simple inversion of probabilities and positions is quite certain to "go." A
hesitating smile will first creep into the corners of the beater's eye.
After an interval spent in grappling with the jest, he will become purple,
and finally he will explode.

During the rest of the day you will hear him repeating your little
pleasantry either to himself or to his companions. You can keep it up by
saying now and then, "How many did the constable pocket that last beat?"
(_Shouts of laughter._) Thus shall your reputation as a humorist be
established amongst the beating fraternity--("that 'ere Muster JACKSON, 'e
do make a chap laugh, that 'e do," is the formula)--and if you revisit the
same shooting next year, a beater is sure to take an opportunity of saying
to you, with a grin on his face, "Policeman's a comin' out to-day, Sir; I'm
a goin' to hev my eye tight on 'im, so as 'e don't pocket no rabbits," to
which you will reply, "That's right, GEORGE, you stick to it, and you'll be
a policeman yourself some day," at which impossible anticipation there will
be fresh explosions of mirth. So easily pleased is the rustic mind, so
tenacious is the rustic memory.

But the head-keeper recks not of these things. All the anxiety of the day
is his. If, for one reason or another, he fails to show as good a head of
game as had been expected, he knows his master will be displeased. If the
beaters prove intractable, the birds go wrong, but the burden of the host's
disappointment falls on the keeper's shoulders. His are all the petty
worries, the little failures of the day. The keeper is, therefore, not
given to conversation. How should he be, with all these responsibilities
weighing upon him? Few of those who shoot realise what the keeper has gone
through to provide the sport. Inclement nights spent in the open, untiring
vigilance by day and by night, a constant and patient care of his birds
during the worst seasons, short hours of sleep, and long hours of tramping,
such is the keeper's life. And, after all, what a fine fellow is a good
keeper. In what other race of men can you find in a higher degree the best
and manliest qualities, unswerving fidelity, dauntless courage, unflinching
endurance of hardship and fatigue, and an upright honesty of conduct and
demeanour? I protest that if ever the sport of game-shooting is attacked,
one powerful argument in its favour may be found in the fact that it
produces such men as these, and fosters their staunch virtues. Think well
of all this, my young friend, and do not vex the harassed keeper with idle
and frivolous remarks. But you may permit yourself to say to him, during
the day, "That's a nice dog of yours; works capitally."

"Yes, Sir," the keeper will say, "he's not a bad 'un for a young 'un.
Plenty of good blood in him. His mother's old _Dido_. I've had to leave her
at home to-day, because she's got a sore foot; but her nose is something
wonderful."

"Did you have much trouble breaking him?"

"Lor' bless you, Sir, no. He took to it like a duck to the water. Nothing
comes amiss to him. You stand there, Sir, and you'll get some nice birds
over you. They mostly breaks this way."

That kind of conversation establishes good relations, always an important
thing. Or you may hint to him that he knows his business better than the
host, as thus:--

"I must have been in the wrong place that last beat. Not a single bird came
near me."

"Of course you were, Sir. I knew how it would be. I wanted you fifty yards
higher up, but Mr. CHALMERS, he would have you here. Lor, I've never known
birds break here. Now then, you boys, stop that chattering, or I sends you
all home. Seem to think they're out here to enjoy theirselves, instead of
doing as I tells 'em. Come, rattle your sticks!"

Thus are the little beaters and the stops admonished.

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM A MODERN ENGLISH EXAMINATION-PAPER

_Which young Mr. D. Brown went in to floor, but which floored him._

_Question._ What is the meaning of "to deodorise." Give the derivation.

_Answer._ "To deodorise" is to gild the statue of a heathen deity.
Literally "to gild a god." This compound verb is derived from "_Deus_,"
dative "_Deo_," and the Greek verb "[Greek: dorixo], _i.e._ to gild."

_Q._ What is a "Manicure"? Give its derivation.

_A._ It is another term for a Mad Doctor. Its derivation is
obvious--"Maniac Cure." The last syllable of the first word being omitted
for the sake of convenience in pronunciation.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE COMING OF THE BOGEYS.

(_Mr. Punch's Dreadful New Year's Dream after a Surfeit of Mince Pies and
"Times" Correspondence._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE COMING OF THE BOGEYS.

  I had a Dream, which was not all a Dream.
  (By Somnus and old Nox I fear 'twas _not_!)
  Common-sense was extinguished, and Good Taste
  Did wonder darkling on the verge of doom.
  I saw a Monster, a malign, marine,
  Mysterious, many-whorled, mug-lumbering Bogey,
  Stretched (like Miltonian angels on the marl)
  In league-long loops upon the billowy brine.
  Beshrew thee, old familiar ocean Bogey,
  Thou spectral spook of many Silly Seasons,
  Beshrew thee, and avaunt! Which being put
  In post-Shakspearian vernacular, means
  Confound, you, and Get out!!! The monstrous worm
  Wriggling its corkscrew periwinkly twists
  Of trunk and tail alternate, winked huge goggles
  Derisively and gurgled. "_Me_ get out,
  The Science-vouched, and Literature-upheld,
  And Reason-rehabilitated butt
  Of many years of misdirected mockery?
  You ask omniscient HUXLEY, cocksure oracle
  On all from protoplasm to Home Rule,
  From Scripture to Sea Serpents; go consult
  Belligerent, brave, beloved BILLY RUSSELL!
  Verisimilitude incarnate, I
  Scorn your vain sceptic mirth!
          Besides, behold
  The portent riding me, as Thetis rode
  The lolloping, wolloping sea-horse of old!
  Is it less likely that _I_ should remain
  Than _she_ return?"
          Then, horror-thrilled, I gazed
  At her, the Abominable, the Ogreish Thing;
  The soul-revolting, sense-degrading She,
  Who swayed and sickened, scourged and scarified
  The unwilling slaves of fashion and discomfort
  A quarter of a century since!
          She sat,
  A spectral, scraggy, beet-nosed, ankle-less,
  Obtrusive-panted, splay-foot, slattern-shape,
  Of grim Medusa-faced Immodesty,
  Caged cumbrously in a stiff, swaying, swollen,
  Shin-scarifying, hose-revealing frame
  Of wide-meshed metal, like a monster mousetrap--
  Hideous, indecent, awkward!
          Oh, I knew her--
  This loathly _revenant_, revisiting
  The glimpses of the moon. She shamed my sight,
  And blocked my way, and marred my young men's art,
  Twenty years syne and more. 'Twas CRINOLINA,
  The long-abiding, happily banished horror
  We hoped to see no more. _Shall_ she return
  To vex our souls, unsex our wives and daughters,
  And spoil our pictures as she did of old?
  Forbid it, womanhood and modesty!
  And if _they_ won't, let manhood and sound sense
  Arise in wrath and warn the horror off,
  Ere she effect a lodgment on the limbs
  Of pretty girls, or clothe our matron's shapes
  With shame as with a garment.
          "Get thee gone!"
  Cries _Punch_, and shakes his gingham in her face.
  "The Silly Season's Nemesis we may stand,
  But thou, the loathlier Bogey? _Garn away!_
  (As 'LIZA said to amorous 'ARRY 'AWKINS)
  Avaunt, skedaddle, slope, absquatulate,
  Go, gruesome ghoul--go quickly--and for ever!!!"

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. R.'S nephew read out an announcement to the effect that Messrs.
MACMILLAN were about to publish Lord CARNARVON'S "Prometheus Bound."
"Indeed!" exclaimed Mr. R.'s excellent aunt. "That's very vague. Doesn't it
say how it's to be bound?--whether in calf or vellum?"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "AN INTERNATIONAL EPISODE."

_Hostess._ "ER--ALLOW ME TO INTRODUCE--ER--MR. CORNELIUS P. VAN DUNK, FROM
CHICAGO--MR. KEMBLE MACREADY KEAN, THE GREAT TRAGEDIAN, AND MANAGER OF THE
PARTHENON."

_Mr. Van Dunk._ "MR. KEMBLE MACREADY KEAN! SIR, YOUR NAME'S VERY FAMILIAR
TO ME, AND I'M PROUD TO KNOW YOU!--AND I SHALL TAKE AN EARLY OPPORTUNITY OF
ASKING YOU FOR SOME ORDERS FOR YOUR THEATRE!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

LAPSUS LINGUAE.

    ["There is scarcely one of us who does not violate some rule of
    English grammar in every sentence which he speaks."--_Daily
    News._]


  Never we dreamt of this horrible blundering!
    Up to the present, we cheerfully spoke
  Quite unaware of our errors, nor wondering
    How many rules in each sentence we broke.

  Now we can scarcely pronounce the admission that
    Grammar and parsing we freely neglect,
  Scarcely can dare to make humble petition that
    Someone or other will cure this defect!

  Often we err in the use of each particle,
    Seldom observe where our adverbs belong,
  Wholly misplace the indefinite article,
    In our subjunctives go hopelessly wrong!

  What can we do? Will the _Daily News_ qualify
    As an instructor in matters like these?
  How can we quickest successfully mollify
    Those whom our errors must sadly displease?

  Scarce can we venture the veriest platitude,
    May not its grammar be shamefully weak?
  You, _Mr. Punch_, can rely on our gratitude,
    If you will tell us--how _ought_ we to speak?

       *       *       *       *       *

A DARK SAYING.--Had HILDA DAWSON--who, as reported in the _D. T._ one day
last week, was haled before Sir PETER EDLIN--been a character in some play
of SHAKSPEARE'S, to whom the Bard had given these words to utter--"And this
is what you call trial by Jury! Why they are not fit to try shoemakers!"
what voluminous suggestions and explanations of the meaning of this phrase
would not the learned Commentators have written! What emendations,
alterations, or amendments of the text would not have been proposed!
Perhaps, some hundreds of years hence, this dark saying of HILDA DAWSON'S
will engage the close attention of some among the then existing learned
body of Antiquaries.

       *       *       *       *       *

"SOUNDS RATHER LIKE IT."--In France the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has
gone to the DEVELLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HAYMARKET HYPATIA.

That I never could struggle through CHARLES KINGSLEY'S novel _Hypatia_, is,
as far as I am personally concerned, very much in favour of my pronouncing
an unbiassed opinion on the "_new classical play_" ("Historical," if you
like, but not "classical," and there is not the slightest chance of its
becoming a "classic") written by G. STUART OGILVIE, entitled _Hypatia_, and
"_founded on_ KINGSLEY'S _celebrated Novel_," which "celebrated Novel" is,
for me at least, not only "celebrated," but "remarkable," as being one of
the very few works of fiction (excepting always the majority of KINGSLEY'S
works) completely baffling my powers of endurance.

[Illustration: The Tip for the Alexandr(i)a Park Meeting. "_Heraclian_ must
win." Notice the _Rara Nativa Oysteriana Shrub_ in the background.]

[Illustration: Cyrillus Fernandez Gladstonius Episcopus.]

Mr. STUART OGILVIE'S Drama may be a clever adaptation of a story difficult
to adapt; but that his play is powerfully dramatic, even when it arrives at
what, as I conceive, was intended to be its strongest dramatic situation in
the Second Scene of the Third Act, no one but an _Umbra_ (to be
"classical"), a sycophant, a "creature," or a contentious noodle, could
possibly assert. Yet, as a series of _tableaux vivants_, illustrating
scenes in the public and private life of _Issachar_ the Jew,--and that
Jew Mr. BEERBOHM TREE, so artistically made up as to be absolutely
unrecognisable by those who know him best,--the action is decidedly
interesting up to the end of the Third Act. After that, all is tumult. The
gay and seductive _Orestes_, Prefect of Alexandria (carefully played by Mr.
LEWIS WALLER) is slain, anyhow, all higgledy-piggledy, by the Jew,
_Issachar_, whose seductive daughter _Ruth_ (sweetly and gently represented
by Miss OLGA BRANDON) this gay LOTHARIO of a Prefect has contrived, not,
apparently, with any great difficulty, to lead astray, or, to put it
"classically," to seduce from the narrow path of such virtue as is common
alike to Pagan, Jew, and Christian. As for handsome _Hypatia_ herself,
magnificent though Miss JULIA NEILSON be as a classic model for a painter,
she is nowhere, dramatically, in the piece, when contrasted with the
unhappy Jewish Family of two. It is the story of _Issachar_, his daughter
and _Orestes_, that absorbs the interest; and, as to what becomes of
_Cyril_ and his Merry Monks, of _Philammon_ (which, when pronounced, sounds
like a modern Cockney-rendering of PHILIP HAMMOND, with the aspirate
omitted and the final "d" dropped), of old _Theon_ (who never appears but
he is immediately sent away again, and therefore might be termed
"_The-on-and-off-'un_"), and, finally, of even that charming specimen of a
Girton Girl-Lecturer on Philosophy _Hypatia_ herself, well--to adopt HOOD'S
couplet about the Poor in London,--

    "Where they goes, or how they fares, Nobody knows and nobody
    cares."

The entire interest is centred in _Issachar_, and had the author devised
some strong dramatic climax (such as occurs in that play of SARDOU'S where
SARAH B. stabs PAUL BERTON) with which to finish the piece, when the
Prefect should have been killed either by _Issachar_ or by _Miriam_ (SARDOU
would have made _Issachar's_ daughter the heroine--the SARA BERNHARDT of
the piece) then, in the penultimate Act, anything tragic, or otherwise,
might picturesquely and appropriately have happened to the classic Girton
girl, _Hypatia_, and Master _Phil 'Ammon_, the good young Monk so inclined
to go wrong, to the great contentment of the audience.

Mr. TREE makes a thoroughly oriental type of _Issachar_, and it is within
an ace of being a grand impersonation. What that ace exactly is, it is
somewhat difficult to say, but what _is_ wanting is wanting in his great
scene with his daughter. If the dramatist had given him such another final
chance as I have already suggested, the character might have been
dramatically perfected in Mr. TREE'S hands. As it is, both by author and
actor it is left "to be finished in our next."

Mr. TERRY is good as the amatory Monk, and Miss JULIA NEILSON is
statuesquely graceful as _Hypatia_. If I say "she is making strides in her
profession," I must be taken to allude not to her vast improvement
histrionically, but to the long steps which she takes across the stage.

The costumes are admirable, especially that of _Issachar_, on whose attire
the Messrs. NATHAN as Israel-lights-and-leaders must be considered high
authorities.

[Illustration: From an Ancient Vase found in the Haymarket.]

Mr. ALMA TADEMA, R.A., is responsible for the designs of the scenery by
Messrs. JOHNSTONE, HANN, HALL, and HARKER. [Great chance for 'ARRY 'ere!
"Scenery by 'ANN--a lady artist of course--then 'ALL and then 'ARKER, from
designs by HALMA TADEMA." "I s'pose HALMA'S a artistic shemale," 'ARRY
would say: "cos I know as there's another HALMA on the stage, leastways on
the Music 'All stage, and she's HALMA STANLEY."] Whatever the designing
ALMA may have done, I cannot say much for the reproduction of his favourite
game of marbles. The "marble halls" lack polish; but the Market Place, The
Court of _Hypatia's_ House, _Issachar's_ snuggery, and a Street in
Alexandria, are highly effective pictures. But I should like to know if in
Mr. ALMA TADEMA'S design for the Monk's dress, Mr. FRED TERRY found a small
black and silver crucifix of very modern workmanship suspended from the
girdle, as this religious emblem did not come into use until a much later
date. By the way, ecclesiastical ornaments must have been cheap in those
days to warrant _Bishop Cyril_ (strongly rendered by Mr. FERNANDEZ)
flaunting about the streets of Alexandria in such rainbow robes as, in a
later age, would have led people to imagine that he had just broken out of
the stained glass window of a Gothic Cathedral. Two thousand years hence
the New Zealand dramatist may represent the Archbishop of CANTERBURY as
walking about London in his lawn sleeves with coronation cope and mitre, or
Cardinal HERBERT VAUGHAN as wearing his scarlet hat and robes, and riding
in a Hansom cab, having been unable to pick up his own Cardinal's train.
All this were hypercriticism, but that the name of ALMA TADEMA, R.A., is a
public guarantee for academical accuracy.

Anyhow, _Hypatia_, if not "a famous victory"--is at least a fine spectacle,
with some fine acting in it, but this is mainly confined to Mr. BEERBOHM
TREE. As the very heavy father, Mr. KEMBLE has not been allowed half a
chance. Why should he not alternate characters with Mr. FERNANDEZ, and for
three nights a week appear as _Cyril_ the Bishop, while FERNANDEZ would be
_Hypatia's_ parent who has to grovel on the steps while his highly educated
child is lecturing, who has to comfort her in her terror, and be turned out
neck and crop whenever nobody on the scene wants him, which by the way,
happens rather frequently.

The music to a Drama is generally a minor affair, but, in this instance, it
is both major and minor, and has been specially written for the piece by
Dr. HUBERT PARRY. As this play is not an "adaptation from the French," the
music of this Composer is the only _article de Parry_ about the piece, and,
being strikingly appropriate, it proves an attraction of itself. It is
conducted by the Wagnerian ARMBRUSTER, who, with his Merry Men, is hidden
away under the stage, much as was the Ghost of _Hamlet's_ father whom
_Hamlet_ irreverently styled "Old Truepenny." Altogether a notable piece.
_Prosit!_

THE B IN A BOX.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHEAP LAW IN THE CITY.

_Probable Development of the new "London Chamber of Arbitration," for the
economical Settlement of Disputes without recourse to Litigation_

[Illustration: "'Ave yer got sich a thing as a second-hand murder defence,
Guv'nor?"

"Could you direct me to the Breach of Promise Department?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

The one volume entitled _My Flirtations_, written by MARGARET WYNMAN (so
like a real name!), and published by Messrs. CHATTO AND WINDUS, consists of
short stories setting forth the varied experiences of an uncommonly 'cute
young lady. It is a literary portfolio of lively sketches of men and women,
"their tricks and their manners," all most amusing, and told in a naturally
easy and epigrammatic style. Some of the characters are evidently
intended for portraits, which anyone living in the London world could
easily label--(which by changing "a" into "i" would be the probable
consequence)--were he not baffled by the art of the skilful writer, and by
the equally skilful illustrator--our Mr. PARTRIDGE--who have, the pair
of them, combined to throw the reader off the right scent. The one
mistake--not a fatal error, however,--which this authoress has made,
is that of getting herself engaged in the last story. Not married,
fortunately; only engaged. Consequently the match can be broken off. Let
her be "engaged" on another volume. She can be married at the end of
volume three, and may give us her experiences as the wife of Mr.
Whoever-it-may-be. Will the clever authoress accept this well-meant hint
from her literary and critical admirer, THE GALLANT BARON DE B.-W.?

       *       *       *       *       *

ROBERT WITH THE CHILDREN AT GILDHALL.

Well, I don't quite kno as I quite hunderstans what's bin a goin on in our
old Sacred Gildall, or weather it's all xactly what sum of our werry
sollemest Holldermen, or ewen our werry anshent Depputys, might admire; but
I must say, for myself, that too thowsand more owdashus boys, and larfing
gals, I never seed nor herd than I did on Toosday larst, for about fore
hours, in old Gildall aforesaid!

Jest to show how the werry best, aye and the werry wisest on us, gets
carried away by the site of swarms of appy children a enjoying thereselves,
as praps they never did afore, I feels myself compelled to state, that our
good kind Lord MARE was so delighted to see sich swarms of appy children
all round him and looking up to him so appy and so grateful, that, jest
afore it was time to go, he acshally told 'em a most wunderful story all
about two great Giants as lived in the rain of King LUD, on Ludgate Hill. I
was that estonished when he begun, as to amost think that GOG and MAGOG, as
stood on both sides of him, would begin to grin, but that was, of course,
only a passing delushun. But didn't all the children lissen with open
mouths when the Lord MARE told 'em that one of the Giants had too heads,
and the other three! and that a very good boy named JACK managed to kill
'em both!

And so all was ended but the cheering, and that the pore delited children
kept up till they all marched out, smiling and appy, and wishing as such
glorious heavenings was in store for them in grand old Gildall for many,
many years to come, and with sitch a Lord Mare to see as everything was
done as it had been done that jolly heavening.

ROBERT.

       *       *       *       *       *

DWARFS.--Of course there are dwarfs. Lots of 'em all over the world. At
least no experienced traveller ever yet made a stay in any country without
becoming acquainted with plenty of people who were "uncommonly 'short' just
at that moment,"--"that moment" being when the impecunious traveller wanted
to obtain a slight loan. The author of _Borrow in Spain_ would have been an
authority on such a subject.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRANSFORMATION SCENE.--Dear Sir, I see by the paper that "Mr. EDMUND YATES
has been made a J. P." Odd! What does "J. P." stand for? Oh, of course,
"JOE PARKINSON." But does "E. Y." on becoming "J. P." cease to be
"MOI-MEME"?--Yours, M. MUDDLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A TOO INQUIRING MIND.

"HOW WAS _I_ MADE, MAMMIE DARLING? WAS I _KNITTED_?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LATEST TRADE OUTRAGE!

(_Scene from the New and Unpopular Sensation Drama of "The Monopoly-Monster
and the Maid Forlorn."_)

    ["A large number of complaints have reached the Board of Trade
    with regard to increase in the new rates adopted by Railway
    Companies as from January 1 ... among other complaints of increase
    of rates for the conveyance of milk, grain, hay and other
    agricultural produce, firewood, live stock, coal and coke, iron
    and hardware."--Sir COURTENAY BOYLE _to the Secretary of the
    Railway Companies Association_.]

  Oh! who'll bring a rescue or two to the help of a much-injured Maid,
  Thus cruelly bound hand and foot, and by miscreants ruthlessly laid
  On the lines, in the Pathway of Peril? The Monster snorts nearer! Bohoo!
  'Tis a Melodrame-crisis of danger!--and _who'll_ bring a rescue or two?

  The Maid (British Trade), has been harried and hunted by villains and
          robbers,
  By bold, bad, black-masked foreign foes, and by home-bred monopolist
          jobbers.
  In town or in country alike the poor dear has been chevied and chased.
  By rivals deceitful and dark, and by kindred deboshed and debased.

  She once was a proud reigning beauty, who now is a maid all forlorn,
  As hopeless and helpless, and tearful as RUTH midst the alien corn.
  Or poor Proserpine snatched by dark Pluto afar from the day and the
          light;
  Torn away--like this maiden--from Ceres, and wrapt--like this maiden--in
          night.

  Perchance she was just a bit haughty in virginal safety and pride;
  No rival too near her high throne, Prince FORTUNIO aye at her side;
  But now a poor PERDITA, prone at the feet of her foes she lies bound,
  And that melodramatic thud-thud draweth near--a most menacing sound!

  Ah! sure 'twas enough to deprive the Maid of Protection, her trust!
  But this is the last straw of burden that bows her poor back to the dust.
  That Monster _should_ be her sworn henchman, and now she lies bound in
          his path!
  Oh! where is the hero who'll rush to her rescue, in chivalrous wrath?

  Such champion always turns up--on the stage! CHAPLIN, WINCHILSEA, BOYLE,
  HOWARD-VINCENT & Co., here's your chance. Shall she be that big Monster's
          mere spoil?
  Ah! Surely the Maid is too lovely to leave to the murderous crew
  Of the Monster Monopoly's myrmidons! _Who_'ll bring a rescue or two?

       *       *       *       *       *

Her First Appearance.


  "What! a new Magazine!" just so,
  First number, January, "Oh!
  So far? yet farther sure will go
                    _The Mother._"

       *       *       *       *       *

"SCHOOL ATTENDANCE IN BAD WEATHER."--"SANDFORD" writes of this to the
_Times_. Why doesn't MERTON--our TOMMY MERTON--speak? And what has the
venerated Mr. BARLOW got to say?

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE SITUATION IN EUROPE."--Monte Carlo (_i.e._, for the winter months).

       *       *       *       *       *

ETHNOGRAPHICAL ALPHABET.

  A is an Afghan, whose knife bids one quail;
  B is a Boer, who made England turn pale;
  C is a Chinaman, proud of his tail;
  D is a Dutchman, who loves pipe and ale;
  E is an Eskimo, packed like a bale;
  F is a Frenchman, _a Paris fidele_;
  G is a German, he fought tooth and nail;
  H is a Highlander, otherwise Gael;
  I is an Irishman, just out of gaol;
  J is a Jew at a furniture sale;
  K is a Kalmuck, not high in the scale;
  L is a Lowlander, swallowing kale;
  M a Malay, a most murderous male;
  N a Norwegian, who dwells near the whale;
  O is an Ojibway, brave on the trail;
  P is a Pole with a past to bewail;
  Q is a Queenslander, sunburnt and hale;
  R is a Russian, against whom we rail;
  S is a Spaniard, as slow as a snail;
  T is a Turk with his wife in a veil;
  U a United States' Student at Yale;
  V a Venetian in gondola frail;
  W Welshman, with coal, slate,--and shale;
  X is a Xanthian--or is he too stale?--
  Y is a Yorkshireman, bred by the Swale;
  Z is a Zulu;--and now letters fail.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LATEST PARADOX.--JOHN STRANGE WINTER is taking Summer-y proceedings
against the Coming Crinoline. Henceforth she will be always known as "the
WINTER of our Discontent."

       *       *       *       *       *

"GOOD BUS."--From the _Times_ money article we learn that PARR'S Banking
Co., Limited, is paying 19 per cent. The price of the shares, therefore,
must be considerably "_above par_." Capital this, for _Ma'_!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SHOCKING TRADE OUTRAGE!

(_Scene from the New and Unpopular Sensation Drama of "The Monopoly-Monster
and the Maid Forlorn."_)

  "OH! WHO'LL BRING A RESCUE OR TWO TO THE HELP OF A MUCH-INJURED MAID,
  THUS CRUELLY BOUND HAND AND FOOT, AND BY MISCREANTS RUTHLESSLY LAID
  ON THE LINES, IN THE PATHWAY OF PERIL? THE MONSTER SNORTS NEARER! BOHOO!
  'TIS A MELODRAME-CRISIS OF DANGER!--AND _WHO'LL_ BRING A RESCUE OR TWO?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SUBACIDITIES.

_Gladys._ "OH, MURIEL DEAR, THAT HEAVENLY FROCK!--I THINK IT LOOKS LOVELIER
EVERY YEAR!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LAY OF THE (MUSIC-HALL) LAUREATE.

  Ah! Who talks of the reversion of the Laurel,
    Of your MORRISSES, and SWINBURNES, and that gang?
  _I_ could lick them in a canter--that's a moral!
    I'm the most prolific bard who ever sang.
  Of the modern Music Hall I'm chosen Laureate,
    My cackle and my patter fill the Town;
  I'm more popular than BURNS, a thing to glory at;
    My name is PINDAR BOANERGES BROWN.

  You have never heard it mentioned? Highly probable
    A hundred duffers flourish on _my_ fame;
  But the Muse is _so_ peculiarly rob-able,
    And I am very little known--by name?
  But ask the Big BONASSUS--on the Q. T.--
    Or ask the Sisters SQUORKS, of P. B. B.
  And they'll tell you Titan Talent, Siren Beauty,
    Would be both the frostiest fizzles but for Me!

  Gracious Heavens! When I think of all the cackle
    I have turned out for the heroes of the Halls!!!
  No wonder that the task I've now to tackle--
    Something new and smart for TRICKSY TRIP!--appals.
  I have tried three several songs--and had to "stock 'em,"
    She's imperative; her last Great Hit's played out,
  And she wants "a new big thing that's bound to knock 'em."
    And "she'd like it by return of post!"--No doubt!!!

  She does four turns a night, and rakes the shekels;
    She sports a suit of sables and a brougham.
  Five years ago a lanky girl, with freckles,
    First fetched 'em with my hit, "_The Masher Groom_."
  And now her limbs spread pink on all the posters,
    And now she drives her pony-chaise--and Me!
  Poet-Laureate? I should like to set the boasters
    The tasks I have to try for "TRICKSY T."

  I am vivid, I am various, I am versatile;
    I did "_Up to the Nines_" for DANDY DOBBS,
  And "_Smacky-Smack_" for "TIDDLUMS,"--Isn't _hers_ a tile?--
    "_Salvation Sue_"--the stiffest of stiff jobs--
  For roopy-raspy-voiced and vain "OEOLIA,"
    Who dubs herself the SCHNEIDER-PATTI BLEND;
  And now, a prey to stone-broke melancholia,
    I sit and rack my fancy, to no end!

  My ink runs dry, my wits seem gone wool-gathering;
    And yet I know that over half the town
  _My_ "stuff" the Stars are blaring, bleating, blathering,
    Sacking a tenner where I pouch a crown.
  I know that my--anonymous--smart verses,
    Are piling oof for middlemen in sacks,
  My verse brings pros. seal-coats and well-stuffed purses
    My back care bows, whilst profits lade _their_ backs.

  If you'll show me any "Poet" more prolific,
    If you'll point to any "patterer" more smart,
  One whose "patriotic" zeal is more terrific,
    Who can give me at snide slang the slightest start,
  Who can fit a swell, a toff, a cad, a coster,
    At the very shortest notice, as _I_ can,
  Why, unless he is a swaggering impostor,
    I will gladly hail him as the Coming Man!

  But he'll have to be a dab at drunken drivel,
    And he'll have to be a daisy at sick gush,
  To turn on the taps of swagger and of snivel,
    Raise the row-de-dow heel-chorus and hot flush.
  He must know the taste of sensual young masher,
    As well as that of aitch-omitting snob;
  And then--well, I'll admit he _is_ a dasher,
    Who, as Laureate (of the Halls) is "on the job!"

    [_Left lamenting._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MAN FROM BLANKLEY'S.

A STORY IN SCENES

    SCENE I.--_Breakfast-room at No. 92a, Porchester Square,
    Bayswater. Rhubarb-green and gilt paper, with dark olive dado:
    curtains of a nondescript brown. Black marble clock on grey
    granite mantelpiece; Landseer engravings; tall book-case,
    containing volumes of "The Quiver," "Mission-Work in Mesopotamia,"
    a cheap Encyclopedia, and the "Popular History of Europe." Time,
    about 9:45._ Mr. MONTAGUE TIDMARSH _is leaving to catch his
    omnibus_. Mrs. T. _is at her Davenport in the window_.

_Mr. T._ (_from the door_). Anything else you want me to do, MARIA?

_Mrs. T._ Don't forget the turbot--and mind you choose it yourself--and the
lobster for the sauce--oh, and look in at SEAKALE'S as you pass, and remind
him to be here punctually at seven, to help JANE with the table, and say I
insist on his waiting in _clean_ white gloves; and be home early yourself,
and--there, if he hasn't rushed off before I remembered half----(Mr. T.
_re-appears at the door_.) What is it _now_, MONTAGUE? I do wish you'd
start, and have done with it, instead of keeping JANE at the front door,
when she ought to be clearing away breakfast!

_Mr. T._ Very sorry, my love--I was just going, when I met a Telegraph-boy
with this, for you, I hope there's nothing wrong with Uncle GABRIEL, I'm
sure.

_Mrs. T._ Don't stand there holding it--give it to me. (_She opens it._)
"Regret impossible dine to-night--lost Great Aunt very suddenly.--BUCKRAM."
How provoking of the man! And I particularly wished him to meet Uncle
GABRIEL, because he is such a good listener, and they would be sure to get
on together. As if he hadn't all the rest of the year to lose his Aunt in!

_Mr. T._ That's BUCKRAM all over. Never can depend upon that fellow.
(_Gloomily._) Now we shall be thirteen at table!

_Mrs. T._ Nonsense, MONTAGUE--we _can't_ be! Let me see--Uncle GABRIEL and
Aunt JOANNA, two; the DITCHWATERS, four; BODFISHES, six; TOOMERS, eight;
Miss BUGLE, nine; Mr. POFFLEY, ten; CECILIA FLINDERS, eleven, ourselves--we
_are_ thirteen! And I know Uncle will refuse to sit down at all if he
notices it; and, anyway, it is sure to cast a gloom over the whole thing.
We _must_ get somebody!

_Mr. T._ Couldn't that Miss--what's her name? SEATON--dine, for once?

_Mrs. T._ The idea, MONTAGUE! Then there would be one Lady too many--if you
can _call_ a Governess a Lady, that is. And I do so disapprove of taking
people out of their proper station.

[Illustration: "Montague, _don't_ say you went and ordered him."]

_Mr. T._ I might wire to FILLETER or MAKEWAYT--but I rather think they're
both away, and it won't do to run any risk. Shall I bring home STERNSTUHL
or FEDERFUCHS? Very quiet, respectable young fellows, and I could let one
of 'em go off early to dress.

_Mrs. T._ Thank you, MONTAGUE--but I won't have one of your German clerks
at _my_ table--everyone would see what he was in a minute. And he mightn't
even have a dress-suit! Let me think ... _I_ know what we can do. BLANKLEY
supplies extra guests for parties and things. I remember seeing it in the
paper. We must hire a man there. Go there at once, MONTAGUE, it's very
little out of your way, and tell them to be sure and send a gentlemanly
person--he needn't talk much, and he won't be required to tell any
anecdotes. Make haste, say they can put him down to my deposit account.

_Mr. T._ I don't half like the idea, MARIA, but I suppose it's the only
thing left. I'll go and see what they can do for us.

    [_He goes out._

_Mrs. T._ I _know_ he'll make some muddle--I'd better do it myself! (_She
rushes out into the passage._) JANE, is your Master gone? Call him
back--there, I'll do it. (_She calls after Mr. T.'s retreating form from
the doorstep._) MONTAGUE! never mind about BLANKLEY'S. _I_'ll see to it. Do
you hear?

_Mr. T.'s Voice_ (_from the corner_). All right, my love, all right! I
hear.

_Mrs. T._ I must go round before lunch. JANE, send Miss SEATON to me in the
breakfast-room. (_She goes back to her desk; presently_ Miss MARJORY SEATON
_enters the room; she is young and extremely pretty, with an air of
dejected endurance_.) Oh, Miss SEATON, just copy out these _menus_ for me,
in your neatest writing, and see that the French is all right. You will
have plenty of time for it, as I shall take Miss GWENDOLEN out myself this
morning. By the way, I shall expect you to appear in the drawing-room this
evening before dinner. I hope you have a suitable frock?

_Miss Seaton._ I have a black one with lace sleeves and heliotrope
_chiffon_, if that will do--it was made in Paris.

_Mrs. T._ You are fortunate to be able to command such luxuries. All _my_
dresses are made in the Grove.

_Miss Seat._ (_biting her lip_). Mine was made when we--before I---- [_She
checks herself._

_Mrs. T._ You need not remind me _quite_ so often that your circumstances
were formerly different, Miss SEATON, for I am perfectly aware of the fact.
Otherwise, I should not feel justified in bringing you in contact, even for
so short a time, with my relations and friends, who are _most_ particular.
I think that is all I wanted you for at present. Stop, you are forgetting
the _menus_.

    [Miss SEATON _collects the cards and goes out with compressed lips
    as_ JANE _enters_.

_Jane._ Another telegram, if you please, M'm, and Cook would like to speak
to you about the pheasants.

[Illustration: THE POET LAUREATE OF THE MUSIC HALLS. A STUDY. [_See p. 33._

_Mrs. T._ Oh, dear me, JANE! I wish you wouldn't come and startle me with
your horrid telegrams--there, give it to me. (_Reading._) "Wife down,
violent influenza. Must come without her, TOOMER." (_Resentfully._) Again!
and I _know_ she's had it twice since the spring--it's too tiresomely
inconsid--no, it isn't--it's the very best thing she could do. Now we shall
be only twelve, and I needn't order that man from BLANKLEY'S, after all.
Poor dear woman, I must really write her a nice sympathetic little note--so
_fortunate_!


    SCENE II.--Mrs. TIDMARSH'S _Bedroom--Time 7:15._ Mrs. T. _has just
    had her hair dressed by her Maid_.

_Mrs. T._ You might have given me more of a fringe than that, PINNIFER. You
don't make nearly so much of my hair as you used to! (PINNIFER _discreetly
suppress the obvious retort_.) Well, I suppose that must do. I shan't
require you any more. Go down and see if the lamps in the drawing-room are
smelling. (PINNIFER _goes; sounds of ablutions are heard from_ Mr. T.'s
_dressing-room_.) MONTAGUE, is that you? I never heard you come in.

_Mr. T.'s Voice_ (_indistinctly._) Only just this moment come up, my dear.
Been putting out the wine.

_Mrs. T._ You always _will_ leave everything to the last. No, don't come
in. What? How can I hear what you say when you keep on splashing and
spluttering like that?

_Mr. T.'s Voice_ (_from beneath a towel._) That dozen of Champagne Uncle
GABRIEL sent has run lower than I thought--only two bottles and a pint
left. And he can't drink that _Saumur_.

_Mrs. T._ Two bottles and a half ought to be ample, if SEAKALE manages
properly--among twelve.

_Mr. T.'s V._ Twelve, my love? you mean _fourteen_!

_Mrs. T._ I mean nothing of the sort. Mrs. TOOMER'S got influenza
again--luckily, so of course we shall be just twelve.

_Mr. T.'s V._ MARIA, why didn't you tell me that before? Because I say,
look here!----

    [_He half opens the door._

_Mrs. T._ I won't have you coming in here all over soap, there's nothing to
get excited about. Twelve's a very convenient number.

_Mr. T.'s V._ Twelve! Yes--but how about that fellow you told me to order
from BLANKLEY'S? He'll be the thirteenth!

_Mrs. T._ MONTAGUE, _don't_ say you went and ordered him, after I expressly
said you were not to mind, and that I would see about it myself! You heard
me call after you from the front door?

_Mr. T.'s V._ I--I understood you to say that I was to mind and see to it
myself; and so I went there the very first thing. The Manager assured me he
would send us a person accustomed to the best society, who would give every
satisfaction. _I_ couldn't be expected to know you had changed your mind!

_Mrs. T._ How _could_ you be so idiotic! We simply can't sit down thirteen.
Uncle will think we did it on purpose to shorten his life, MONTAGUE, do
something--write, and put him off, quick--do you hear?

_Mr. T.'s V._ (_plaintively_). My love, I _can't_ write while I'm like
this--and I've no pen and ink in here, either!

_Jane_ (_outside_). Please, Sir, SEAKALE would like a word with you about
the Sherry you put out--it don't seem to ta--smell quite right to him.

_Mrs. T._ Oh, never mind Sherry _now_. (_She scribbles on a leaf
from her pocket-book._) Here, JANE, tell SEAKALE to run with this to
BLANKLEY'S--quick.... There, MONTAGUE I've written to BLANKLEY'S not to
send the man--they're sure to keep that sort of person on the premises; so,
if SEAKALE gets there before they close, it will be all right.... Oh, don't
worry so.... What? White ties! How should _I_ know where they are? You
should speak to JANE. And do, for goodness sake, make haste! _I'm_ going
down.

_Mr. T._ (_alone_). MARIA! hi.... She's gone--and she never told me what
I'm to do if this confounded fellow turns up, after all! Hang it, I must
have a tie somewhere!

    [_He pulls out drawer after drawer of his wardrobe, in a violent
    flurry._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE RAILWAY SERVANT'S VADE MECUM.

(_For Use in the Training School when the proposed Institution has been
established._)

_Question._ What are the duties of a Porter?

_Answer._ To move passengers' luggage with the greatest possible
expedition.

_Q._ Is there any exception to that general rule?

_A._ Yes, when the passenger is late, and there seems some doubt about the
bestowal of a tip.

_Q._ How would he inform passengers that they have to change carriages for,
say, Felstead, Margate, Highgate, Winchester and Scarborough.

_A._ By shouting, in one word, "Change-Felgit-Highchester-and-Boro!"

[Illustration]

_Q._ If he had to call a Cab for an elderly Lady with three boxes, or a
military-looking Gentleman with an umbrella, which passenger would first
claim his attention?

_A._ Why, of course, the Captain.

_Q._ What is the customary charge of a Guard for reserving a compartment?

_A._ A shilling for closing one of the doors, half-a-crown for locking
both.

_Q._ What are the duties of a Booking-Clerk?

_A._ If very busy, a Booking-Clerk may walk leisurely from one pigeon-hole
to the other, and ask the passenger to repeat his demand, and then take
some time in finding the required amount of change. If the passenger is
irritable, and in a hurry, the Clerk can stop to explain, and remonstrate.
In the case of an inquiry as to the progress of the trains, a busy
Booking-Clerk can refer impatient passengers to the time-table hanging
outside the station.

_Q._ When is a Booking-Clerk usually very busy?

_A._ When he happens to be in a bad temper.

_Q._ Ought a suggestion from the Public that the Public will write to his
superiors have any effect upon a Booking-Clerk?

_A._ Not if the Public has just taken an express ticket in London either
for Melbourne, Australia, or Timbuctoo.

_Q._ What is the best course for the Public to pursue under such
circumstances?

_A._ To bear it either with or without a grin.

_Q._ Is there much point about a Pointsman?

_A._ Not after he has been on duty some eighteen hours.

_Q._ And does his application of the break suggest anything?

_A._ Yes, a break in this catechism. More on a future occasion.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SUGGESTION FOR PANTOMIME.--The good Fairy, Sir DRURIOLANUS, triumphing
over Evil Spirits, King Fog, Frost ("he's a nipper, he is!"), and Slush,
the obstructionists. Evil Spirits disappear, Good Spirits prevail, and, as
_Kate Nickleby's_ lunatic lover observed, "All is gas and gaiters!" Messrs.
DAN LENO and CAMPBELL are doing great business just now. _Vive_ DRURIOLANUS
PANTOMIMICUS IMPERATOR!

       *       *       *       *       *

A Meeting between the "Unemployed and Mr. GLADSTONE." What a contrast!

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE.--Rejected Communications or Contributions, whether MS., Printed
Matter, Drawings, or Pictures of any description, will in no case be
returned, not even when accompanied by a Stamped and Addressed Envelope,
Cover, or Wrapper. To this rule there will be no exception.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume
104, January 21, 1893, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***

***** This file should be named 20704.txt or 20704.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/7/0/20704/

Produced by Matt Whittaker, Juliet Sutherland and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
