The Project Gutenberg eBook, Synopsis of Some Genera of the Large
Pyrenomycetes, by C. G. Lloyd


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Synopsis of Some Genera of the Large Pyrenomycetes
       Camilla, Thamnomyces, Engleromyces


Author: C. G. Lloyd



Release Date: June 7, 2007  [eBook #21761]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYNOPSIS OF SOME GENERA OF THE
LARGE PYRENOMYCETES***


E-text prepared by Victoria Woosley, La Monte H. P. Yarroll, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21761-h.htm or 21761-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/7/6/21761/21761-h/21761-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/7/6/21761/21761-h.zip)


Transcriber's notes:

      Irregularities or errors in spelling, punctuation or
      capitalization have been preserved as in the original text.

      Text bolded in the original is delimited by '#', underlined
      text by '=' and italic text by '_'.

      The paragraphs immediately before and after "SECTION 2.
      PHYLACIA." were rendered in smaller font in the original
      text. The context does not seem to indicate an intent to
      block quote (see "SPECULATION" later in text), so this has
      been transcribed as normal text.




=SYNOPSIS= OF =SOME GENERA= OF THE =LARGE PYRENOMYCETES=

CAMILLEA

THAMNOMYCES

ENGLEROMYCES

_by_

C. G. LLOYD







CINCINNATI, OHIO, JANUARY, 1917






THE GENUS CAMILLEA.


The receipt of a nice specimen of Camillea Cyclops from Rev. Torrend,
Brazil, has induced us to work over the similar species in our
collection. On our last visit to Europe we photographed the various
specimens we found in the museums, but did not study them as to
structure. However, they make such characteristic photographs that we
believe the known species can be determined from our figures.

We are all familiar with the common Hypoxylons that form little globose,
black balls, usually on dead limbs, in our own woods. They have a solid
carbonous interior with the perithecia imbedded near the surface. There
have been over two hundred alleged Hypoxylons, mostly from the tropics.
We have never worked them over, but suspect that a number of them from
the tropics, when examined, will be found to be Camilleas. If the
specimens were examined, no doubt "prior" specific names would be found
for several of this list.[1]

In the old days all similar carbonous fungi were called Sphaeria.
Montagne first received a section of Sphaeria with cylindrical form,
from South America. The perithecia were long, cylindrical, and were
arranged in a circle or were contiguous, near the summit of the stroma.
He proposed to call it Bacillaria, as a section of Sphaeria, but the
name being preoccupied, he, at the suggestion of Fries, afterwards named
it in honor of himself, Camillea, Montagne's first name being Camille.

The original species were separated into a genus by Montagne in 1855,
and five species listed, and it is a curious fact that these five
species, as well as all others that have since been added, are of the
American tropics. I have not worked over the "Hypoxylons" in the
museums, but as far as the records go the genus Camillea does not occur
in other tropical countries.

In 1845 Leveille announced that he had discovered a plant resembling an
Hypoxylon which had, however, the spores borne on filaments
(acrogenous), and not in perithecia. He called it Phylacia globosa, and
classified it in Sphaerioidaea. The specimen (Fig. 847) is still at
Paris. Saccardo has omitted it, and states that Phylacia is probably a
pycnidial condition of Hypoxylon turbinatum. Both were guesses, one
statement surely, and both probably, wrong. The interior is filled with
a powder that under the microscope appears to be made up of ligneous
filaments mixed with a few spores. These filaments appear to me to be
the disintegrated walls of the perithecia, and not the "filaments that
bear the spores." From analogy, at any rate, the spores of all these
similar species are probably borne in asci which disappear early, and
Phylacia seems to be the same genus as Camillea, the walls of the
perlthecla disintegrating and forming a powdery mass. If this view is
correct, Camillea can be divided into two sections.

#EUCAMILLEA.#--Perithecia persistent.

#PHYLACIA.#--Perithecia early disintegrated.


SECTION 1. EUCAMILLEA.


CAMILLEA LEPRIEURII (Fig. 826).--Carbonous, black, cylindrical, 2-3 cm.
long, 3-4 mm. thick. Apex truncate, excavate. Perithecia linear, near
apex of stroma. Asci (teste Montagne) linear, 8 spored. Spores (pale)
spindle shape, dark, 6-7 x 25-35 mic.

[Illustration: #Fig. 826.#]

A most peculiar and apparently a rare species. All the specimens I have
noted came to Montagne from Leprieur, French Guiana. Berkeley records it
from Brazil, Spruce, but I think it has not been collected in recent
years. Our figure 826 is from specimens in Montagne's herbarium, and
these are three times as long as the specimen Montagne pictures. I saw
no such short specimens. Patouillard has given a detailed account of the
structure of the plant. The perithecia are arranged in a circle neat the
apex of the stroma. The spores are spindle shaped (rather than caudate,
as Montagne shows them) and 25 to 35 mic long. Patouillard claims that
Hypoxylon melanaspis has same spores and structure, and is the pulvinate
form of Camillea Leprieurii. It does not seem possible to me, but I can
not say to the contrary.


CAMILLEA BACILLUM (Fig. 827).--Stroma cylindrical, black, 1 cm. long, 1
mm. thick. Apex truncate, shown punctulate in Montagne's drawing. Spores
dark, reniform.

[Illustration: #Fig. 827.#]

This is very similar to the preceding in shape, but is a much smaller
species with different spores (teste Montagne). We have only seen the
originals in Montagne's herbarium, from which our figure is made. The
drawing given by Montagne represents the plant better than our
photograph. Montagne records the species from Cuba and French Guiana. We
think it a very rare plant.


CAMILLEA MUCRONATA (Fig. 828).--Stroma cylindrical, black, 6 mm. long, 3
mm. thick. Apex with a prominent, mucronate point. Perithecia linear,
contiguous, near the apex of the plant. Asci cylindrical. Spores oblong
(M.) 31/2 to 4 x 10 mic., colored.

[Illustration: #Fig. 828.#]

This also is a rare species, only known from the original collection by
Leprieur, French Guiana. Our photograph is from the type. In the
original drawing there is a circle of little acute protuberances shown
near the apex of the plant. We can see but faint indication of them in
our photograph.


CAMILLEA LABELLUM (Fig. 829).--Plant short, cylindrical, about a cm.
tall and thick, with a depressed disc. Perithecia contiguous, forming at
layer beneath the disc. Spores (M.) fusiform, dark, 30 mic., long.

I believe the plant is only known from the original collection in
Montagne's herbarium, from Leprieur, French Guiana. It does not follow,
however, that it is such a rare plant, but only that the plants of the
region have been scantily collected. Our figure is a photograph of the
types.

[Illustration: #Fig. 829.#]


CAMILLEA TURBINATA (Figs. 830-833).--Plants obconic or turbinate, about
a cm. tall and broad, growing in a dense cluster from a common, mycelial
carbonous base. The summit is truncate, and marked with a raised central
disc, which is thin and in old plants breaks irregularly. A section of a
young plant (Figs. 831 x6) shows the lower part composed of rather soft,
carbonous tissue, the upper filled with a light brown powder, composed
of spores mixed with hyphae tissue. In old plants the tops break in, the
powder is dissipated, and there remains (Fig. 833) a bundle of carbonous
tubes, the walls of the perithecia. Finally, these break up and
disappear, leaving the upper part of the plant hollow. The spores are
elliptical, 6-7 x 16-18 mic., smooth, light colored. The asci which
disappear at at very early stage, are shown by Moeller as oval, each
containing 8 spores.

This is at common plant in our American tropics, and was named by
Berkeley, as Hypoxylon turbinatum, but in a later paper he referred it
to Camillea turbinata. It is compiled in Saccardo as Hypoxylon. I doubt
not but that it was named Sphaeria caelata by Fries many years "prior."
Spegazzini found it abundantly, and noting that it was not a good
Hypoxylon, puzzled over it in two or three papers and finally also
concluded that it was at Camillea. Moeller also "discovered" it, and
although the common plant was well known in other centers, the rumors
had not reached Berlin, hence he "discovered" it was a new genus, which
he dedicated to his friend, Dr. Hennings and called it Henningsinia
durissima. Fortunately, he gave a good figure by which his "discovery"
could be interpreted.

We have beautiful specimens from Dr. J. Dutra, Brazil, from which our
figure was made, also we have specimens from Rev. Rick.

[Illustration: #Fig. 830.# Camillea turbinata. (Side view, natural size.)]

[Illustration: #Fig. 831.# Section with spore mass (X 6).]

[Illustration: #Fig. 832.# Same, top view.]

[Illustration: #Fig. 833.# Section after dispersion of spores.]


CAMILLEA CYCLOPS.--Plants short, cylindrical, or semi-globose, black,
about 4 mm. in diameter, erumpent from a common mycelial origin, and
distributed regularly over the matrix. They are produced at intervals of
about 1/2 cm, and apparently never two contiguous. Apex a circular,
rounded depression, with a slightly elevated disc. Perithecia arranged
in a central bundle, with permanent, carbonous walls (Fig. 835 x6).
Spores oblong, 8 x 12, pale colored.

[Illustration: #Fig. 834.# Camillea Cyclops.]

[Illustration: #Fig. 835.#]

While this as probably not a rare plant in the American tropics, it
appears to have been only known from the Leprieur collections sent to
Montagne. We have recently gotten it from Rev. Torrend, Brazil, and the
receipt of the specimens inspired this pamphlet. I notice on some of
these specimens (not all) little protruding points that are similar to
those that Montagne shows, near the apex of Camillea mucronata. These
appear like abortive surface perithecia, but I do not find any clue to
their nature, and I do not know what they are. Cyclops was the name of a
giant in mythology that had but one eye in the middle of his forehead.
Thus species has but one "eye," but it is hardly a giant.

In the same paper in which Montagne lists Camillea Cyclops, he names
and figures Hypoxylon macromphalum. I can not tell the photograph
(Fig. 837) I made of the type from the photograph of Camillea Cyclops.
From Montagne's sectional figure, the perithecia are arranged in the
same manner, and the two plants are surely cogeneric and, I believe,
identical. A close reading of Montagne's description discloses but one
point of difference. He records that in Hypoxylon macromphalum the
ostioles are prominent, and in a close examination of my photograph, I
do note minute points on the disc that are absent from Camillea
cyclops. Still I believe they are the same plant.

[Illustration: #Fig. 837.#]


SECTION 2. PHYLACIA.


This might be made a genus, corresponding to Hypoxylon as to stroma,
but having the stroma hollow and filled with a pulverulent mass. In
reality, I think it is a better Camillea, the perithecia arranged the
same way, not permanent, but broken up at an early stage. Of course,
it is only an inference. Leveille states that it has the spores borne
on hyphae (acrogenous), but I do not place much value on Leveille's
statements. Patouillard, after admitting that he saw nothing but this
powdery mass, adds "it is probable that the spores were contained in
logettes with fugacious walls, of which only the marks on the inner
side of the cavity remain." It would have been better if he had
stopped there, but he goes on to propose afterwards that Hypoxylon
Bomba should be held distinct from Camillea under the name Phylacia,
because it presents a form "stylospored" and a form "ascospored." He
does not give the reason for the assertion that it is "stylospored,"
not even citing the uncertain testimony of Leveille. Phylacia might be
held distinct from Camillea on the ground of the powdery mass and the
early disappearance of the perithecia and ascus walls. There is
nothing new about that. It was done years ago by Fries who called the
"genus" Leveilleana, which is a tip for some future name-juggler. All
that is really known about its early structure is only from inference,
and that inference is contrary to its having been "stylospored."

[Illustration: #Fig. 838.#  #Fig. 839.#  #Fig. 840.#
               Camillea Sagraena. Fig. 838, a cluster natural size;
               Fig. 839, broken specimen as often seen; Fig 840, two
               long stipe specimens.]


CAMILLEA SAGRAENA (Figs. 838-840).--Plants oblong about 3-4 mm.,
stipitate or substipitate at the base, growing densely caespitose, in
patches, black, smooth, the apices usually obscurely mammillate. Stipes
usually short, but sometimes 6-8 mm. long, and when growing in clusters,
the bases consolidated by a carbonous stroma. Interior of the receptacle
in two compartments (Fig. 841 x6), the lower filled with soft tissue,
black around the edges, but _white_ in the center. The upper compartment
filled with a mass of spores mixed with a few fragments of hyphae.
Spores narrowly elliptical, 6 x 12, straight, pale colored.

[Illustration: #Fig. 841.#]

In Cuba I made abundant collections of this species. It grew in patches
from the thin bark, usually on the branches of a dead tree. I do not
know the name of the tree, but I think it was only on one kind, one of
the few softwood trees of Cuba. Camillea Sagraena is undoubtedly a
common species in the American tropics. It has never been well
described, and the white tissue of the interior lower half, which is a
very rare occurrence in similar black, carbonous plants, has never been
noted. A "new genus" might be based on this feature. It is quite fragile
and the broken bases as shown (Fig. 839) are often all that remain of it
when old. Camillea surinamensis as named by Berkeley from specimens from
Surinam, type at Kew, is exactly the same species. Berkeley does not
record it from Cuba, but from Nicaragua, and the specimen is supposed to
be illustrated by Ellis in his plate 38. It may have been the plant, but
if so, it was so inaccurately drawn that it would never be recognized.
In addition to my abundant collections from Cuba, I have a scanty
collection also from Cuba from E. B. Sterling.

[Illustration: #Fig. 844.#  #Fig. 845.#
               Camillea Bomba. Fig. 844 on bark; Fig. 845 on hard wood.]


CAMIILLEA BOMBA (Figs. 844, 845).--Plants globose, sessile, 4-6 mm. in
diameter, black, smooth, without any disc. Dehiscing by irregular
fracture. Stroma hollow on the interior (Fig. 846 x6) filled with a
brown powder, composed of spores mixed with abundant hyphae remnants of
the perithecia and asci. Spores 6-7 x 10-12, elliptical, pale colored.

[Illustration: #Fig. 846.#]

This seems to be a frequent species in tropical America. I collected it
in Cuba and have specimens from Miss Barrett, Jamaica, and L. J. K.
Brace, Bahamas. The latter specimens grew erumpent from thin bark, and
the broken bark forms a kind of cup at the base of the stroma. A thin,
black mycelial stroma underlies the bark. Those I collected in Cuba were
somewhat larger, and more irregular. Some grew in same manner, erumpent
from thin bark and the broken bark forms a kind of cup at the base of
the stroma, others on the naked, hard wood and grew more compact. In the
latter case the black stroma at the base was thicker and more in
evidence. There is no question but that Camillea Bomba is cogeneric with
Camillea Sagraena, but the gleba of the latter consists almost entirely
of spores, while in the former there is considerably more hyphae
remnants than spores.


CAMILLEA GLOBOSA (Fig. 847).--Plants densely caespitose, sessile,
globose, black, smooth. 7-8 mm. in diameter. Opening by irregular
fracture. Stroma hollow, filled with a brown mass of spores and hyphae
remnants. Spores elliptical.

Leveille named this from a specimen from Tolima, Columbia, South
America. The type Fig. 847 is all than is known to me. Leveille spins a
long story about it having spores borne on filaments, merely a wrong
deduction, I think, from his having found filaments (of the perithecia
walls?) mixed with the spores. Saccardo, who evidently did not take much
stock in Leveille's story, omitted the species, suggesting that it was a
form of Camillea turbinata. Saccardo's conclusions were almost as bad as
Leveille's.

We have not examined any specimens of Camillea globosa, but suspect a
section would show two divisions of the gleba, as in the next. In fact,
with the exception of the stipe, it appears to be the same plant, and
abundant collections may show them as only sessile and stipitate forms
of the same thing.

[Illustration: #Fig. 847.#]


CAMILLEA POCULIFORMIS (Figs. 848 and 849).--Plants caespitose,
stipitate, globose or obovate, smooth, black, 8-15 mm. in diameter.
Stroma somewhat flattened at apex, opening circumscissally[2] or
breaking irregularly. Stipe 8-10 cm. long, 2-3 mm. thick, black. Stroma
hollow, the interior in two divisions, a narrow layer above, the fertile
portion with a few spores in abundant, hyphae remnants, the lower
(corresponding to the sterile base of a Lycoperdon) of matted hyphae.
Spores short, elliptical, 9 x 14, pale colored, scantily found.

[Illustration: #Fig. 848.# Camillea poculiformis.]

[Illustration: #Fig. 849.#]

The pulverulent mass is rather firm, and remains after the peridium
breaks up. Camillea poculiformis was named Corynelia poculiformis in
Weigel's old exsiccatae, about a hundred years ago. It came from South
America. Years later Montagne published it as Hypoxylon poculiformis,
and Leveille as Phylacia poculiformis. I can not trace it from Fries'
writings, though no doubt Fries had it and doubtless named it. The old
specimens of Weigel's exsiccatae are found in most museums of Europe,
and all the publishing has been done on this one collection. I have a
nice collection (Fig. 848), made by T. J. Collins in Guatemala.


SPECULATIONS.

    The scanty knowledge we have of the real structure of this group
    of plants leaves much to speculation. They are all evidently
    closely related plants, and I think best classified under one
    general head, or genus, Camillea. They are quite different from
    the Hypoxylons of the temperate region, although we do not
    question that the tropical species are included in Saccardo
    mostly under Hypoxylon. When we come to compare what little we
    know of the species we find several differences on which
    "genera" could be based, and no doubt will be in time. In the
    original sense, Camillea might be restricted to the two
    cylindrical species, C. Leprieurii and C. Bacillum.

    Then we have the short, cylindrical or globose forms with
    persistent or semi-persistent perithecia, Camillea Labellum, C.
    Cyclops and C. turbinata with the intermediate species C.
    mucronata. The above will form one, or two, genera, according to
    taste.

    In the following plants we find no perithecia in the ripe
    specimens, hence of course they will in time be considered a
    genus. We believe there are two distinct differences between the
    few species we know, corresponding with the old ideas of Bovista
    and Lycoperdon in the puff balls. Camillea Sagraena and C.
    poculiformis, with two divisions of the gleba, a fertile and a
    sterile portion, and Camillea Bomba and C. globosa (?) with
    homogenous gleba. The species Camillea Sagraena differs from the
    other in having the fertile portion composed largely of spores
    (scanty in others) and in having part of the sterile portion of
    uncolored hyphae. Of course, it will form a "genus." Thus the
    genus Camillea can be easily divided into five "genera" and we
    make the suggestion for the benefit of those engaged in breaking
    up the old genera, and proposing new names to which to add their
    own. Who will rise to the occasion?

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GENUS THAMNOMYCES.


This is included in Saccardo as part of Xylaria, but we feel is well
entitled to generic rank. It was proposed by Ehrenberg in 1820 for a
curious species collected in Brazil. The genus differs from Xylaria in
having the fruiting bodies on the ends of branches, which in one
species are dichotomous, or in the other two species sessile or
subsessile and borne on a slender rhachis. There are conflicting
accounts of the structure of these bodies. The original, by Ehrenberg,
represents them as hollow bodies, with the perithecia imbedded in the
walls. That also is as shown by Cooke and is the usual idea. Moeller, on
the contrary, represents each body as a perithecium, and our examination
confirms Moeller's view. If Moeller's account is true, as it seems to
be, it is a strong reason why Thamnomyces should not be classed with
Xylaria.

The usual Xylaria has a white, sterile, central portion known as the
stroma, bearing a carbonous crust. The perithecia are generally imbedded
in the outer portion of the stroma, the mouths opening through the
carbonous crust. The walls of the perithecia are carbonous, and
confluent with the crust. The genus Thamnomyces has a slender stem,
entirely carbonous. This seems to have been the main difference between
it and Xylaria in the old classification, but the character is
fallacious.

There are Species of Xylaria that have no white stroma. The stem is
slender and carbonous and bears the carbonous fruit bodies, superficial,
but sessile and globose. Fries proposed for these species, the generic
name Rhizomorpha, which Saccardo united with Thamnomyces as a section of
Xylaria. In my view it is an entirely different idea from Thamnomyces
and should form a section in itself in the genus Xylaria. There are
Several species like Xylaria scopiformis that intimately connect
Rhizomorpha with Xylaria.

We believe the genus Thamnomyces, in the true sense, embraces only three
species as follows:


[Illustration: #Fig. 850.#]

THAMNOMYCES CHAMISSONIS (Fig. 850).--Stem Carbonous, black, smooth,
repeatedly dichotomously branched, the ultimate branches bearing ovate,
acute fruiting bodies. Structure of these bodies shown by Moeller is
entirely carbonous, hollow, each forming a single, carbonous
perithecium. Spores shown by different authors as of different shapes
and sizes. In our specimens they are 9 x 20-28 mic., dark, and arctuate.
They closely resemble the ordinary Xylaria spore.

This was originally named from Brazil by Ehrenberg, who gave a good
illustration of it. It has therefore escaped all synonyms, excepting by
Cooke, who discovered it was a new species and called it Thamnomyces
dendroidea. Hennings also discovered it from Africa, first as a new
variety, then as a new species, Thamnomyces camerunensis, but of course
everything that came to Hennings must be "new" something. It grows on
rotten, hard wood, and does not seem frequent in our American tropics.
In Africa, however, I judge it is more abundant as numbers of African
collections are in the museum at Berlin. We have only received it once,
at nice specimen (Fig. 850) from R. H. Bunting, Gold Coast, Africa.


[Illustration: #Fig. 851.#]

THAMNOMYCES CHORDALIS (Fig. 851).--Stem long, slender, several
proceeding from a common base, entirely carbonous, black, smooth.
Fruiting bodies (or perithecia?) sessile along the stem, ovate, with
slender apices, black. Spores oblong, arctuate, dark.

This, I believe, is only known from tropical America, but is apparently
not rare as it is recorded a number of times, mostly from Brazil. Fries
named it from French Guiana in 1830 and gave a characteristic
description of it. A co-type with the fruit mostly gone is at Kew. Later
Montagne got it also from French Guiana and gave a good figure and
description under the name Thamnomyces rostratus. He thought it was
different from Fries' species on account of the spores not being
globose, but the "globose" spores of the original description is
doubtless an error. The plants are surely the same. As Montagne's figure
is characteristic, the plant when subsequently found has usually been
recorded under his name. We present in our figure both Montagne's and
Fries' type.


[Illustration: #Fig. 852.#]

THAMNOMYCES FUCIFORMIS (Fig. 852).--In general appearance, this is the
same as Thamnomyces chordalis, but a much larger plant. The fruit
bodies (perithecia?) are more slender and are short, stalked. Our
figure, which is about half the spike, will show exactly the difference
between the two species. The plant was named by Berkeley from specimens
collected in Brazil by Spruce, and to this day is only known from this
old collection. The name is from the habits, "those of a fucus rather
than a fungus," a far-fetched comparison, for my impression is there are
no fuci that are carbonous, or have much resemblance to this plant.


RELATED PLANTS.

The following plants are compiled in the section Thamnomyces in
Saccardo. None of them are true Thamnomyces, and most of them could go
into Fries' genera Rhizomorpha. I do not believe, however, it is
possible to keep Rhizomorpha separate from Xylaria. The type species
Xylaria setosa is quite different from the normal type of Xylarias in
having entirely carbonous, filiform stems and superficial perithecia,
but both of these features merge into Xylaria through so many
intermediate species that there is no drawing the line of demarcation.


[Illustration: #Fig. 853.#]

XYLARIA SETOSA (Fig. 853).--Stem densely fasciculate, filiform, black,
entirely carbonous. Perithecia ovate, sparse, rarely developed. Spores
(teste Fuckel), ovoid, dark, 10 x 16 mic.

This is a rare plant in Europe, growing on old sacks, matting, carpets,
and similar refuse. It is generally found in cellars. I think it is not
known on wood nor recorded in the United States. It resembles carbonized
horse hair and was called "horse hair usnea" by old Dillenius. Our
photograph of the specimen at Kew will give a good idea of it, although
from the account it grows erect, and is not matted. Both Bulliard and
Sowerby gave characteristic figures, both from plants growing in
cellars, on old mats. It has had a great number of names, and is
recorded in Saccardo as Xylaria hippotrichoides, the specific name
proposed by Sowerby and used by Persoon. Some very recent juggler, I
have forgotten who, dug up the old name setosa, which I adopt as being
less cumbersome. Occasionally these jugglers do propose some improvement
in names, and I believe in encouraging them, when their wonderful date
dictionary discoveries are really better names. Saccardo gives the
following synonyms: Sphaeria hippotrichoides, Ceratonema
hippotrichoides, Hypoxylon loculiferum, Rhizomorpha tuberculosa,
Cryptothamnium usneaeforme, Rhizomorpha setiformis, Chaenocarpus
setosus, Chaenocarpus Simonini. The date expert must have had quite a
job.

    Xylaria adnata as described by Fuckel (Rhizomorpha adnata), and
    unknown to me, is evidently very similar to the preceding plant,
    but grows closely adnate to rotten beech wood.

    Xylaria fragilis (Rhizomorpha fragilis) is imperfectly known
    from old records in Europe. It is probably same as above.

    Xylaria hispidissima (Rhizomorpha hispidissima) from East Indies
    is known only from old description. It is an evident Xylaria and
    seems to be same as recently collected, adventitious in a hot
    house in Hungary, and distributed as Xylaria hungarica.

    Xylaria annulata, described in 1820 from West Indies as
    Thamnomyces annulatus and unknown otherwise, reads like
    Thamnomyces chardalis, but the branches of the latter are not
    known to be "annulated under a lens."


[Illustration: #Fig. 854.#]

XYLARIA ANNULIPES, described and figured by Montagne as Thamnomyces
annulipes from Brazil, is same as since named Xylaria marasmoides (Fig.
854) by Berkeley. Berkeley does not mention the rings on the stem as
shown so plainly in Montagne's enlarged figure, nor can I note them with
a lens on my photograph of Berkeley's or Montagne's types. Spegazzini
refers marasmoides as a synonym for annulipes, no doubt correctly.
Theissen refers it as a synonym for Xylaria aristata, an evident error.
Xylaria vermiculus, recently published from Brazil by Sydow, as
"Saccardo n. sp. in litt.," is, both from description and photograph,
evidently the same as Xylaria annulipes.


[Illustration: #Fig. 855.#]

XYLARIA MELANURA (Fig. 855), West Indies, described as Chaenocarpus
melanurus and compiled in Saccardo in section Thamnomyces, is evidently
same as Xylaria gracillima in sense of Berkeley and Montagne, but not I
believe as to Fries. We present a photograph made from Leveille's
cotype.

    Xylaria axillaris was not compiled in Thamnomyces in Saccardo,
    but is evidently a very similar if not the same plant as Xylaria
    setosa, and is only known from Currey's original account from
    Africa. It is about a half inch high, with filiform stem, and
    few, superficial perithecia. Spores are given as 25 to 32 mic.,
    which are much larger than those of setosa.

    Xylaria patagonica as named by Crombie as Thamnomyces and
    compiled in Saccardo, Vol. 9, was based on Dillenius' old (1741)
    figure t. 13, f. 11, from Patagonia, which, as far as the figure
    goes, could be Xylaria setosa. Of course, nothing as known about
    it.

    Xylaria Schwackei, named by Hennings from Brazil, seems from
    description to be Xylaria melanura.

    Xylaria Warburgii, named by Hennings from New Guinea, seems from
    the crude figure to be Xylaria carpophila.

    Xylaria luzonensis, named from Philippines by Hennings, seems
    from crude figure to be Xylaria multiplex in original sense of
    Fries (not Thiessen).

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: #Fig. 856.# Engleromyces Goetzei.]

THE GENUS ENGLEROMYCES.


Plants large, subglobose, with alveolate, sinuate carbonous exterior.
Stroma white, fleshy, 11/2-2 cm. thick. Perithecia carbonous, forming
several stratose layers, imbedded in the stroma in the depressions.
Spores 12-15x18-24, dark, smooth, curved, agreeing with Xylaria spores.


ENGLEROMYCES GOETZEI (Figs. 856 and 857).--This is the largest
Pyrenomycete, and as far as known only occurs in Eastern, tropical
Africa. In 1900 Hennings described and named it, and there are several
specimens on exhibition in the museum at Berlin. Some years later (1906)
a specimen reached Paris from the same region. It was sent to the
anthropological museum at Paris, the collector taking it for a
fossilized skull. The reference to a skull is not inappropriate as will
be noted from our photograph (Fig. 857) from the specimen at Paris.
Patouillard, not knowing of course what Hennings had done at Berlin,
renamed it Colletomanginia paradoxa. Our figure 856 shows a section, and
the arrangement of the perithecia. Practically nothing is known as to
its habits. Patouillard states it occurs on the trunk of Abies, Hennings
on Bamboo. We feel that on publication of our photograph there will be
no occasion for further names for it.

[Illustration: #Fig. 857.#]

       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES:

    [1] Thus there is no doubt whatever in my mind that Camillea
        turbinata is Sphaeria caelata of Fries, but not knowing the
        Friesian species from specimens, I take the only sure name I
        know. Montagne refers it to Camillea poculiformis, but I do not
        think he knew more about it than I do, and I do not know anything
        excepting the "description."

    [2] So shown in one specimen on Fig. 848, but doubtful if it is a
        character of the plant.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYNOPSIS OF SOME GENERA OF THE LARGE
PYRENOMYCETES***


******* This file should be named 21761.txt or 21761.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/1/7/6/21761



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

