The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Mixer, by Lillian Nicholson Shearon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Little Mixer

Author: Lillian Nicholson Shearon

Release Date: June 14, 2007 [EBook #21830]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE MIXER ***




Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)






THE LITTLE MIXER



_By_

LILLIAN NICHOLSON SHEARON



INDIANAPOLIS
THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY
PUBLISHERS


Copyright, 1922
By The Bobbs-Merrill Company


_Printed in the United States of America._


PRESS OF
BRAUNWORTH & CO.
BOOK MANUFACTURERS
BROOKLYN, N.Y.




THE LITTLE MIXER




There was no fault to be found with the present itself; the trouble lay
in the method of transportation. This thought was definite enough in
Hannah's mind, but she had to rely upon a seven-year-old vocabulary for
expression, and grown-ups are notably dull of comprehension. Even
mothers don't always understand without being told exactly in so many
words.

"I didn't say the kimono wasn't nice, Mama," explained Hannah, "and
'course Cousin Carrie was awful good to send it to me, but--but Santy
Claus is going to bring Virginia one to-morrow night, _down the
chimbley_!"

Rose Joseph slipped the absurd little garment over her daughter's dainty
lingerie frock, and stood her on a chair that she might view herself in
the narrow mirror between the windows of the living-room. The child was
as lovely as a flower, but vanity was still sound asleep in her soul,
and she glanced indifferently at the reflection, her body sagging with
disappointment. "It is just like those little Japanese girls wear," her
mother cried in that over-enthusiastic adult tone which warns a child he
is about to be the recipient of a gold brick. "I am sure Virginia's
can't be any nicer than this one!"

"But, Mama, Santy Claus is going bring hers _down the chimbley_.
Mine"--her voice dropped to a mournful key--"mine came _through the
door_!"

"But, darling, what difference does that make just so you get it?"

Pity for her mother's barren childhood shone in Hannah's soft black
eyes. "That's--that's no way for presents to come," she explained;
"Mama, it's Chris'mus."

"It is Chanuca," Mrs. Joseph responded firmly. "Remember you are a
Jewess, dear."

"I can't never forget it," said the child with a catch in her voice,
"'specially at Chris'mus."

"But, darling, the Jewish children have Chanuca; it comes about the same
time as Christmas, and amounts to the same thing."

Hannah shook her bronze curls. "Chanuca is because the children of
Israel took Jerusalem and the temple away from the bad people," she
recited glibly, "and--and you say prayers, and light candles--eight
days, and--and all your uncles and aunts and cousins send you things,
but Santy Claus, he don't pay any 'tention to Chanuca. Chris'mus is just
one day, and Santy Claus comes down the chimbley and brings things to
all good children--'cept little Jews--because it is the birthday of our
Saviour."

Mrs. Joseph was silent so long that Hannah felt she had convinced her
mother of the superiority of the Gentile Christmas over the Jewish
Chanuca, and she continued more in detail. "And the children's kinfolks
just give Santy Claus money, and tell him what to buy, and he brings the
presents, and nobody has to bother about it 'cept him."

"Hannah," Mrs. Joseph interrupted coldly, "who told you about the
birthday of--of the Saviour?"

"Nellie Halloran," answered Hannah, "and Virginia, too. They've--they've
got the same one."

"The same what?"

"The same Saviour," Hannah explained.

"Darling, hasn't Mama told you many times, that you must never, never
talk about religion to Nellie and Virginia?"

"Oh, we don't, Mama, never, never! But 'course we got to talk about
Santy Claus, and things."

There seemed to be no reasonable objection to that, so Mrs. Joseph
dropped the subject. She spent a great deal of time folding the despised
and rejected kimono into its tissue-paper wrappings. Presently she
brought a narrow parcel from another room.

"See what Uncle Aaron has sent you, dear," she cried gaily. "A little
man; you wind him up in the back with this key--so--and then he dances
and plays the fiddle!"

Hannah forced a polite giggle at the little man's antics. He too rested
under the ban of having come "through the door," and her attention soon
wandered.

"Nellie got a jumping-jack in the very top of her stocking last
Chris'mus; 'cause she's such a jumping-jack herself, her papa said. You
know, Mama, Santy Claus puts nuts and candy, and _little_ things in your
stocking and puts your big things all around the room. Sometimes he
brings a tree and hangs them all on a tree. Virginia and Nellie want a
tree and a new doll. Virginia gets a new doll every Chris'mus, and she's
got every doll Santy ever brought her--even her little, baby, rubber
doll. She's eight years old and will have eight dolls! But Nellie
ain't--hasn't saved a single one, and she's scared she won't get one
this Chris'mus--awful scared."

"Why, dear?" asked Mrs. Joseph, when Hannah paused for breath.

"Because the doll Santy brought Nellie last Chris'mus, you know what?
She was playing Indian with her brother one day, and _chopped her head
off_! And Nellie's mama says she don't know whether old Santy's going to
forget that or _not_! But Nellie, she says she prays hard to the Virgin
Mary every night--if she don't go to sleep too quick. Mama, what's a
virgin? Mama, what's----"

"A virgin is a lady who has never been married," answered Mrs. Joseph,
putting the neglected musician back into his box.

Hannah wrestled alone for a moment with a mighty ecclesiastical problem,
and then gave it up.

"The Virgin Mary is God's mother," Hannah continued. "That's her picture
over our fireplace,"--pointing to a copy of a crude thirteenth century
Madonna and Child in a carved Gothic frame, which Eli and Rose Joseph
had bought in Italy while on their wedding trip. Flanked now by candles
burning in silver candelabra in honor of Chanuca, it gave the mantel a
passing resemblance to a Catholic shrine.

"I don't think God's mother is very pretty, do you, Mama? And I think
Nellie's little brother is a heap prettier'n God was when He was a
baby."

Mrs. Joseph showed signs of having reached the limit. "Hannah," she said
firmly, "it is time you were in bed."

"But, Papa hasn't come home yet."

"Papa will be late to-night, dear."

"The Chris'mus rush," sighed Hannah. "Mama, you haven't looked down my
throat to-day," she added, playing for time.

Mrs. Joseph went through the daily ritual. "It looks all right," she
pronounced.

"It _is_ all right," came the triumphant answer. "It is never going to
be sore again. Virginia says----"

"Never mind what Virginia says. If your throat ever hurts you the least
little bit, you are to come to me instantly and tell me. Do you
understand?"

"Yes, Mama, but it isn't going to hurt any more," Hannah insisted.

"Come on up-stairs to bed."

Still Hannah hung back. She had not played her trump card yet, and the
time was short. She caught her mother's slim white hand in hers and
fingered nervously at the rings. "Mama," she almost whispered, "Virginia
says it's Jewish mamas' fault that Santy Claus don't come to see Jewish
children. If the mamas would just go to Santy and _tell_ him to
come--You will, won't you, Mama? _Please, Mama!_"

"Hannah, not another word about Christmas and Santy
Claus--not--another--word!"

Hannah swallowed something that came in her throat, and bravely winked
back her tears. "Can't Mandy put me to bed?"

"No, dear; Mandy is busy in the kitchen. Mama will put you to bed and
tell you stories." She bent down and kissed the child tenderly.

Hannah flung her arms about her mother's neck. She loved the feel of the
soft throat and the gently curving bosom against her little cheek, and
the fragrance of her mother's hair and silken laces. She didn't know
that her mother looked like a portrait by Raphael, but she did know that
her mama was the prettiest, sweetest mama in all the world; and yet--

"Mama, I'm so tired of stories about the children of Israel. They never
did anything funny. Mandy tells me tales about the old plantashun, when
her ma was a slave, and about ole Marse, and ole Mis' going to town and
giving Santy Claus money so's he'd bring beads and 'juice' harps and
things to the little niggers; and he never forgot one, from the biggest
to the littlest darky, Santy didn't."

The child's body began to tremble with repressed sobs. "I--I wisht I was
a--a little darky! It's--it's awful--sad to be a little Jewish child at
Chris'mus time."

And then the storm broke.

Two hours later Eli Joseph's tired step sounded on the veranda, and Rose
hurried to admit him, lifting a silencing hand as soon as he had crossed
the threshold. "Hannah has just gone to sleep," she whispered. "No--no,
she's not sick at all." He placed an arm around her and drew her into
the library.

"Eli, your overcoat is wet," she exclaimed, untwining her arms from his
neck.

"Snow," he said, his good-looking boyish face lighting up with pleasure.
"It seems we are to have a white Christmas after all."

"Christmas!" she cried; "I wish I could never hear that word again."

"Well, I'm glad it comes only once a year. To-night ends my siege,
though. To-morrow night Stein goes on duty, and I come home for dinner
to stay. Rose, darling, you look all tired out. You shouldn't wait up
for me."

"It isn't that. It's Hannah. She cried for more than an hour to-night,
and but for Mandy and her tales I believe she would still be crying."
And she detailed the scene to him.

"But, good gracious, Rose, let Santa Claus bring her presents to her,"
said Eli, when she had finished. "Hannah's nothing but a baby."

"She is beginning to think for herself."

"As you did at a very early age," he reminded her, "and your father the
strictest of orthodox rabbis. How old were you when you began slipping
off to the reformed temple?"

"I broke my father's heart," she said somberly. "I'll be punished
through Hannah."

"Not unless you let Hannah think faster than you do. And remember," he
added teasingly, "if you hadn't run off to the reformed temple you would
never have met me."

"Outside, at the foot of the steps," she recalled. "I would never have
met you inside."

"Maybe I am lax," he acknowledged, "but it seems to me that if you are
living a decent life yourself, and giving the other fellow a square
deal, you are pretty nearly fulfilling the law and the prophets."

"And what do you suppose is happening to Hannah with a Christian Science
family on one side and Roman Catholics on the other?" she demanded
tragically. "She's decided not to take any more medicine, because
Virginia Lawrence doesn't. And she has Nellie Halloran's every
expression about the Virgin and the Saviour. Not only that, but she has
made friends with a Christian Science practitioner through the
Lawrences, and calls him 'my friend Mr. Jackson.' She runs to meet him
and walks the length of the block with him every time he passes."

"Hannah is certainly a natural born mixer," laughed the father. "We are
saving ourselves trouble by giving her the best there is to mix with!"

"Eli, I am afraid we made a mistake moving out here, away from all our
people."

"No, we didn't make a mistake," he declared earnestly. "The Square was
no place to bring up Hannah, among those parvenu Jews. We have the
prettiest home on the heights and the best people in town for
neighbors."

"Our child is losing her identity as a Jewess."

"Let her find it again as an American," he replied. "Frankly, Rose, I
don't lose any sleep over trying to keep _my_ identity as a Jew intact.
If a Jew doesn't like it here, let him go back to Palestine or to the
country that oppressed him, I say. I've got the same amount of patience
with these hyphenated Americans as I have with the Jews who try to
segregate themselves and dot the map with New Jerusalems. Where's the
sense in throwing yourself into the melting-pot, glad of the chance, and
then kicking because you come out something different?--Come on to bed,
dear; you are as pale as a ghost, and I'm so tired I can't see straight.
Our baby is all right. Don't you worry."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Snow falls on the just and the unjust. There was quite as much of it in
Hannah's back yard as in either Virginia's or Nellie's--perhaps even a
little more had drifted into the fence corners. Hannah's joy in
discovering that in this respect she had not been slighted crowded her
troubles into the background. Immediately after breakfast, bundled up
snugly, she stood in her yard and threw snowballs toward her neighbors'
homes, while she squealed with delight. In a very few minutes, three
little girls were playing where only one had played before.

The two newcomers, Virginia Lawrence and Nellie Halloran, presented an
interesting contrast. Virginia, slim, and tall for her age, with long,
flat, yellow braids, handled the snow daintily, even gingerly. Nellie,
fat and dimpled, her curls tousled into a flame colored halo, rolled
over and over in the snow, and then shook herself like a puppy. Until
the advent of Hannah, a subtle antagonism had existed between the two
children. Virginia's favorite game was playing "lady" with a train
floating gracefully behind her; Nellie's chief joy in life was seeing
how long she could stand on her head, her short skirts obeying the laws
of gravity all the while. Hannah, however, vibrated obligingly between
the two sports, and kept the peace inviolate.

Romping in the snow is hard play, and presently the little girls sat
panting on the top step of the Josephs' back porch. Immediately Nellie
produced a string of amethyst colored beads from her coat pocket, with
the announcement that she would say her prayers while resting.

"What kind of beads are those?" asked Hannah.

"Rosary beads, 'course," responded Nellie. "Hannah, you don't know
anything."

"I do, too."

"Huh! you didn't even know about the Mother o' God until I told you."

"I reckon I thought God was an orphan," Hannah pleaded in extenuation.
"But, what about God's papa?" she demanded with sudden inspiration.
"You're so smarty, tell me about that!"

"Oh, God didn't have to have a father," Nellie answered easily.
"Everything is free in Heaven; so He didn't have to have a father to
work for Him when He was little."

"Then why did He have to have a mama?"

"To tell Him what to do, 'course. You know how 'tis. If you ask your
papa anything, don't he always say, 'Go ask your mama'?"

Hannah had noticed this shifting of masculine responsibility more than
once. "That's so," she acquiesced. Then a terrible thought struck her.
"I don't want to go to Heaven! I don't want to go anywhere unless my
papa can go too."

Nellie's nimble Irish wits were ready. "I just said _God_ didn't need
any papa. 'Course _our_ papas will go to Heaven, 'cause that's the only
place they can quit working. Didn't I hear my papa say one time he hoped
he'd get a little rest in Heaven, 'cause he never got any on this
earth?"

"But, you have to die before you can get to Heaven," sighed Hannah.

Virginia, who had been maintaining a most dignified silence, looked as
if she must speak or explode. "No you don't. Heaven begins here and
now," she recited. "If you are good, you are well and happy, and that's
Heaven."

"'Tisn't," scoffed Nellie. "Do you see any angels flying 'round in this
here yard? I don't."

Hannah rather took to Virginia's argument, and resolved to have
conversation with her some time, undampened by Nellie's skepticism. If
there could be feasting on the joys of Heaven here and now, Hannah had
every intention of being at the banquet table. At the present moment,
however, the rosary beads were of fascinating interest; she must hold
them in her own hands, and watch the play of purple lights upon the snow
as she flashed them in the sun. Questions about the crucifix, she found,
brought on an embarrassing silence. Nellie looked at Virginia. Virginia
looked at Nellie. Then the two excused themselves for a whispered
colloquy at the other end of the yard. When they returned, Virginia
acted as spokesman, fixing Nellie with an unrelenting eye.

"That is Jesus nailed to the cross, Hannah. Some very wicked people did
it."

There was nothing exciting in this to Hannah; wicked people were doing
wicked things the world over, all the time. The statement fell flat, and
Nellie, disappointed at the lack of dramatic effect, broke treaty. "I
'spect the Jews did it," she said.

"They did not!" Hannah's voice trembled. "The Jews are nice people; they
wouldn't do a wicked thing like that!"

Virginia put an arm across Hannah's shoulders. "Now see what you've
done," she snapped at Nellie.

"Oh, I 'spect the Irish helped them," Nellie added magnanimously. "My
papa says the Irish are into every thing."

Not having to bear the ignominy alone Hannah was comforted. "What makes
you say prayers on the beads?" she asked.

"'Cause I want Santy to bring me a doll to-night. I wrote him 'bout
sixteen letters, and I'm going to say my rosary a dozen times to-day."

To-morrow was Christmas Day! Hannah's face fell. All her sorrows
returned with a rush. "Have you got any more of those beads?" she asked.

"Yes, but they wouldn't do you any good," Nellie answered with quick
understanding. "You're not a Catholic."

"Couldn't I be one?"

"Not unless you're baptized with holy water. The priest does it."

The leaven had begun to work.

"What did your mama say about asking Santa Claus to come?" Virginia
inquired, with a quick glance toward the beads.

Hannah shook her head, speechless. She compressed her lips into a tight
line with an effort at self-control, but two large tears rolled down her
cheeks and splashed on her scarlet coat. Again Virginia placed an arm
protectingly across Hannah's shoulder.

Nellie's bright blue eyes grew soft with pity. "I tell you what," she
exclaimed. "I'll baptize Hannah, then she'll be a Gentile, and Santa
Claus will come, no matter what. And when your mama sees how nice it is,
she won't care."

"But, you said a priest has to baptize anybody," objected Virginia.

"He does 'less it's a time of danger and you can't get any priest. Then
any Catholic can baptize anybody. My mama baptized our washerwoman's
little baby 'cause they knew it was going to die before Father Murphy
could get there. And ain't this a time of danger?"

"Nobody's dying." Virginia was distressingly literal.

Hannah looked from one friend to the other, hoping against hope.

"No, but there's danger Santa Claus won't come to see Hannah less'n
sump'n is done mighty quick," came Nellie's ready reply. "And can we get
a priest? You go get one, Virginia. Go get one."

Clearly there was no answer to this. The ceremony was set for early
afternoon when Grandmother Halloran took her nap and Nellie could borrow
the bottle of holy water from her shelf. As to the place, there were six
boys at the Hallorans' always in the way; Mrs. Lawrence had guests;
obviously the baptismal rite would have to be performed at Hannah's
home. After lunch the children assembled in the sun parlor of the
Josephs' home, in full view of Mrs. Joseph who sat embroidering in the
library, the French door closed between them, so that she did not hear.

Nellie had secured the bottle of holy water, and, arrayed in her brother
Joe's long, black rain-coat, a towel about her neck for a stole, acted
as priest. Virginia, not to be left out of such an important affair,
consented to be godmother. In lieu of a prayer manual, Nellie used one
of Hannah's story books. She chose a verse, which, because she knew it
by heart, she could read exceptionally well:

    "Little boy blue, come blow your horn,
    The sheep are in the meadow,
    And the cows are in the corn."

Then she poured a little of the holy water on Hannah's forehead (wet
hair might occasion unanswerable questions) and baptized her "Hannah
Agnes Ignatius Joseph."

Called upon for a response, the godmother recited very impressively the
Scientific Statement of Being as found in the Christian Science
text-book, and Hannah was pronounced a Gentile and a Catholic.

One thing more remained to be done. Hannah ran to her mother, cheeks
aglow. "Mama, may I trade my striped ball to Nellie for some beads?"

"Why of course, darling, if you wish."

The exchange was made, and some time was spent in mastering the use of
the rosary. All three of the children knew the "Our Father," though
there was some difference of opinion as to "debts" and "trespasses"
which is apt to hold in all mixed congregations. The "Hail Mary" proved
a bit difficult for Hannah, and she finally abandoned it. "I'll say,
'Hear, oh Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One,'" she said. "I
already know that, and a prayer is a prayer, isn't it?"

Nellie refilled the holy-water bottle from the kitchen hydrant, and
hurried home to replace it before her grandmother should awaken. Hannah
spent the next hour lying flat on her stomach printing letters,
appealing to Virginia from time to time for aid as to the spelling,
Virginia being a very superior speller.

Mrs. Joseph was busy with callers when Virginia went home, and Hannah
was left to her own devices. Suddenly she thought of one stone that had
been left unturned: there was her friend Mr. Jackson to whom the
Lawrences always appealed in time of stress. She knew the formula, she
knew his number, for on the list by the Lawrences' telephone, his name,
like Abou-ben-Adhem's, led all the rest. "Main 1234," it was as easy as
counting. She slipped into the telephone closet and closed the door.

There was no trouble with Hannah that night. She went to bed early, and
didn't care to have any stories told--she could go to sleep by herself.

"Quite a change of heart, eh?" Eli commented to Rose, as they sat by the
living-room fire after telling their little girl good night.

"She has been like that all day, playing as happily as you please," Rose
responded. "I suppose she got it all out of her system in last night's
scene."

Eli drummed abstractedly on the arm of his chair: "I don't feel quite
right about it, even so," he said.

"Maybe you will think me inconsistent," she confessed, flushing, "but
Hannah was so indifferent about the presents sent her for Chanuca, I
only showed her two. I've saved the others to give her Christmas Day, so
she will have something of her own to show when the other children bring
theirs over."

Eli didn't seem any too pleased. "Poor little mite," he murmured.

                    *      *      *      *      *

"His-st! Missis Joseph!"

It was Bridget, the Hallorans' old family servant, calling softly from
the hall.

"I'll be after takin' the prisints ye've stored away for us. I'll lave
'em on the back porch 'n' carry 'em over when the childer are all
asleep. Nellie's in bed like a little angel, bless 'er heart, but them
divilish b'ys do be a-snoopin' into ivery crack 'n' corner!"

Mrs. Joseph unlocked a closet under the stairs, and loaded Bridget's
arm's with heavy and bulky parcels.

"Shure, an' 'tis a sad Chris'mus we'll be havin', savin' the childer.
Mr. Timmy, him that's old Missis Halloran's youngest, but old enough to
know better, he ups an' runs away to-day an' marries a Protestant
gir-rl. An' if ye'll open y'r windy the bit av a crack, ye'll hear the
poor old lady this minit, wailin' like a banshee."

"But Mr. Timothy is such a nice young man, he must have married a lovely
girl, Bridget," said Rose.

"Shure, an' that may be, but she is a Protestant, Missis Joseph. She
runs away fr'm her folks, an' he runs away fr'm his, an' they get
married by a justice o' peace. An' no peace will come o' such doin',
Lord 've mercy on their souls!"

"Oh, poor Grandma Halloran!"

"Poor lovers," said Eli, when Bridget had gone. "I'll wager they had the
very deuce of a time with both sides."

No sooner had they settled themselves again than the door knocker
sounded. Eli admitted Mr. Jackson, the Christian Science practitioner.

"I have only a minute," he said. "I just dropped by to leave a doll my
wife dressed for your little girl. We chose one that we thought looked
like Hannah."

"Oh, but that is kind of you!" Rose looked her gratitude. "Mrs. Lawrence
has told me how busy both you and your wife always are--and to take time
to think of our little girl----!"

"I had intended to give it to her myself," Mr. Jackson continued, "but
after her talk with me to-day I decided she would enjoy it more if I
asked Santa Claus to bring it." His eyes twinkled reminiscently. "She
called me up by telephone and asked me to give Santa Claus a
treatment--she seemed to think that he would pass her by. I could assure
her that he wouldn't, as I had already seen the doll. Hannah is a
wonderful child."

"We think so," smiled Eli. "I am sure we thank you, and wish you the
very merriest Christmas."

"It will be a _happy_ Christmas for me," he answered. "I am going to the
station to meet my father and mother. Some years ago they felt estranged
from me--they are both staunch Presbyterians of the old school and it
nearly broke their hearts when I went into Christian Science work. But
they are beginning to look more tolerantly upon my calling, and they are
on their way now to spend Christmas with us. You can guess how happy
that makes me. 'Peace on earth, good will to men'--it is a
wonder-working thought."

"It is indeed," Eli agreed heartily.

When the door had closed upon their visitor, Rose and Eli stood staring
at each other rather foolishly. She was the first to speak: "Is there no
end to the fight between the old and the new generation?"

"We are just beginning the scrap with _our_ new generation," he said.
"She called him up and asked for Christian Science help! I wonder what
else that little monkey has been up to?"

They soon found out. Carrying the doll Mr. Jackson had brought, Rose
tiptoed after Eli into the nursery and gradually turned on the light.
The first object to meet their eyes was Hannah's stocking, hanging
precariously to a pin driven into the mantel. Pinned to the wall were
several messages, neatly printed in pencil, which told their own tale:

    Deer Santy--Nellie babtized me. Holy wotter.
                                                Hannah.


    Deer Santy--I want things in my stockin.
                                                Hannah.


    Deer Santy Claws--Ime a jentile. Nellie babtize me. Ime a jentile
    cath-lic C. S.
                                                Hannah.


    Deer Santy--Bring me any nice things you got left. With love
                                                Hannah.


    Deer Santy--Don't let my Mama and my Papa get mad bout you.
                                                Hannah.

Eli began to chortle, and Hannah stirred in her sleep, throwing both
chubby arms over her head. Clutched tightly in her left hand they saw a
rosary of amethyst colored beads.

Rose snapped off the light and pushed Eli out into the hall. He sat down
on the stairs and laughed until he cried. "The dog-gone little mixer!"
he chuckled. "A Gentile Catholic Christian Scientist is she? And if she
has ever happened to hear anything about Mahomet, believe me, she's
sleeping with her feet toward Mecca right now!"

Rose was weeping silently over the message: "Don't let my Mama my Papa
get mad bout you." She touched her husband on the shoulder, "Eli, what
shall we do about it?"

"Do?" He stood up and set his jaw determinedly. "You spoke just now of
the fight between the old and the new generations: do you see what we
are coming to if we don't concede our child her legitimate rights. She
will seek them out, and take them by force, and never forgive us for
withholding them, that's what! Every child who has ever heard of Santa
Claus has a right to enjoy the myth. Didn't I give a hundred dollars to
the Elks and a hundred dollars to the Big Brothers who are looking after
the empty stockings of the poor children, while my own baby----"

He had reached his bedroom door and was kicking off his house slippers.

"Eli, where are you going?"

"Down-town to see Santa Claus if I have to break open a dozen stores,"
he answered determinedly.

                    *      *      *      *      *

It seemed that Santa Claus, never having visited Hannah before, had a
mind to make up for lost time. An overflowing stocking hung from the
mantel; a tree loaded with presents and tinsel stood by her bed; about
the room were placed large gifts, everything a little girl might wish
for. Hannah was dazed. She didn't see her mother and father standing in
the doorway of the nursery, their arms about each other, and smiling.
She tugged at her window until it opened and then called to Nellie
across the intervening space.

"He came! He came!" she screamed, as a tousled, flame-colored head
showed at the window opposite.

Hannah brushed by her parents and, running to the window nearest
Virginia's room, repeated her message. Then she came back into the
nursery, still oblivious of mother and father, and stared about her in
ecstasy. The occasion called for some expression of thanksgiving--what
could it be? A seven-year-old child hasn't words for such a big emotion.
She could think of but one thing to do.

Reverently bowing her little bronze head, she made the sign of the
cross--upside down!


THE END






End of Project Gutenberg's The Little Mixer, by Lillian Nicholson Shearon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE MIXER ***

***** This file should be named 21830.txt or 21830.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/8/3/21830/

Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
