The Project Gutenberg eBook, Spool Knitting, by Mary A. McCormack


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Spool Knitting


Author: Mary A. McCormack



Release Date: July 9, 2007  [eBook #22029]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPOOL KNITTING***


E-text prepared by Tamise Totterdell and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from digital material
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 22029-h.htm or 22029-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/2/0/2/22029/22029-h/22029-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/2/0/2/22029/22029-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/spoolknitting00mccorich





SPOOL KNITTING

by

MARY A. McCORMACK







[Illustration]



New York
A. S. Barnes & Company
1909
Copyright, 1909
by A. S. Barnes & Company.




CONTENTS

                                      PAGE

  Spool Knitting                         1
  Toy Knitters                           3
  Round Web                              5
  Flat Web                               7
  Circular Mat                           9
  Ball for Baby                         11
  Doll's Muff                           13
  Collarette                            15
  Tom O' Shanter Cap                    17
  Baby's Rattle                         19
  Toboggan Cap                          21
  Child's Bath or Bedroom Slippers      23
  Small Mittens                         25
  Doll's Hood                           27
  Doll's Coat or Jacket                 29
  Bootees                               33
  Little Boy Blue                       35
  Little Red Riding Hood                37
  Doll's Skirt                          39
  Little Boy's Hat                      41
  Child's Muffler                       43
  Child's Hood                          45
  Little Girl's Hat                     47
  Doll's Sweater                        49
  Wristlets                             51
  Shoulder Shawl                        53
  Doll's Carriage Robe                  55
  Child's Leggings                      57
  Muffler                               59
  Made of Knitting Cotton               61
  Jumping Rope                          63
  Toy Horse Reins                       65
  Wash Cloth                            67
  School Bag                            69
  Chimney Cleaner                       71
  Doll's Hammock                        73




[Illustration]

SPOOL KNITTING


Few elementary exercises have aroused more interest in the child than
the toy knitting; due, perhaps, to its simplicity and his power to do it
easily and well.

To some keen observer the little orb-weaving spider may have suggested
this form of occupation. Be this as it may, the child who is a lover of
nature will be quick to perceive the strong resemblance he bears to this
little insect while at work with his toy knitter, going from post to
post just as the insect worked its net in spiral form on his framework
of radiating lines.

The possibilities of an empty spool and a few pins are almost without
limitations. The illustrations here given are merely suggestive of many
more that can be worked out along these lines. They are not simply to
momentarily attract the child, but to permit of individual growth, and
to have him participate in the joy of its ultimate use.




[Illustration]

Toy Knitters


Toy knitters are made of a cylindrical piece of wood two and one-half or
three inches long and at least one inch in diameter. This size enables
the child to grasp it easily and work without cramping the fingers. A
hole one-fourth or one-half inch in diameter is bored lengthwise through
the center to admit the work. Spools are used to advantage where
knitters cannot be obtained.

Pins, staples, or wire nails are used as posts. These are driven into
the wood and then curved outward a little at the top with pliers, to
prevent the work from slipping off. One, two, three or four posts may be
used.

A number of forms of web can be made, but the simplest and quickest are
those made on the knitters having but two posts. The four-post knitters
are also simple and are used where a thick cord is needed.

Except otherwise specified two-post knitters are used for these models.




[Illustration]

Round Web


Drop worsted through the hole in the center of the knitter and draw it
out at the other end, three inches. This end is used to draw the work
through the knitter. Carry the worsted leading from the ball, around the
post to the right, across the center of the hole in the knitter and
around the post to the left; then back across the center to the post at
the right, thus making two stitches on this post. Lift the lower or
first stitch with a large pin or knitting needle, carry it over the
second stitch and drop it over the post; then across the center to the
post at the left and repeat. So continue until the desired length is
obtained.

It will require seven yards of yarn to make one yard of web on the
two-post knitter.




[Illustration]

Flat Web


Begin in the same way as for round web, but after carrying the first or
lower stitch over the second stitch on each post, bring the worsted back
around the same post, and over to the post on the opposite side and
repeat. This will leave two stitches on each post. In knitting flat
webs, two stitches must always be left on the end posts, and these two
are carried over the third stitch and dropped over the post in working
back and forth.

It requires eleven yards of yarn to make one yard of flat web on the
two-post knitter.




[Illustration]

Circular Mat


A mat five inches in diameter requires two and one-half yards of round
web. Start sewing with the piece of worsted hanging from the end of the
web. Coil and sew in place by taking up the underhalf of a stitch on the
right, then the underhalf of a stitch on the left side usually called
"ball stitch." Continue alternating from right to left, taking up one
stitch at a time except when it is necessary to widen; then sew two
stitches of the web into one in the mat.

Run the end of sewing thread back in the sewing to fasten it. When
starting with a new sewing thread, put the needle in one inch back from
where sewing ended and run it through the work to where the last stitch
was taken.




[Illustration]

Ball for Baby


Use round web. Start with end of web and sew and coil as for round mat.
Widen only when necessary to keep it from drawing in too quickly. When
desired width or center of ball is reached, fill with tissue paper or a
ball of soft cotton. The sewing is then continued and each row narrowed
off by taking two stitches in part already sewed and one in the web.
When the same number of rows is narrowed the filling should be entirely
covered. The end left over will serve as a cord for the ball.

Flat web may be used by taking twelve pieces three inches long and
sewing them together--alternating color and white, if desired. Run a
draw-thread around the bottom and fill with paper or cotton; then run a
draw-thread around the top. Finish with a cord made of a piece of round
web.




[Illustration]

Doll's Muff


This will require three yards of round web. Sew the web into a
rectangular piece three inches wide and five inches long.

Join the three-inch ends together and draw up the ends a little to form
the muff. Finish with cord to go around the neck.




[Illustration]

Collarette


Round web five yards. Measure the doll's neck for collar. Gradually
widen each row in the back. Bring the third row of web down in front to
form the tabs; then up to the back of collarette and finish the back,
bringing the last row down in front into the tabs.

Paper patterns may be used as a guide, but children should be encouraged
to draw and cut their own patterns.




[Illustration]

Tam O' Shanter Cap


Measure the doll's head and make the top of the crown twice the diameter
of the head. It is sewed in the same way as the circular mat. When the
desired width of crown is obtained, begin the under side of the crown by
narrowing off--that is, taking two stitches in the crown and sewing them
into one stitch in the web. Continue until the desired opening for the
head is obtained. Two rows of web will complete the headband. Finish
with a pompon on top.

Use round web.




[Illustration]

Baby's Rattle


The foundation ring is made of a piece of splint or flat pith fifteen
inches long. Form this into a ring, having the ends lap two inches.

Wrap this with knitting cotton or yarn, being careful to keep winding
even. When the winding is completed, draw the end of cotton underneath
the winding with a needle to fasten it.

Use three pieces of round web for spokes. Fasten all three together in
the center. Bells may be sewed on the outside or inside of the ring.




[Illustration]

Toboggan Cap


To make a cap five inches long and four inches wide, knit eighty-four
inches of flat web. Begin five inches from the end of the web, turn and
sew into a rectangular form five inches wide and eight inches long.

Join the five-inch ends, and draw in the top with the needle and a piece
of the material from which the cap was made. After securing the top,
twist and fold the piece of yarn remaining for a cord and fasten a
number of strands of yarn through the loop for a tassel.




[Illustration]

Child's Bath or Bedroom Slippers


Length of sole, five and one-half inches. It is well to have the soles
before beginning to sew. They can be secured at any store.

Each slipper requires two and one-half yards of round web. Start at the
back of the heel (A, of illustration), and make the first two rows three
inches high, then gradually shorten the next three rows, and keep each
row this height until the instep is finished. The first row on the vamp
(B, of illustration) is made one inch higher than the side. Each row is
then gradually shortened, the last row being three-fourths of an inch
high (C, of illustration). This will complete one-half of the slipper.

The other half is made in just the reverse way by continuing the sewing
from the toe (C, of illustration) back to the heel, taking care that
each row is exactly the same height as the corresponding row on the
opposite side.

Join the back of the heel and sew to the soles before closing the vamp
in front. Sew vamp up the center by catching corresponding loops
together. Make cord and tassel to go around the top, as in illustration
of finished slippers.




[Illustration]

Small Mittens


Sixty inches of flat web will be required for each mitten. Cut off eight
pieces six inches long. In cutting, clip just one stitch and run the
ends across, and sew them into a cylindrical form. Draw in the top with
a needle and a piece of the material and fasten securely. Leave an
opening on one side for the thumb.

The thumb is made of three pieces sewed together. The longest piece is
three inches and the others each two and three-fourths inches long. In
sewing it into the mitten, have the longest piece come down toward the
wrist. Gradually form and sew it in place. Draw in the top and fasten
securely.


CORD

This is made of round web, knitted the desired length. The length will
vary a little according to size of the child, but four and one-half feet
is a good length. The mittens are fastened to the ends of the cord.




[Illustration]

Doll's Hood


This requires two yards of round web.

Start with the end of the web and sew into a circular form for the
crown. (See illustration A.) The sixth row is brought down to within one
inch of the center of the back. Turn and sew around to within one inch
from the center of the back on the opposite side. This will leave two
inches free in the back of the hood. Turn and continue sewing in this
way for five rows, which will form the side of hood.

The remaining part of the web is then brought around the face of the
hood and across the back, as one would sew a cord.

Finish with cord and tassel for tie-strings. A rosette of yarn may be
made for the top or side.




[Illustration]

Doll's Coat or Jacket


This may be made of round or flat web.

The coat is begun at the under-arm seam _a_. For a coat five inches long
begin three inches from the end of the web to make the first turn. Sew
from this turn to the starting end of the web _b_, fasten the sewing
thread and cut it off. The second row is made eleven inches long, or
long enough to go over the shoulder and down the back, _b_ to _c_.

Sew four rows in this way to form the front and part of the back; then
four rows five inches long for the back; then four more rows eleven
inches long for the other shoulder and front _d_ to _e_. Sew the fifth
or last row up three inches for the other under-arm seam.

Join the under-arm seams, leaving an opening of two inches for sleeves
if they are desired. If not, the armhole and neck can be finished off
with some contrasting color.

[Illustration]

For the sleeves, measure the length of the doll's arm and make the first
row this length. Make each row a little longer than the preceding row
until the top or shoulder part is reached, then gradually shorten each
row until the desired width is obtained. The last row should be the
same length as the first row. When sewing them in the coat, have the
longest part come at the top of the shoulder. Buttons are made by
braiding yarn and sewing it in the form of buttons.

A cord for fastening is made by braiding, or twisting and folding the
yarn. It is then sewed into loops or used as cord and tassel for tying.




[Illustration]

Bootees


Knit two yards of round web for each bootee.

Start two inches from the end of the web for the first turn. Sew into an
elliptical form three and one-half inches long for the sole. Sew two
more rows without widening for the sides of the foot; then sew two rows
across the front for the toe; the third row bring all around the top to
complete the foot.

The leg of the bootee is made by bringing the web directly upward three
inches before making the first turn. Make each row three inches high and
catch each row into the top of the foot while sewing. Put cord and
tassel around where the leg and foot meet.




[Illustration]

Little Boy Blue


Make coat according to directions given for doll's coat.

Measure the length of the doll's leg for the length of the trousers. Use
flat web and sew it into two rectangular pieces wide enough to make each
leg a little full.

Join the inside seams part way and then join the open edge of the right
front with the open edge of the left front. Do the same with the back
edges. Put a draw-string around the top, or a piece of the web may be
used for a waistband. Put in a draw-string around the bottom of each
leg.




[Illustration]

Little Red Riding-Hood


The doll shown in illustration is ten and one-half inches tall. To make
cape and hood in one piece sew two rows of flat web, six and one-half
inches long, for the center of the back. These two rows will also give
the desired fulness. The next five rows are made nineteen inches long,
or long enough to reach over the head and down to form the two sides of
the cape and hood. After these five rows are completed, sew five rows
six inches long on each side of the front of the cape, to make it wide
enough to meet across the chest.

Close the cape and the hood in the back. The part above the six and a
half inch rows will form the hood. Draw in the top of these two short
rows and sew to the base of the hood. Put in a draw-string around the
top of the right side of the cape in front, carry it around the base of
the hood, around the top of the cape on the left side and tie in front.




[Illustration]

Doll's Skirt


This skirt is five inches long and made of flat web. The first and last
rows are made one and a quarter inch shorter than the other rows forming
the skirt. These two rows are sewed together when the skirt is finished,
thus forming the placket and also the desired fulness in the back.

There are sixteen rows in all. Each two, when sewed together, form a
scollop at the top and bottom where the web is turned. In sewing care
must be taken to have each row the exact length of the preceding row
except in the first and last row.

The top of the skirt may be finished with a draw-string or a band made
from cloth. The bottom of the skirt may be left as it is, or be finished
with a blanket stitch of some contrasting color. The skirt requires five
yards of flat web.




[Illustration]

Little Boy's Hat


Measure the child's head for the size of the hat. Make the crown of the
hat one-half of this measurement. If the child's head measures
twenty-two inches around, make the crown eleven inches in diameter. The
crown is circular and is made in the same way as the circular mat,
taking two stitches of web and sewing them into one stitch of the crown
already sewed to keep it flat. When it is of the desired size, begin the
side by sewing one stitch of the web into one of the crown, at the same
time holding the web to be sewed directly under the last row in the
crown.

Make the side twice as long as the desired height of the hat. For
instance, if the desired height is to be three and a half inches, make
the side seven inches long, as one-half of this measurement is turned
up.

Two colors may be used, one color for the crown and one for the side.
Red and black or red and white are pretty combinations.

A doll's hat of the same style, the crown three and a half inches in
diameter, requires five yards of round web.




[Illustration]

Child's Muffler


This is a combination of flat and round web. Knit ten inches of flat
web, change to round web by bringing the yarn across the center of the
hole in the knitter to the opposite post, and knit ten inches, or the
number of inches necessary to go around the neck. Change again to flat
web, knit ten inches and clip off.

Make seven such pieces and sew them together to form the muffler. The
round web will form the neck part.

Do not remove from the knitter while changing from flat to round web.




[Illustration]

Child's Hood


This is made much in the same way as the doll's hood. Make the back of
the hood five inches in diameter, then turn the web and form the side.
Sew around to within four inches of the place of turning on the opposite
side and turn again. So continue until the side is sufficiently wide to
cover the child's head. Extend this side three inches beyond the desired
width, widening on each row of the extended part to give fulness. This
widening may be omitted, and the extended part turned back, leaving it
perfectly plain, if desired. Trim with rosettes or pompons made of the
same material as the hood.

Turn back the extended part and tack to the hood. Sew a pompon or a
rosette of yarn over the top of the sewing stitch. For tie-strings, use
cord and tassel, or ribbon.

The hood requires from twenty-five to thirty yards.




[Illustration]

Little Girl's Hat


This requires twenty-five yards of round web. Measure the child's head
for the size of the hat. Start the crown in the same way as the circular
mat. When it is five inches in diameter, gradually turn the crown, while
sewing the next five or six rows.

When the desired width is reached, begin forming the side by sewing one
stitch of web into one stitch of the crown, keeping each row exactly
under the preceding row until the desired height is obtained; then
gradually widen to form the rim, which is three and a half or four
inches broad.

Do not widen any on the last two rows, but draw the web a little tighter
while sewing to make the edge of the rim roll or turn inward.

Finish with cord and tassels around the crown, or pompons on the right
or left side of the front of the hat.




[Illustration]

Doll's Sweater


This is made of five and one-half yards of flat web cut into pieces of a
desired length. Cut three pieces seven inches long for the front. One
inch and a half of this will also form the neck. When cutting, clip only
one stitch and pull out the ends.

The next two pieces are cut five and one-half inches long and sewed one
on each side of the front one inch and a half below the top end. Each
succeeding row is made a little shorter to form the shoulder, the
shortest pieces forming the outside edges.

Make the back of the sweater in the same way and sew front and back
together, leaving one and a quarter inch opening on each side for the
sleeves.

The sleeve is made of five pieces, the longest piece being three inches,
and the shortest two and one-half inches long. Sew these pieces together
to form the sleeve. When sewing it into the sweater, place the longest
part at the shoulder seam and stretch the armhole while sewing it in.




[Illustration]

Wristlets


These are made of round or flat web. Each wristlet requires one and
one-half yards.

Measure five inches, the length of the wristlet, and turn. Start sewing
from this point and sew to the end of the five inches and turn again.

Continue until enough rows are sewed to make the wristlet the desired
width, which in this model is two and one-half inches.




[Illustration]

Shoulder Shawl


This may be made of round or flat web, and of any desired size. If the
shawl is to be thirty-six inches long, clip the web into pieces of this
length and sew them together until the shawl is of the desired width, or
the web may simply be turned at the end of each row, then proceed with
the sewing.

The fringe for the ends is made by cutting the yarn into lengths twice
as long as the desired length of the fringe--that is, if the fringe is
to be five inches long, cut the yarn into pieces ten inches long.

Fold each ten-inch piece in two, slip the folded end through a stitch in
the end of the shawl and draw the two ends of the piece through the loop
thus formed and pull tight.




[Illustration]

Doll's Carriage Robe


This robe is ten inches wide and eighteen inches long, and is made of
four pieces of flat web, each piece three yards long. Any number of
pieces of either round or flat web may be used, and the robe made wider
and longer if desired.

Measure fifteen inches of web and turn it. Begin sewing from this, turn
down to the end of the fifteen inches and again turn, bringing the web
around over the end. Care must be taken while turning to keep the ends
perfectly flat.

When the three yards are used begin the other parts in the same way.
Make four or any desired number of parts, and sew them together,
alternating the colors. Put a tassel made of the same material on the
rounded end of each part.

If round web is used it will require more for each part, for the round
is not as wide as the flat web.




[Illustration]

Child's Leggings


Leggings may be made of round or flat web. Measure five inches above the
knee down to the vamp of the shoe for the length of the front part of
the legging. This gives the length of the first row.

Turn the web and begin to sew from this point up to the top, then turn
again and sew down to the toe. Continue in this way until the front part
is two and one-half inches wide.

Bring the remaining rows down to within two inches of the end of the
toe, until the legging is wide enough to go around the child's leg, then
sew to the opposite side of the front. Sew a piece of tape to the
instep.




[Illustration]

Muffler


This may be made of round or flat web. Make the part to go around the
neck first. In this model the neck band is ten inches long and three
inches wide. Sew four rows of flat or six rows of round web for the
neck. Begin three inches from the ends to make the front. Gradually
shorten each row until it is of the desired length.

Make loops of twisted yarn and sew to one end of the neck band to slip
over the buttons. Sew the buttons on the opposite end and on the inside
where they will be hidden while the muffler is being worn.




Made of Knitting Cotton


Knitting cotton can be secured at any department store. It comes in
colors white, black, red, navy blue, and mixed colors. This is not as
elastic as worsted and is used where strength is required, such as bags,
hammocks, wash-cloths, etc. It is very inexpensive and can be used to
great advantage.




[Illustration]

Jumping Rope


Select a piece of jute, or stout cord the length of the desired rope.
Drop one end of this and one end of the knitting cotton through the hole
in the knitter (use knitter having four posts), and draw it out at the
other end three inches. Bring the cotton leading from the ball around
each post once, then proceed with the knitting, covering the cord or
jute which is used as a core or foundation for the rope.

Cords for pillow tops may also be made in this way.




[Illustration]

Toy Horse Reins


These are made of coarse knitting cotton on four-post knitters. Knit a
piece three yards long for the reins. The children measure each other
for the breast-piece, which will be from ten to twelve inches long. This
is fastened to the reins nine inches below the center of the neck on
each side, to allow the head to pass through easily.

Two colors may be used in knitting the reins, working around first with
one color, then with the other.

Fourteen yards of knitting cotton will make one yard of web on the
four-post knitter.




[Illustration]

Wash Cloth


This is made of white knitting cotton. It requires nine yards of web for
a cloth ten by twelve inches. Measure twelve inches of web, turn and sew
toward the end.

When the twelve-inch piece is sewed turn again and sew. Continue in this
way until the desired size is obtained.

With a piece of the cotton make a loop at one corner by which to hang
it.




[Illustration]

School Bag


This may be made of round or flat web. A bag twelve inches deep and
fourteen inches wide requires thirty yards. Measure twenty-four inches
of web and turn. Begin sewing from this turn to the end of the
twenty-four inches then turn again. So continue until this oblong piece
measures fourteen by twenty-four inches. Fold this in two and sew up the
sides. This will avoid any seam in the bottom of the bag.

Make handles in the same way as for jumping-rope, or a double thickness
of the web may be used for each handle and sewed to the top sides of the
bag. Finish by sewing a piece of the web around the top.

Laundry bags, sewing bags, and little bags for holding paints and
water-dish may be made in similar way.




[Illustration]

Chimney Cleaner


This is made of white knitting cotton. It requires two yards of flat or
three yards of round web.

Secure a piece of stick or better still a piece of half-inch dowel ten
or twelve inches long, for a handle. Cut a groove with a knife around
one end to keep the web from slipping off.

Sew the web into loops three and a half or four inches long. Draw them
in around the end of the handle with the sewing string just in the
groove; then wind the sewing string around two or three times, tie, and
clip off the ends.




[Illustration]

Doll's Hammock


This is made of flat web. A hammock eight by twelve inches requires five
and one-half yards. Sew this into an oblong piece twelve inches long and
eight inches wide.

Secure a piece of cardboard three inches longer than the oblong piece
and one inch wider.

Round off the corners with a pair of scissors (see illustration), and
cut notches or slits in ends one-half inch apart. Sew two brass rings in
the center of one side, and on the other baste the oblong piece which is
to be used for the hammock. Then with a needle and a long piece of the
knitting cotton begin making the ends of the hammock by securing one end
of the sewing string to the hammock and bring it over the end of the
cardboard in the first slit from the end and through the ring on the
opposite side of cardboard; back over cardboard, through second slit and
through hammock.

So continue until one end is finished. Do the same with the other end.
These strings may be held in place by putting three or four rows of
weaving just underneath the rings.

Clip the basting stitches and remove from the cardboard. Make fringe as
for shawl.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPOOL KNITTING***


******* This file should be named 22029.txt or 22029.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/2/0/2/22029



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

