The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume 104,
March 4, 1893, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume 104, March 4, 1893

Author: Various

Editor: Francis Burnand

Release Date: August 23, 2007 [EBook #22380]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, OR THE LONDON ***




Produced by Matt Whittaker, Juliet Sutherland and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note: The short pieces "Suppositious" and "Quite Another
Thing" were moved from their original positions accompanying the
illustration "The Political Fancy Dress Ball at Covent Gardent" to the end,
to prevent the "Essence of Parliament" article from being broken in the
middle.




PUNCH,

OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 104.




March 4, 1893.




A BALLAD OF WEALTHY WOOING.

  Ah, why, my Love, receive me
    With such tip-tilted scorn?
  Self-love can scarce retrieve me
    From obloquy forlorn;
  'Twas not my fault, believe me,
    That wealthy I was born.
  Of Nature's gifts invidious
    I'd choose I know not which;
  One might as well be hideous
    As shunn'd because he's rich.
      O Love, if thou art bitter,
        Then death must pleasant be;
      I know not which is fitter,
        Not I--(or is't "not me"?)

  'Tis not that thou abhorrest,
    Oh, maid of dainty mould!
  The foison of the florist,
    The goldsmith's craft of gold;
  Nor less than others storest
    Rare pelts by furriers sold;
  But knowing I adore thee,
    And deem all graces thine,
  My choicest offerings bore
    Just because they are mine.
      Then, smile not, dear deceiver,
        Keep no kind word for me,
      Enough that the receiver
        Is thou--(or is it "thee"?)

  When others come, how trimly
    Thou sett'st thy chatty sail!
  For me alone all dimly
    Seemeth the sun to fail.
  Young FRANK he frowneth grimly,
    And thou turn'st haughty pale.
  'Tis not the taint of "City,"
    For here be scores who sport
  Their Mayfair manners pretty
    In Cop-the-Needle Court.
      Ah, chill me not so coolly,
        A Croesus though I be--
      The one who loveth truly
        I swear is I--(or "me"?)

  But what availeth grammar
    As taught in straitest schools--
  The hammer of the Crammer
    Forging Bellona's tools--
  Or words that humbly stammer
    Regardless of the rules?
  And what availeth fretting,
    Deep sighs, and dwindling waist,
  And what the sad forgetting
    Of culinary taste,
      Since still thou fondly spurnest
        Five hundred thou. (or "thee."?)
      And on young STONEY turnest
        Love's eye--(or _is_ it "me"?)

       *       *       *       *       *

SAD CONCLUSION.--To be virtuous for virtue's sake, without prospect of
reward, this is to be good for nothing!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: BYE-ELECTION-OLOGY.

_Gladys._ "LISTEN, SIBYL. PAPA HAS WON A GREAT MORAL VICTORY----WHAT DOES A
MORAL VICTORY MEAN EXACTLY?"

_Sibyl_ (_who has had more experience_). "OH, IT MEANS--WELL, THAT WE ARE
TO BE THE VICTIMS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY, AND NOT GO TO LONDON, AFTER ALL!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

INDERWICKEDNESS.

"I do not wish to make a joke," Mr. INDERWICK, Q.C., is reported to have
observed in the course of examining the plaintiff in a divorce case, but,
in spite of this pathetic announcement, which passed without any comment
from the Judge, the ruling passion was too strong for him, and he
continued, "but Artists' models are not always models of virtue, are they?"
Not new, not by any means new, of course, but he had apologised beforehand,
and he couldn't help it; as the weak heroine, who yields to strong
temptation in a French novel or play, usually acknowledges "_C'etait plus
fort que moi_." The inflammable materials being in close contact, there was
nothing to 'inder-wick from catching fire when in proximity to a spark of
genius. Yet so powerfully had the eminent Queen's Counsel's prefatial
apology affected the court and the audience, that his saucy sally--(for
there is life in the old sally yet, whether in our alley or in this
Court)--was not followed by the usually reported "laughter." How was it
received? Doubtless with decorous silence and downcast eyes, expressive of
sweet memories of dear old jokes made long ago, in happier and brighter
times, "when all the world was young."

When a good old joke is again brought into Court with or without apology,
instead of its being received with respectful silence, we should like to
read that it was greeted with "tears" or "sobs." It would, indeed, not be
unbecoming on the part of the Judge if, unable to control his emotion, he
had immediately arisen, and, in broken judicial utterances, had adjourned
the Court for the day, out of respect to the memory (for old jokes) of the
Leader or Junior who had apologetically perpetrated one. Should Mr.
INDERWICK try this again, the new effect, as above suggested, may be
obtained to the satisfaction of all parties, except, maybe, those to the
suit, "whom," as one learned brother might say with another, and still
profounder apology, "such a proceeding would not _suit_ at all."

       *       *       *       *       *

LINES ON A LIFE-BELT.

(_After Waller's "On a Girdle._")

     ["According to the evidence of the only two witnesses who sailed with
     her, no Life-belts were forthcoming, when the Life-belts might have
     given many of those on board a last chance of life."--_The "Times" on
     the Inquiry into the Wreck of the "Roumania."_]

_Shipwrecked Passenger loquitur_:--

  That which would give me ease of mind,
  And hope of life, I cannot find.
  No monarch but would give his crown
  For a Life-belt, when ships go down.

  It would relieve extremest fear,
  That circlet light, that cork-lined sphere;
  But in dark nooks below above,
  The careless crew such trifles shove!

  A narrow compass, and yet there
  Dwells safety, but for want of care.
  Give me the Belt, which can't be found,
  And I might live, who must be drowned!

       *       *       *       *       *

A certain noble Lord was supposed to have somewhat disparaged one of his
horses on sale by describing him as "a Whistler." JAMES MCNEILL, "of that
ilk," was of opinion that this description, supposing the animal to have
been "a genuine Whistler," ought to have increased its value considerably.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Musical Coster Craze.

_Customer._ Have you a copy of COSTA'S _Eli_?

_Shopman._ No, Sir; we have none of CHEVALIER'S songs.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUPERLATIVE!--The appointment of Mr. DUFF, M.P., to be Governor of New
South Wales is a "positive" good, seeing that they might have appointed "a
comparative Duffer."

       *       *       *       *       *

LOVELY CHEESE! OR, A WELSH RARE-BIT.

[Illustration]

AIR--_"Lovely Night." Dissenting Anti-Church Mice sing_:--

  Lovely Cheese! Lovely Cheese!
    To Church Mice thou art most dear,
  But _do_ please, but _do_ please
    Let _us_ also share thy cheer:
  For though our "freedom" gladsome seems,
    Too oft it brings poor fare alone;
  But aided by what haunts our dreams,
    How many joys Church Mice have known!
      Lovely Cheese! Lovely Cheese!
        Long we've yearned to draw more near
      To the ease, toothsome ease,
        Of the dwellers in thy sphere!

  Lovely cheese! Lovely cheese!
    When a mouse thy cover nears,
  Growling fit his heart to freeze,
    Some keen-claw'd (Church) cat appears.
  But now--that knife portends a boon;
    Monopoly slice by slice 'twill slay.
  We, too, may get--let it be soon!--
    Our bit of cheese, some day, some day!
      Lovely Cheese! Lovely Cheese!
        When that cover's lifted clear,
      With what ease, with what ease
        We poor mice may share Church cheer!

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a feeling of uncertainty in the House of Commons last Wednesday,
as to what should be taken to constitute "A Religious Body." Not to go
harking back to the Rev. SYDNEY SMITH'S definition of "a
Corporation"--which, without speaking it profanely, cannot be here quoted
without offending eyes polite,--one may say that "A Religious Body" is a
contradiction in terms. It is simply "A Soul-less Thing."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What's the name of that German Beer?" asked Mrs. R., "I rather think it is
Pil-sen-ner. It sounds to me more like medicine."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MAN FROM BLANKLEYS.

A STORY IN SCENES.

     SCENE XI.--_The Drawing-room._ Mrs. GILWATTLE _is still unable to
     express her feelings by more than a contemptuous glare._

_Uncle Gabriel._ My--ah--love, you didn't hear me. I was saying I've almost
prevailed on his Lordship----

_Mrs. Gilwattle_ (_becoming articulate_). His Lordship, indeed! If _that's_
a Lord, I don't wonder you're such a Radical!

_Uncle Gab._ Why--why--what's _come_ to you, JOANNA? My Lord, I hope you'll
excuse her--she's a little----

_Mrs. Gil._ Fiddlesticks! You've been made a fool of, GABRIEL! Can't you
see for yourself that he's neither the manners nor yet the appearance of a
_real_ nobleman--or anything but what he _is_?

_Uncle Gab._ (_dropping_ Lord S.'s _arm_). Eh? If you're not a Lord, Sir,
what else _are_ you?

_Lord Strath._ (_wavering between wrath and amusement_). Afraid I can't
enlighten you--I'm extremely curious to know myself.

_Mrs. Tid._ (_distractedly_). Oh, Aunt, it wasn't my fault, really!
MONTAGUE _would_ have him! And--and we _sent_ round to say he wouldn't be
required--we did indeed! Please, _please_ don't tell anybody!

_Mrs. Gil._ (_rigidly_). It is my _duty_ to let everyone here know how
disgracefully we have been insulted to-night, MARIA, and might have gone
away in ignorance, but for that innocent child--who has done nothing, that
_I_ can see, to deserve being shaken like that! _I_'m not going to sit by
in silence and see a man passed off as a Lord who is nothing more nor less
than one of the assistants out of BLANKLEY'S shop, hired to come and fill a
vacant seat! Yes, GABRIEL, if you doubt my word, look at MARIA--and _now_
ask that young man to dine!

     [_Profound sensation among the company._

_Uncle Gab._ I--ah--withdraw the invitation, of course--it is cancelled,
Sir, cancelled!

_Feminine Murmur._ I had a feeling, the moment he came in, as if--so
thankful now I didn't commit myself by so much as--ah, my dear, it all
comes from a desire to make a show!--&c., &c.

_Uncle Gab._ It's the bare-faced impudence of coming here on false
pretences, that _I_ can't get over. Come, Mr. SHOPWALKER, COUNTERJUMPER, or
whatever you really are, what have _you_ got to say for yourself?

_Lord Strath._ Say? Why----

     [_He struggles to control his countenance for a moment, until he is
     convulsed at last by irrepressible laughter._

_All_ (_except the_ TIDMARSHES). He's laughing--positively _laughing_ at
Us! The brazenness of it!

_Lord Strath._ (_regaining composure_). I--I'm awfully sorry, but it struck
me suddenly as so----After all, the joke is only against myself. (_To
himself._) Must try and get my unfortunate hostess out of this fix--not
that she deserves it! (_Aloud._) If you will kindly let me explain, I think
I can----

_Mr. Tid._ (_suddenly_). Oh, hang explaining! It's all out now, and you'd
better leave it there!

_Lord Strath._ I can't, indeed. I must make you all understand that this
well-meaning lady with the highly-developed sense of duty has done our host
and hostess a grave injustice, besides paying me a compliment I don't
deserve. I'm sorry to say I can't claim to be half as useful a member of
the community as any of the very obliging and attentive gentlemen in Mr.
BLANKLEY'S employment. If I'm anything, I'm a--an Egyptologist, in an
amateur sort of way, you know. A--in fact, I'm writing a book on Ancient
Egypt.

_The Others._ A _literary_ man! As if _that_ made it any better!

_Lord Strath._ I merely mention it because it led me to write to Mr.
CARTOUCHE--whom I happened to hear of as a famous collector--and ask to be
allowed to call and inspect his collection. Mr. CARTOUCHE (who lives, I
believe, at No. 92, next door) very kindly wrote, giving me leave, and
inviting me to dine at the same time, and--I know it was unpardonably
careless of me--but somehow I came here instead, and, Mr. and Mrs. TIDMARSH
being both too--er--hospitable to undeceive me, I never found my mistake
out till too late to put it right, without inconveniencing everybody.
That's really all.

     [_Uneasy reaction in the company._

_Uncle Gab._ (_pompously_). Ha--hum--no doubt that puts a somewhat
different complexion on the case, but it doesn't explain your conduct in
calling yourself Lord STRATHFOOZLEUM, or whatever it was.

_Lord Strath._ I think you mean STRATHSPORRAN. I did call myself that,
because it happens to be my name.

_Mrs. Tid._ (_passionately_). I don't believe it.... I _can't_. If it is,
why did Miss SEATON call you "Mr. CLAYPOLE"?

_Lord Strath._ I beg your pardon--CLAYMORE. Because, when we last met, I
was DOUGLAS CLAYMORE, with no prospect whatever, as it seemed then, of
being anything else.

_Mrs. Tid._ (_faintly_). Then he really is--_Oh_!

     [_She sinks on the couch, crushed._

_Uncle Gab._ Ha, well, my Lord, I'm glad this little misunderstanding is so
satisfactorily cleared up, and if I may venture to hope for the honour of
your company,--shall we say Friday wee----(Lord S. _looks at him
steadily._) Oh, if your Lordship has some better engagement, well and good.
Makes no difference to _me_ I assure you. JOANNA, our carriage must be here
by now, say good-bye and have done with it! Good-night, MARIA, I'll see you
don't expose me to _this_ again!


     SCENE XII.--_The guests have all taken leave with extremely frosty
     farewells_; Mr. TIDMARSH _is downstairs superintending their
     departure._ GWENNIE _has been pardoned on_ Lord S.'s _intercession,
     and dismissed, in much bewilderment, to bed._ Mrs. TIDMARSH _and_ Lord
     STRATHSPORRAN _are alone._

_Mrs. Tid._ (_hysterically_). Oh, Lord STRATHSPORRAN, when I think how
I----What can I _ever_ say to you?

_Lord Strath._ Only, I hope, that you forgive my stupidity in blundering in
here as I did, Mrs. TIDMARSH.

_Mrs. Tid._ It _was_ a good deal your fault. If you had only said who you
really were--if my husband had not been idiot enough to misunderstand--if
Miss SEATON had been more straightforward, all this would never----!

[Illustration: "Sitting down heavily on a Settee."]

_Lord Strath._ We were all the victims of circumstances, weren't we? But I,
at least, have no reason to regret it. And, if I may ask one last
indulgence, will you--a--let me have an opportunity of saying good-bye to
Miss SEATON?

_Mrs. Tid._ She, she doesn't _deserve_--Oh, I don't know _what_ I'm saying.
Of _course_, Lord STRATHSPORRAN, anything, _anything_ I can do to----I will
send her down to you, if you will only wait. She shall not keep you long!

_Lord Strath._ (_alone, to himself_). It's an ill wind, &c. I shall have
MARJORY all to myself, now! To think that--but for a lucky blunder--I
should be spelling out scarabs and things on the wrong side of that wall at
this moment, and never dreaming that MARJORY was so----Ah, she's coming!
(Miss SEATON _enters, looking pale and disconsolate._) MARJORY, you've no
idea what you've missed! I _must_ tell you--it's too good to lose. What
_do_ you think all these good people have been taking me for? You'll never
guess! They actually believed I was hired from BLANKLEY'S! Give you my word
they did!... Why don't you _laugh_, MARJORY?

_Miss Seaton_ (_faintly_). I--I _am_ laughing. No, DOUGLAS, I'm not. I
can't; I haven't the conscience to. Oh, I never meant you to know--but I
must tell you, whatever comes of it! _I_ believed it too, at first.
(_Tragically._) I _did_, DOUGLAS!

_Lord Strath._ _Did_ you though, MARJORY? Then, by Jove, I _must_ have
looked the character!

_Miss Seaton_ (_timidly_). I knew you--you weren't very well off, DOUGLAS,
and so I fancied you might----Oh, I know it was hateful of me ever to think
such a thing, but I did. And you can never _really_ forgive me!

_Lord Strath._ Couldn't think of it! Shall I tell you something else,
MARJORY? I've a strong impression that you will not be an inmate of this
happy English household _much_ longer.

_Miss Seaton._ I'm _sure_ I shan't, from Mrs. TIDMARSH'S expression just
now. But I don't care!

_Lord Strath._ Don't be reckless. How do you know there isn't a moral lion
about? And where will you go next, MARJORY?

_Miss Seaton_ (_with a shrug_). I don't know. I suppose to anybody who
wants a Governess, and doesn't mind taking her without a reference, if
there _is_ such a person!

_Lord Strath._ Well, oddly enough, I fancy I know somebody who has been
trying for a long time to find a young person of just your age and
appearance, and might be induced to waive a reference on a personal
interview. (Miss SEATON _looks incredulous._)... MARJORY, don't you
understand? If I hadn't been such a pauper, I'd have spoken long ago, when
we were up in Scotland together, only it didn't seem fair then. I--I
daresay I've no better chance now; but, at least, I've more right to speak
than I had, and--and--will you have me, MARJORY? (_She turns away._) I--I
won't worry you, dear, if you really can't care about me in that way;
but--but if you only _could_, MARJORY, even a little!

_Miss Seaton._ DOUGLAS!...

     _Same Scene--somewhat later._

_Lord Strath._ Not yet, MARJORY--I can't let you go just yet!... Must I,
really? Before I've said half what I wanted!... Well--in one minute, then.
And you're coming to my people as soon as you can get out of this, MARJORY;
and I shall see you every day, till--till we shall never be separated
any----Confound it!--who's that? [Mr. TIDMARSH _enters suddenly._

_Mr. Tid._ Oh--er--Lord STRATHSPORRAN, sorry to interrupt you, but--hem--my
wife, who's feeling too unwell to come down again, desires me to say that,
in her opinion, Miss SEATON has been here quite long enough. [Miss SEATON
_escapes by the back drawing-room._

_Lord Strath._ I entirely agree with Mrs. TIDMARSH; but I am happy to say
that Miss SEATON will not remain here very much longer, as she has just
done me the honour of consenting to be my wife. Good night, Sir, and many
thanks for a most er--eventful evening.

     [_He goes out._

_Mr. Tid._ (_making an effort to escort him downstairs, but giving it up,
and sitting down heavily on a settee instead_). She'll be Lady
STRATHSPORRAN! And I shall have to break it to MARIA--after she's just gone
in and stuck a month's salary and immediate notice on her pincushion! Oh,
lor--as if my poor wife hadn't trouble enough to bear as it was!

THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

HARE-ING HIS DIPLOMACY.

As I have already conveyed, in a short note last week, the first night of
the revival of _Diplomacy_, viz., Saturday, Feb. 18th, will be for ever
memorable in the annals of the English stage in general, and in the
reminiscences of Mr. JOHN HARE in particular, whenever he may choose to
give them to the public. It will also afford matter for a brilliant chapter
in the second or third series of Mr. and Mrs. BANCROFT'S _On and Off the
Stage_. A great night, too, for the eminent adapters Messrs. SCOTT and
STEPHENSON, once known as "the Brothers ROWE," who rowed in the same boat.

Never, at any time, has this version of the French play been so well cast
as it is now at Garrick Theatre, though nervousness told on all the actors,
especially on the elder ones, except, apparently, Mrs. BANCROFT, in whose
performance there was hardly any trace of it, though once she nearly missed
her cue while resting awhile at the back of the stage.

The part of _Lady Henry Fairfax_ has literally nothing whatever to do with
the plot, and were it not played as it is now, and played so capitally by
Mrs. BANCROFT, it would be better, for an English audience at least, if
omitted entirely, or reduced to a few appropriate lines in pleasant places.
An English audience wants the story, when once begun, to go on without any
break or interruption; and indeed, but for dramatic effect, an English
audience is inclined to resent even the division of a piece into Acts,
unless such arrangement is evidently necessitated by some heavy mechanical
change of scenery.

So our audiences would decidedly prefer to have the _roles_ of _Lady Henry_
and _The Marquise de Rio Zares_ (with her wearisome iteration about "Don
ALVA," and played with rather too much accentuation by Lady MONCKTON)
reduced to the smallest possible algebraic expression. Mr. BANCROFT was the
same _Count Orloff_ as he was years ago on the little stage of the old
Prince of Wales's Theatre; his action more deliberate than when he was
younger and more impetuous; his pauses for meditation longer by a thought
or so than of yore; while in his tone and manner there was just a
delicately-deepened colouring of the genuine original Bancroftian "Old
Master." To Mr. BANCROFT, resuscitating our old courtly friend _Count
Orloff_ (now _Count Orl-on-again_), I would address the once well-known
line from "_Woodman, spare that Tree_"--

"Touch not a single _bow_!"

[Illustration: "Three Men in a boat."]

ARTHUR CECIL, too, as _Baron Stein_, excellent, _cela va sans dire_; yet,
somehow, his effects now seem to me to be laid on with too broad a brush,
especially in the scene of his last appearance, where he makes a sly, and,
for the _Baron Stein_, a rather over-elaborated and farcical attempt to
recapture the letter he has just given up. FORBES ROBERTSON is good from
first to last as the very weak-knee'd _Julian Beauelere_, sufficiently
emotional in the strong situations, and never better than when the
character itself is at its weakest; that is, in the one great scene with
his wife.

The _Algie Fairfax_, of Mr. GILBERT HARE, was natural where the authors
have allowed him to be natural, and best, therefore, in the last Act, where
he has become a responsible personage in a diplomatic office. The
"three-men-in-a-difficulty" scene went as well as ever, though, on the
whole, played far too slowly, and with so much "suppressed force," that the
celebrated "_Monsieur! a vos ordres!_" when _Orloff_ suddenly breaks out
into "the language of diplomacy," did not electrify the house. On the
contrary, the audience took it very quietly, awaiting with some curiosity
the interference of _Henry Beauclerc_. And it was at this point that the
services of Mr. JOHN HARE in this character were invaluable. Never had his
crisp incisive style produced more marked effect. It is a pity that in the
Third Act, which being the weak point of the play requires all the strength
of the actor to be seriously employed, Mr. HARE should have given a very
light comedy, nay, even a farcical touch to his treatment of the "business"
of sniffing the perfume--when he is literally "on the scent"--and to the
momentous situation of his interview with _Zicka_. "_Maintenant a nos
deux!_" Odd that, in his treatment of the strength of the scent, SARDOU
should have shown the feebleness of his methods. Yet so it is. The play, at
this point, being practically played out, he carelessly chucks the puppets
into a corner. He has made his great scenes, and there's an end of it; let
the weakest go to the wall.

[Illustration: DUET--_Baron Cecil Stein and Lady Henry Bancroft Fairfax_
(_with original model of Strasbourg Clock_)--"Here we are again!"]

[Illustration: SCENT ZICKA--from a (guilt)-stained-glass Russian window.]

Last of all to be mentioned with unstinted praise is Miss KATE RORKE. It is
as well to remember throughout that we are witnessing a play of
semi-French, not purely domestic English life, and the essence of the play
could not be adapted to ordinary English notions. _Julian Beauclerc_, for
example, in England, would never have challenged _Count Orloff_; he might
have had "a deuce of a row with him"; _et voila tout_. _Dora_, as a young
Irish girl, and not, as she is here, a half-breed, would never have
threatened to suicide herself out of the window, though all else she, as a
not particularly well-educated, but certainly very impulsive girl, might
probably have done. Her great scene, where she bangs her fists against the
looked doors, shrieking to her husband to return--an effect to be led up to
and made within the space of a minute--was, if I may be allowed to say so,
without being suspected of exaggeration, "just perfect." That some
considerable time will elapse before the enthusiasm aroused by this revival
dies out among the patrons and lovers of the Drama-at-its-best is the
private opinion, publicly expressed, of Yours, truly, "THE ONE MAN SEEN" IN
A BOX.

P.S.--When _Diplomacy_ shall have accomplished its Hundred Nights, Mr. HARE
can announce its Scentenary.

       *       *       *       *       *

A LAST STRAW.

(_By One who has to Make Bricks with It._)

     ["... It is rumoured that a measure will shortly be introduced for
     transferring the duties of Revising Barristers to Magistrates."]

  Go, tell the budding blooms they'll ne'er have dew more,
    Go, doom the summer trees to languish leafless--
  A like effect this ultra-fiendish rumour
    Works in the drooping bosoms of the Briefless.

  No more Reviserships! No paltry pittance
    For Themis' harvesters, too often sheafless!
  Is this the Constitution, once Great Britain's;
    _This_, your provision for the meekly Briefless?

  As well proclaim to such as slave at Sessions,
    A world unburglarised and wholly thiefless,
  As rob the least rewarded of professions
    Of its ancestral comfort for the Briefless.

  What's to become of us?--I speak for many,
    Idle and "Unemployed," but oh! not griefless;
  Please, please kind Government to spare a penny,
    Or yet Trafalgar Square shall rouse the Briefless.

  Yes! Don't imagine, uncomplaining creatures
    Are quite disorganised and limp, and chiefless;
  Our jaw is one of our most drastic features,
    And Art is long, though Life perforce be Briefless.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A REGULAR KNOUT AND KNOUTER!!!]

       *       *       *       *       *

"'BEN' TROVATO."--Odd that the French author of such truly Parisian stories
as _Coeur d'Actrice_, _L'Amour pour Rire_, _Flirtage_, and others _du meme
genre_, should be named "TILLET." There is a "du" before the French
author's name, and it is of course proverbial that even a certain person in
the Lower House shall have his "due." 'Tis just this, that, as far as name
goes, differentiates him from t'other TILLET, "which his Christian name is
BEN."

       *       *       *       *       *

Further Fall in Irish Stocks.

(_Vide Daily Papers, Feb. 24, 1893._)

  Though mongers of panic, with malice satanic,
    The credit of Ireland be troublin',
  Home Rule cannot shake her, nor severance break her,
    So long as her _capital's D(o)ublin_.'

       *       *       *       *       *

WEATHER FORECAST BY MRS. R.--"After this cold snowy weather," she observed,
oracularly, "we may expect what they call 'equally obnoxious gales.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HISTORY CONTRADICTS ITSELF.

THE MISSES ROUNDABOUT THINK TIGHT SKIRTS A PREPOSTEROUS AND EXTRAVAGANT
INVENTION, AND APPEAR AT MRS. WEASEL'S PARTY IN A SIMPLE AND ELEGANT
ATTIRE. [_Vide "Punch" for Nov. 21, 1857._]

       *       *       *       *       *

PUTTING IT PLEASANTLY.

     [Mr. FOWLER announced the Government's willingness to appoint "a small
     Commission" to consider how the City could be amalgamated with the
     rest of London.]

  "Dilly, Dilly, come and be killed!"
    Cried good _Mrs. Bond_ to the ducks, in the story.
  Conceive with what rapture the victims were thrilled,
  And then picture the joy of our Turtle friends, filled
        With sweet premonitions of glory!

  No little testudinate triflers are these,
    Unmindful of doom unforbodingly playing.
  The cook's charming manners are likely to please,
  But the flash of that knife Snapping Turtles might freeze,
        'Tis so strangely suggestive of--slaying.

  The civic Brer Terrapin certainly seems
    Extremely content with its time-honoured station.
  Our "young men" may dream highly optimist dreams,
  But Turtledom feareth what Turtledom deems
        The perils of--Unification!

  "No compulsion, of course, only, darlings, you must!"
    That's their reading _au fond_ of the C. C. Cook's attitude.
  "'Amalgamate' Us? Doosed cool, most unjust!
  Your offer inspires us with dismal distrust,
        Your 'Commission' won't move us to gratitude.

  "We love the traditions of Old London Town,
    We Turtles. Pray leave us alone, and don't bother!
  Amalgamate? Nay, on the notion we frown!
  Like the lion and lamb we'll together lie down----
        When the one is safe inside the other!"

  Alack and alas! But the new _Mrs. Bond_
    Means mischief, we fear, with her kind "Dilly, Dilly!"
  And well may the Turtles droop fins and despond.
  When the snug isolation of which they're so fond,
        They must part with at last, willy-nilly!

       *       *       *       *       *

WAGES.

(_A long way after Lord Tennyson._)

     ["Lord WOLMER ... pointed out that Mr. GLADSTONE'S majority of forty
     would be wiped out if the 'paid mercenaries' of the Irish-American
     factions were withdrawn, or were even unable to keep up a steady
     attendance in the House of Commons."--_The Times._

     "The proposed Bill to Provide for the Payment of Members of Parliament
     ... is a bold attempt to transfer to the tax-payers of Great Britain
     the burden of supporting at Westminster the Irish Nationalist
     Members."--_Ibid._]

  Glory of Irishman, glory of orator, going it strong,
    Paid by his countrymen's mites from across the Atlantic Sea--
  Glory of PAT, to spout, to struggle, right Ireland's old wrong!
    Nay, but they aim not at glory, or Home Rule (swears WOLMER, swears
            he):
  Give 'em the glory of living on _us_ and our L. S. D.!

  The wages of swells are high; if high wage to a Minister's just.
    Shall we have the heart low wages to hard-worked M.P.'s to deny?
  _Mercenaries?_ What then are those toffs in high places of trust,
    Who live on our golden largess? Will WOLMER inform us just why
  We _may_ give wages to Wealth, and _not_ unto Poverty?

       *       *       *       *       *

"Down Among the Dead Men."

_Ebriosus loquitur_:--

  Silly spook-hunters show a wish to learn
  If (_hic!_) departed spiritsh e'er return!
  _Did_ they, I should not have so dry a throttle,
  Nor would it cost so mush to--passh the bottle!
  Thersh no returning (_hic!_) of Spiritsh fled,
  And (_hic!_) "dead men"--_worsh luck!_--continue dead!

       *       *       *       *       *

WANTED BADLY.--A "close time" for Autograph-hunting. Alas! the great--and
even the not-so-very-great--are "made game of" all the year round.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PUTTING IT PLEASANTLY!

COUNTY COUNCIL COOK. "DILLY, DILLY, DILLY! COME AND BE--_AMALGAMATED_!!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A TRUSTY KNIGHT.

_Tommy_ (_who has undertaken to escort his fair Cousin to see the Hounds
draw Covert_), "AND YOU KNOW YOU NEEDN'T MIND ALL THESE MEN. IT'S ALL
RIGHT, AS YOU'VE GOT ANOTHER FELLOW WITH YOU."]

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. PUNCH'S CHILD'S GUIDE TO KNOWLEDGE.

_Question._ What is a holiday?

_Answer._ The hard work of that wearisome pursuit known as "pleasure."

_Q._ To whom are holidays profitable?

_A._ To the butchers, the pastry-cooks, and last, but certainly not least,
the doctors.

_Q._ What are the ends of holidays?

_A._ Pills and Bills.

_Q._ What are pills?

_A._ The means by which fortunes are made, and in another sense Clubs kept
select.

_Q._ And Bills?

_A._ Necessary evils laid on the table in the House of Commons, and thrown
into the waste-paper basket in the domestic circle.

_Q._ What is Parliament?

_A._ An assembly of men in which hats are worn when the Members don't want
to talk, and removed when they wish to show what amount of brains they may
possess.

_Q._ What is a hat?

_A._ Generally a nuisance.

_Q._ What is cover?

_A._ The profit made by an Outside Broker out of his too confiding
customers.

_Q._ What is the difference between an Outside Broker and an Inside Broker?

_A._ One is associated with the Stock Exchange, and the other is usually
made comfortable with a pot of beer and a penny paper in the kitchen.

_Q._ What is a kitchen?

_A._ The source from which happiness or misery flows under the
superintendence of a cook.

_Q._ Describe a cook.

_A._ As a food-preparer he, or she, is often an executioner.

_Q._ What is a century?

_A._ When obtained by a cricketer, an honour; when achieved by an
individual, a distinction that must be shortly followed by extinction.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.--JOHN OLIVER HOBBES'S last contribution to FISHER
UNWIN'S charming Pseudonym Library is well named _A Study in Temptations_.
It is not in itself an attractive title, but it accurately indicates the
style of the book. It is a study for a novel rather than an accomplished
work. One expects, my Baronite says, that in some leisure time the author
will come back and finish it. It is well worth the labour, being full of
living characters. _Lady Warbeck_ in particular, is excellent, reminiscent
of, and worthy of THACKERAY. The temptingly arranged pages glitter with
shrewd thoughts admirably phrased. BARON DE B.-W.

       *       *       *       *       *

NO DOUBT AS TO THE ANSWER.--In the list of "Noblemen and Gentlemen"
(invidious distinction, by the way) attending the _Levee_ at St. James's
Palace, whose name would be always found?--Why that of "JAMES O. FORBES,
_of Corse_."

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW (NORWEGIAN) NONSENSE VERSE.

(_After seeing Ibsen's Dramas._)

  There was a young female in Norway,
  Who fancied herself in a poor way,
        Because she felt that
        Her sweet sex was squeezed flat,
  As though caught in cold Destiny's doorway.

  This rebellious young woman of Norway
  Cried, "Man, in his coarse, brutal boor-way,
        Would wipe his big feet
        On my sex soft and sweet;
  But _I_'ll be no mere mat in Man's doorway!"

  And so this young woman of Norway
  Got IBSEN to write, in cock-sure way,
        Concerning her woes,
        And tip-tilted her nose,
  Crying, "_Now_ womankind will have more way!"

  But alas! this young woman of Norway
  _Still_ feels that her soul's in a poor way,
        Because, in a play,
        She won't charm (so they say)
  Or draw crowds through the theatre's doorway.

       *       *       *       *       *

LATEST A PROPOS OF THE COVENT GARDEN FANCY DRESS BALLS.--"Of course,"
observed Mrs. R., "as ladies do not want to be recognised, they simply go
in dummy noses."

       *       *       *       *       *

LEGAL QUERY.--When a leading Barrister gets someone to "devil" for him, may
the latter's occupation be correctly described as "devilry"?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "IL Y EN A TOUJOURS UN QUI AIME--ET L'AUTRE QUI TEND LA
JOUE."

_He._ "AH! YOU'D THINK A PRECIOUS LOT MORE OF ME, MATILDA, IF I WAS ONLY
SIX FEET HIGH!"

_She._ "YES, DEAREST! BUT THEN YOU WOULDN'T THINK SUCH A PRECIOUS LOT OF
_ME_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

AN ORLEANS PLUM.--Prince HENRI D'ORLEANS (says the _Times_) has just been
rebuking the British people for the Chauvinism of their Oriental policy.
Like the late M. MASSIE, whose shade he invokes, the young Prince seems to
object to us, not because we commit any specific acts of hostility, but
"because we look on in a most aggravating fashion." This is truly funny!
One country may steal a--Tonkin, but another may not look over a boundary!
Prince HENRY presents a peculiarly close parallel to KEENE'S infuriated
(and incoherent) Paterfamilias, who angrily commanded his silent son "not
to look at him in _that_ tone of voice!"

       *       *       *       *       *

OPERA AND DISESTABLISHMENT.--_La Damnation de Faust_ was produced most
successfully at the Theatre at Monte Carlo. According to some stern
moralists, who regard the Principality as a gambling-hell upon earth, this
particular Opera was in a quite congenial atmosphere. Odd that in the two
Principalities, Monte Carlo and Wales, the objects for Disestablishment
should be so diametrically opposite. In Wales it is the particular Church,
and at Monte Carlo it is the not-at-all-particular t'other word,
unmentionable twice in the same paragraph to ears polite.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW READING.--(_By a Musical Lady Latinist._)--"Amor et melle et KELLIE est
fecundissimus."

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

_House of Commons, Monday, February 20._--New Chairman to-day; dropped in
in most casual way. Wondered to see MELLOR wandering about Library and
corridors at three o'clock in afternoon in full evening dress. "Going out
to tea?" I asked, in my genial way.

"Order! order!" said MELLOR; "the Hon. Member will please give notice of
that question." And he stalked off, trying to convey to the mind of his
astonished interlocutor as near an approach to back view of COURTNEY as
could be attained, without loan of late Chairman's famous summer
pantaloons.

Everything explained later. Soon as questions over, Mr. G., rising and
fixing glittering eye on SPEAKER, observed, "I beg to move that you, Sir,
do now leave the Chair." Strangers in Gallery pricked up their ears;
thought SPEAKER been doing something, and was now in for it. Right Hon.
Gentleman offered no defence, but meekly left Chair. Mr. G. up again like a
shot. "I beg to move that Mr. MELLOR do take the Chair," he said. Then
MELLOR (fortuitously on spot in evening dress) stepped into Chair, where
through six Sessions, COURTNEY has sat ruling the whirlwind out of order,
and riding on the storm. All done in moment. Before you knew where you
were, there was new Chairman of Committees proposing vote of L2,000 for
rearrangement of rooms in Houses of Parliament. ALPHEUS CLEOPHAS rose, with
evident intent of wanting to know "about these rooms," when irrepressible
Mr. G. on his feet again. "I beg to move," he said, addressing Chairman,
"that you do report progress, and ask leave to sit again."

Rather hard this on MELLOR. Just got into Chair; beginning to feel
comfortable. Had proposed subject that might have agreeably occupied
Committee for half an hour, when here comes the untameable, irresistible,
peremptory Mr. G., and bundles him off. At first some signs of inclination
to resist. New Chairman, having put question and declared it carried,
should forthwith have stepped away from the table. MELLOR dropped into
Chair again.

A moment of embarrassment. COURTNEY, looking critically on form below
Gangway, grimly smiled. Members under Gallery tittered. Clerk nudged new
Chairman in ribs. MELLOR sat on till, lifting his eyes, discovered Mr. G.
meaningly regarding him. Knew he'd be up again if he didn't go; so with
promising alacrity, hopped out of Chair, and disappeared from ken of House.

"Well, I don't know," said honest BILL CREMER. "Of course I don't hold with
COURTNEY'S goings-on in the political field, and he can scarcely have
expected us to keep him on in a snug berth. But this I will say, the
manners of the new Chairman may, so to speak, be more MELLOR, but, as
Chairman of Committees, COURTNEY'll be hard to beat."

_Business done._--"Ban, ban, Caliban, got a new Premier, get a new man"--in
Chairman of Committees.

_Tuesday._--"The life of Her Majesty's Ministers," said the GRAND YOUNG
GARDNER, moodily contemplating his spats, "is not an entirely happy one. I
think I may add that is peculiarly the case with the MINISTER for
AGRICULTURE. I must say, if the language, be not regarded as too
flowery----"

"The MINISTER for AGRICULTURE," I said, desiring to put GARDNER at his
ease, "would be fully justified in using cauliflowery language."

"Thank you. Then I'll say I go to bed with tuberculosis, and get up with
HARRY CHAPLIN. The casual observer is, doubtless, aware that CHAPLIN has an
eye. He sees it gleaming through the eyeglass. I feel it ever upon me. It
is no slight thing to have succeeded a statesman of the calibre of CHAPLIN.
But when he persistently sits opposite you, critically observing all your
movements with that air of supreme intelligence which more than hints that,
as MINISTER for AGRICULTURE, he was personally acquainted with every one of
the cattle on a thousand hills, it is an ordeal that calls into play all
the higher faculties of Man. As to the tuberculosis, it is always breaking
out in unexpected places; people concerned insist upon regarding me as
personally responsible for the visitation."

[Illustration: THE POLITICAL FANCY DRESS BALL AT COVENT GARDEN.]

"But," I said, "you have your little holiday, Saturday to Monday, and get
out to dinner on off-nights?"

"No," he sighed, "the MINISTER for AGRICULTURE has no off-nights; and if I
go to church at the seaside on a Sunday, the Church-warden in passing round
the collection-plate, is sure to steal into my hand a telegram, announcing
a fresh outbreak of tuberculosis. As to going out to dinner----"

[Illustration: Harry'd H-rry Ch-pl-n, as he appeared when meditating on
Bimetallistic and Agricultural Distress.]

"Ministers," CAUSTON here observed, "never dine out when the House is
sitting, unless commanded by the QUEEN, and Whips can't be spared even to
dine with HER MAJESTY."

"As to going out to dinner," continued the GRAND YOUNG GARDNER, ignoring
the interruption of his genial colleague, "it is impossible. It was said, I
believe by one of themselves, 'The Guard dies, but never surrenders.' I may
add, the MINISTER for AGRICULTURE lunches but never dines. What would
become of the Government if a division-bell rang and he was found out of
the way? Now to-night, you would say, looking at the business, I might well
be spared. We commence with KIMBER on disparities in the representation of
constituencies. ROLLIT will follow in the interests of undersized
flat-fish. What has the MINISTER for AGRICULTURE to do with flat-fish of
whatever size? you might ask. To the casual observer, nothing. But, looking
ahead, as the responsibilities of my position make it necessary I should
habitually do, I recall the fact that sometimes the placid pilchard is cast
upon our shores in such quantities as to be carted away for manurial
purposes. I am not intimately acquainted with the pilchard. It is not like
the terrapin a land fish. I am not sure it is flat. Still I have a strong
impression it is undersized. Therefore it might come within the purview of
the discussion on ROLLIT'S motion. MUNDELLA, as you say, is in charge of
the debate, and I might comfortably go to dinner. But what does MUNDELLA
know of manure? No; the MINISTER for AGRICULTURE remains, and will
dine,--if necessary die, at his post."

_Business done._--8:10 P.M., House Counted Out, whilst GRAND YOUNG GARDNER
is explaining how it was he couldn't go out to dinner.

[Illustration: "THE WESTMINSTER PLAY."

_Young Grandolphus_ (_in costume, with appropriate action_). "Haec recinunt
Juvenes dictata senesque!"]

_Friday_, 12:30 A.M.--Storm subsided. Magnificent whilst it lasted.
GRANDOLPH in fine form. Mr. G., under his influence, renewed his youth like
the eagle. At same time, though Welsh Church may be doomed, supply of cabs
on night like this inadequate. Better be put in yard in good time. KENYON
lingers on scene, still asking for Bill to be "taken _de die in diem_." "As
if he were giving a prescription," said WILFRID LAWSON, back from Mansion
House, where he has seen his portrait presented to Lady LAWSON. KENYON,
with eye on Bishop of ST. ASAPH, up in Peers' Gallery, made desperate
resistance to attack on Church. Bishop looked a little grave when KENYON
dropped into metaphor.

[Illustration: A FEATURE OF THE DEBATE.

_M-nd-lla._ A cause de mon nom suis-je "alien"?

_J. L-wth-r_ (_heard but not seen_). Non, Monsieur! Mais vous _n'osez_ pas
dire le contraire.]

"Bill like bagged fox, don't you know," said KENYON, nodding confidentially
to SPEAKER. "Meant to run any way you like. What I mean to say is--" and
here he turned for approval to Lord Bishop, consorting in Gallery with his
fighting Dean, "this fox is so tainted with insincerity, or aniseed, that
the hounds may just as well shut up their noses, and have nothing to do
with it."

With this sage remark, and, something horribly like a wink at the Bishop,
KENYON sat down. Up again later, when Closure moved. HICKS-BEACH, in
temporary command of Opposition, deprecated resistance. But KENYON'S blood
up. With strong effort of self-restraint he stopped himself midway in
stentorian shout, "Yoicks!" dexterously turned the "Yo" into "No," and so
saved himself from reproof of SPEAKER. Having got the "No!" he made most of
it. Nothing left but to clear House for Division. Members near entreated
KENYON to desist from further opposition. No use fighting Closure; only
meant another Division and twenty minutes' prolongation of sitting. KENYON,
with eye reverently fixed on Bishop, immovable. Others might falter on the
way; might palter with the truth; might parlay with the enemy. KENYON would
have no compromise, no surrender. "Yoic----" he meant "No! no!" and he
shouted it too.

"Will the Hon. Member name another teller?" said the wary SPEAKER, when
House cleared for Division. KENYON, evidently still seeing the fox steal
away, Aniseed at the Helm and Insincerity at the Prow, almost stumbled on
the name "YOICKS!" Again stopped himself just in time, and looked forlornly
round; eye finally resting on Peers' Gallery. If only the Bishop could
"tell" with him! That evidently out of order. Bishop belonged, to other
House. No one volunteering to stand with him in the breach, and two tellers
being a necessary preliminary to Division, KENYON bent his head in silent
grief, and leave given to bring in Bill which ASQUITH remorselessly
admitted was first step towards Disestablishment of Welsh Church.

_Business done._--Welsh Church Suspensory Bill read First Time, by majority
of 56, in excited House of 546 Members.

_Friday Night._--After the storm, the customary calm. Spent night in
discussing tempting themes of Local Taxation in London, and Superannuation
of School-teachers. On latter subject that _preux Chevalier_, TEMPLE,
laying down the lute, and leaving Amaryllis in the shade, delivered
luminous speech; convinced CHANCELLOR of the EXCHEQUER; made him promise to
fork out.

_Business done._--Much of useful kind.

       *       *       *       *       *

"SUPPOSITIOUS."--"Well," observed our old friend, who was discussing a
recent case that had been headed "Romance in the Court of Chancery," "this
all comes from bringing up a child that they pretended was their own. I
mean what they call 'A Superstitious Child.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

QUITE ANOTHER THING.--With reference to a recent burglary at Sir THOMAS
PIGOT'S, it is stated that "thieves were known to be in the neighbourhood,
and the police have the matter in hand." Wouldn't it be better if they had
the thieves there?

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE.--Rejected Communications or Contributions, whether MS., Printed
Matter, Drawings, or Pictures of any description, will in no case be
returned, not even when accompanied by a Stamped and Addressed Envelope,
Cover, or Wrapper. To this rule there will be no exception.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Volume
104, March 4, 1893, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, OR THE LONDON ***

***** This file should be named 22380.txt or 22380.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/3/8/22380/

Produced by Matt Whittaker, Juliet Sutherland and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
