The Project Gutenberg eBook, Journal of a Young Lady of Virginia, 1782, by
Lucinda Lee Orr


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Journal of a Young Lady of Virginia, 1782


Author: Lucinda Lee Orr



Release Date: September 1, 2007  [eBook #22487]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF A YOUNG LADY OF
VIRGINIA, 1782***


E-text prepared by Susan Skinner, Julia Miller, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from digital
material generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/journalyounglady00orrlrich





JOURNAL OF A YOUNG LADY OF VIRGINIA

1782.







[Illustration]


Printed and Published
For the Benefit of the Lee Memorial Association of Richmond,
By John Murphy and Company,
No. 182 Baltimore Street,
Baltimore.
1871.

[Illustration]

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1871, by
Emily V. Mason,
in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.




PREFACE

[Illustration]


The following pages contain a fragment of the Journal of a young lady of
Virginia of the last century.

It seems to have been written by her while on a visit to her relatives,
the Lees, Washingtons, and other families of Lower Virginia, mentioned
in her Journal.

The friend for whom it was intended was Miss Polly Brent, also of
Virginia.

The manuscript was found torn, and discolored by age, in an old desk at
the country place in Maryland, to which Polly Brent carried it, upon her
marriage into one of the old families of that State.

The Lees, of whom so much mention is made in the Journal--"Nancy,"
"Molly," "Hannah," and "Harriet"--were the daughters of Richard Henry
Lee, of Chantilly. Molly married W. A. Washington, and Hannah was--at
the time of the Journal--the wife of Corbin Washington. Their grandson,
John A. Washington, was the last occupant of Mount Vernon.

Harriet married the son of Mrs. Turberville, the "old lady" spoken of in
the manuscript.

Ludwell Lee, a son of Richard Henry Lee, married the "Flora" of this
chronicle. She was a daughter of Philip Ludwell Lee, of Stratford, and
sister of Matilda Lee, the first wife of "Colonel Henry Lee;" whose
little boy is mentioned as so "fine" a "child." Colonel Henry Lee was
none other than "Light-horse Harry;" the "little boy," his eldest son
Henry, half-brother to General Robert E. Lee.

It is believed the publication of this Journal will be well received, at
a period when everything relating to the family of General Lee is of
peculiar interest. It presents, also, a curious picture of the life and
manners of that day.

There will be found in it many errors, and some antiquities of
orthography, which it has not been deemed advisable to correct. It is
believed that the Journal will be more entertaining in its original
state than it would be with the aid of any amendments that we might
make. It is certainly the work of a very clever girl, and possesses all
that freedom of style and charming simplicity which is so pleasing and
so rare.

Had the writer anticipated any criticism more searching than that of her
amiable Polly, her style and orthography would doubtless have been more
correct, and her Journal quite as commonplace as most of those that find
their way into print.

The proceeds of the sale of this little volume will be devoted to the
"Lee Memorial Association of Richmond," which must further commend it to
the favor of the public.

JANUARY, 1871.




[Illustration]


JOURNAL

OF A

YOUNG LADY

OF VIRGINIA.




1782.

Sept. 16.


FROM LUCINDA TO MARCIA

_THE WILDERNESS, September 16._

[Sidenote: "Wilderness" Residence of John Grymes, Esq., who married Miss
Fitzhugh, of Eagle's Nest. One of this family was Gen. Robert Lee's
grandmother.]

I hear you say, "The Wilderness! where in the world is that, Lucy?" It
is the name of this place. I can't say I was much struck with the
situation of the House; but they are as kind, good People as I ever saw.


Sept. 17.

To-day is Sunday. Old Mrs. Gordon lives in sight of this [place]. One of
her Daughters is just come--Lucy Gordon--very clever, though not a
Beauty.

A Mr. Spotswood and his Lady are come to dine here. I must dress, of
course.

They are gone.

Mrs. Spotswood, I think, is very Affable and agreeable, though not
handsome. She has invited us to see her, and we shall go day after
to-morrow.

I have spent the day pretty agreeably. Lucy Gordon is to stay with me
to-night.

[Sidenote: Col. Ball, probably the aide and kinsman of Gen. Washington:
his second wife was Frances Washington, niece and legatee of Gen.
Washington.]

I have spent the morning in reading; and, much to my satisfaction, old
Mrs. Gordon is just come to spend the day here. Lucy Gordon and myself
are just returned from walking out. I was delighted: we walked to a
river--they call it here; but it is very narrow. The banks of it are
beautiful, covered with moss and wild flowers; all that a romantic mind
could form. I thought of my Polly, and thought how delighted she would
have been had she been a Spectater of the scene; and how much more
pleased would your Lucy have been, how more delighted if she could have
had her Polly to point out the Beauties too, and make her observations:
but her dear Company was denied. Lucy Gordon is a truly good Girl, but
nothing of the romance in her. So much the better, say I; she is much
happier without. I wish to Heaven I had as little. Colonel Ball dined
here to-day: a very clever man.


Sept. 18.

To-day we return Mrs. Spotswood's visit. I have to crape my hair, which,
of all things, is the most disagreeable. Adieu, my Polly, till my
return.

Well, my dear, I am returned; and much pleased. Mrs. Spotswood is
mighty clever in her house. She has a Daughter, about twelve years old
(though very large of her age--she is as tall as I am), very agreeable,
though not handsome.

They are at cards below, and have sent for me to join them, though I had
much rather stay and converse with my Polly; yet politeness obliges my
obeying the summons.


Sept. 19.

To-day we dine at Old Mrs. Gordon's: I flatter myself I shall spend this
day agreeably. This evening Colonel Ball insisted on our drinking tea
with him: we did, and I was much pleased with my visit; his Wife was not
at home.

I have returned, and am sitting alone, writing to my dearest Polly. I
don't think I ever met with kinder, better People in my life; they do
everything in their Power to make you happy. I have almost determined
not to go to the races this Fall: every one appears to be astonished at
[me,] but I am sure there is no sollid happiness to be found in such
amusements. I don't think I could answer for myself if you were to go;
and then I should only go to be with you. I have no notion of
sacrificing my own ease and happiness to the Opinion of the world in
these matters. They laugh, and tell me, while I am mopeing at home,
other girls will be enjoying themselves at races and balls; but I never
will, I am determined, go to one, unless I have an inclination. I would
not have you think from this that I pay no regard to the opinion of the
World; far from it: next to that of a good conscience, the opinion of
the world is to be regarded. Always pay due regard to that.


Sept. 20.

I have spent this morning in reading _Lady Julia Mandeville_, and was
much affected. Indeed, I think I never cried more in my life reading a
Novel: the stile is beautiful, but the tale is horrid. I reckon you have
read it. Some one just comes to tell us A Mr. Masenbird and Mr.
Spotswood is come. We must go down, but I am affraid both Sister's and
my eyes will betray us. Adieu. I will describe the Gentlemen on my
return.

Mr. Spotswood is the Gentleman we visited the other day. I think him
handsome. Mr. Masenbird is an Englishman, and single, that has settled
in this part of the World. I had heard he was a very uncouth creature,
but he is quite the reverse--very polite, not handsome.

Interrupted again. They are come to tell me a Mr. Grimes and his Lady
are come to wait on us. I must throw aside my pen, and go down to be
introduced. Adieu. I will write more when we retire to dress.

[Sidenote: Of the Nicholas family.]

Mrs. Grimes is very handsome, though appears to be a little proud.
Sister is almost drest; I shall have but little time to smart myself.
Adieu. My Great-Coat shall be my dress to day.


Sept. 21.

To-day we return Mrs. Grimes's visit. I am going to wear my straw dress
and my large hat; Sister wears A blue habit, with a white Sattin scirt.
Adieu. I have but little time to dress.

I am returned, and was delighted with my visit. They live in a very
genteel stile. She is one of the cleverest Women I have seen for some
time. I saw there Miss Betty Lee, and A Miss Judy Roberson; the first
is homely, though right agreeable--the latter is, I think, rather
clever. You can't conceive anything more nice or genteel than
every[thing] was. I never was more pleased in my life. I am summon'd to
supper. Adieu, my Polly; may every blessing attend you! Lucy Gordon is
here, and has been ever since I came. I like her more and more every
day.


Sept. 22.

To-day we dine with old Mrs. Gordon. Lucy and myself are going to walk
over now; Sister and Mrs. Gordon will not go this hour. Adieu. I will
carry my Journal with me.

We had a very pleasant walk; got a number of grapes and nuts in our way.
Lucy and myself are going to walk in the Garden, to get some pink-seed I
am anxious to have. The Gentlemen dined to-day at Mr. Masenbird's. Mrs.
Gordon and sister are come: they have proposed cards, and I am called
to join them. Adieu.

I would have staid to-night with old Mrs. Gordon, but expected to go
down to-Morrow. Lucy and myself had a pleasant walk back. The married
folks went on before.

We have supped, and the gentlemen are not returned yet. Lucy and myself
are in a peck of troubles for fear they should return drunk. Sister has
had our bed moved in her room. Just as we were undress'd and going to
bed, the Gentlemen arrived, and we had to scamper. Both tipsy!


Sept. 23.

To-day is Sunday. Brother was so worsted by the frolick yesterday, we
did not set off to-day. Old Mrs. Gordon dines here to-day. Lucy and
myself are going to walk to the river, and get a nosegay of wild
flowers.

We are returned, and was much delighted with our walk. We went to
Colonel Ball's, and sat some time in the Porch; they are from home.
Dinner is almost ready, and I have to dress. The children have
surrounded me the whole evening, as it is to be the last we stay.


Sept. 24.

We are just going to take our leave of these worthy People: I should
like to stay some time longer, if it was convenient. Adieu: the Chariot
is ready.

[Sidenote: _Belleview._ Residence of Thomas Ludwell Lee.]

Well, my dearest Lavinia, I am arrived at _Belleview_, a good deal
fatigued, where we found Mr. Bushrod Washington and his lady, on their
way down. She is fonder of me than ever; prest me to go with her to
Maryland this Winter. Mr. Phil Fitzhugh is likewise here. He said, at
supper, he was engaged to dance with one of the Miss Brents at a Ball
in Dumfries, but that it was only conditionally. Mammy has just sent me
word she has a letter for me--it is from Nancy, I am sure. Adieu.

[Sidenote: _Chantilly._ Residence of Richard H. Lee.]

It was, and one for you enclosed in it. Nancy writes me her Sister
Pinkard is at _Chantilly_. It must be a great acquisition to her
happiness to have so amiable a companion as I have heard she was.


Sept. 25.

The Company is all gone, and I have seated myself to converse with my
Polly. Mrs. A. Washington has lent me a new Novel, called _Victoria_. I
can't say I admire the Tale, though I think it prettyly told. There is a
verse in it I wish you much to read. I believe, if I a'n't too Lazy, I
will copy it off for you: the verse is not very butifull, but the sense
is, I assure you.


Sept. 26.

To-day I have spent in putting my cloaths to rights--a dreadful task,
you will say. I am going to take a little airing this evening. Adieu:
the horses are at the door.


Sept. 27.

[Sidenote: Mr. Charles Lee--afterward Attorney-General in Gen.
Washington's second Cabinet--married the "Nancy" of the narrative.]

I was sitting busy at work, when some one told me Mr. Charles Lee was
here. He was from _Chantilly_; and I flew out in expectation of a
letter. What do you think I felt, when, instead of a letter, he told me
my Nancy was very ill? My Polly, I am sure, will sympathize with me.
What would I not give to see her! but that is denied me. I hope to God
she is better! Mr. Lee says they did not apprehend any great danger.


Sept. 28.

This morning Mr. Lee left us. Every time I see him I like him more and
more. He has proved himself a truly good Brother. I am very uneasy with
regard to Nancy--I wish to Heaven I could hear from her.


Sept. 29.

Mrs. Graem, Letty Ball, and Harry G---- called here to-day. Mrs. Graem,
poor creature, appears much distressed at the death of her Children.
When we come to consider, I think it much better for them: but how
seldom can a Mother reason in this manner! Cousin Nancy is better, she
told me: pray Heaven it may be so.

[Sidenote: _Richland._ Residence of Daniel Brent, Esq.]

When Mrs. Graem came to-day, some one came running in and said the
_Richland_ chariot was coming. You may be assured I flew to the door.
Oh, how disappointed I was!


Sept. 30.

To-day is Sunday, and I am going to church. Brother Aylett is going in
the Chariot with me. I am this moment going to crape and dress. I shall
wear my Great-Coat and dress Hat. Adieu, till my return.

[Sidenote: _Selvington._ Residence of Thomas Selden.]

[Sidenote: _Chatham._ Residence of William Fitzhugh, grandfather of Mrs.
Robert E. Lee. He afterward removed to _Ravensworth_, in Fairfax Co.,
when _Chatham_ was occupied by his brother, Mr. Philip Fitzhugh.]

I am returned. Mrs. Brook, Mrs. Selden, and Nancy were all at church in
deep mourning. They were very civil to me, and prest me to dine at
_Selvington_. Mr. James Gordon is come to dinner from _Chatham_. Mrs.
Fitzhugh has sent me a very pressing invitation to go there this
evening, and to-morrow to the races; but I have not the smallest
inclination, and shall not go. This Mr. Gordon is a mighty clever man--I
wish you could see him. I saw a beauty at church, a Miss Thaskkel. She
has hazel eyes, fine complexion, and Beautiful Auburn hair, which hung
in ringlets upon her neck.

We were sitting drinking tea this evening, when what should we see
coming but Mr. Washington's Carriage. I was delighted, you may be
assured. They were all mighty well. I inquired for you. Cousin Molly
told me you were in perfect health, and that your sister Brent and
Nancy Ambler were with you--then I suppose my Polly is happy. I have a
thousand Questions to ask about them, but I hope you will write me an
exact detail of every thing that happened while there. You have been at
a tea-drinking lately, in Dumfries: Mrs. A. Washington gave me the whole
History of it--told me your dresses, and every thing. But where am I
running to? I had forgot there was Company in the House, so happy am I
always conversing with my Polly. Adieu.

[Sidenote: Richard Brent, U. S. Senator from Virginia for many years.]

You will smile, I am sure, when I tell you what I am about to do. Will
you believe when I tell you I am this moment going to pack up my cloaths
to go to _Chantilly_? Adieu. Some one has just come to tell me your
Brother Richard is come. I must go and inquire for my Polly.

You are very well, he sais. I shall give him your letter from Nancy.
The Gentlemen are all in high spirits, thinking, I suppose, of the
pleasure of to-morrow. I shall be far from this [place] by that time. I
must quit, as the Boys are come for me to get Sweetmeats for supper.


October 1.

I must really take my pen to scribble a little before I set off. The
Gentlemen are just set off to the races, and I am preparing to set off
for _Chantilly_. Adieu, my Polly.


October 2.

I have arrived at _Chantilly_. Nancy was much better than I expected to
find her. Weakness is her only complaint. She was delighted to see me,
and inquired eagerly for her dear Polly, and was much pleased with your
letter.

Mrs. Pinkard is here--and a sweet Woman she is. Adieu. Nancy says I
shall not write more.


October 3.

I am just up, and am going to seat myself for Sibby to crape my hair.

[Sidenote: _Stratford._ Residence of Philip Ludwell Lee.]

Cousin Nancy and myself have just returned from taking an airing in the
Chariot. We went to _Stratford_: walked in the Garden, sat about two
hours under a butifull shade tree, and eat as many figs as we could. How
did we wish for our dear Polly, and think that was the only thing we
wanted to compleat our happiness!

We brought to _Chantilly_ Col. H. Lee's little Boy. He has stayed at
_Stratford_ since his Papa and Mama went to New York. I assure you he is
a very fine child. Dinner announced. Adieu.

Nancy is rather unwell this evening; she is a little fatigued with her
ride. Adieu. I must go and talk, to raise her spirits.


October 4.

To-day I have been busy making a cap. I don't think it clever, though I
have spent a good while about it. Nancy and myself have been locked up
stairs by ourselves all day. She is better to-day than she was
yesterday.

Oh, my Marcia, how hard is our fate! that we should be deprived of your
dear company, when it would compleat our Felicity--but such is the fate
of Mortals! We are never permitted to be perfectly happy. I suppose it
is right, else the Supreme Disposer of all things would not have
permitted it: we should perhaps have been more neglectful than we are of
our duty.


October 5.

Mr. Pinkard and a Mr. Lee came here to-day from the Fredericksburg
races. How sorry I was to hear "Republican" was beaten. I was really
interested in that race. Adieu. I must crape my hair for dinner.

It is a delightful evening. Nancy and myself are going to take a ride
out in the Chariot. Oh, my Polly, why are you not here to join us! Away
with such thoughts--they almost make me melloncholy. Nancy calls me.
Adieu again. I come! I come!

We are returned, and had a delightful ride, and a much more delightful
_tete-a-tete_. This Lee appears to be a hum-drum, disagreeable Creature.
Tea is ready, and I must bid you good-by.


October 6.

I wish, my Polly, you could see Mrs. Pinkard. You would be delighted
with her. She is, I think, among the finest Women I have seen; and is
thought very beautifull.

I have been very agreeably entertained this evening, reading a Novel
called _Malvern Dale_. It is something like _Evelina_, though not so
pretty.

I have a piece of advice to give you, which I have before urged--that
is, to read something improving. Books of instruction will be a thousand
times more pleasing [after a little while] than all the novels in the
World. I own myself, I am too fond of Novel-reading; but, by accustoming
myself to reading other Books, I have become less so, and I wish my
Polly to do the same.


October 7.

This is Sunday. We have been collected in the Chamber, reading the
Lessons of the day. After that, Nancy and myself plann'd a ride out on
horseback, which we are just going to put in execution. Adieu. I will
resume my pen on my return.

We are returned. I can't say I was much delighted with the ride, as I
rode a very hard-going horse. They had dined when we returned.


October 8.

Mr. Newton dined here to-day. I believe you know him, and therefore need
not describe him. I have been very busy to-day working a little screne,
to hold in my hand to prevent the fire from burning my face. I think it
will be beautifull.

I have seated myself in my (w)rapper to scribble a little. Mr. Pinkard
has been reading a Play all the evening to Nancy and myself. We were
much pleased with it. Nancy grows better and better every day--which I
am delighted at. Adieu: sleep has closed my eyes.


October 9.

I was in danger last night of commiting a great piece of rudeness; the
Play Mr. Pinkard read us was the _Bell Strattagem_. Mr. Newton was by
when it was read. Some one ask't him sometime afterwards what the Play
was. He said the _Country Cousin_. I thought I should have burst with
laughter!

The two Gentlemen went to the Court-house to-day. Molly and myself took
a walk this evening, and should have walk't much farther had we not met
the Gentlemen. Mr. Newton dismounted and walkt home with us.


October 10.

I have seated myself to give you the adventures of to-day. Mr. C.
Washington returned to-day from Fredericksburg. You can't think how
rejoiced Hannah was, and how dejected in his absence she always is. You
may depend upon it, Polly, this said Matrimony alters us mightely. I am
afraid it alienates us from every one else. It is, I fear, the bane of
Female Friendship. Let it not be with ours, my Polly, if we should ever
Marry. Adieu. Harriet calls me to supper. Once more good-by.


October 11.

Hannah and myself were going to take a long walk this evening, but were
prevented by the two horred Mortals, Mr. Pinkard and Mr. Washington, who
seized me and kissed me a dozen times in spite of all the resistance I
could make. They really think, now they are married, they are prevaliged
to do any thing.


October 12.

I am going to tell you a little piece of a secret; but you must never
mention it. Nancy had an admirer lately--who do you think it is? No
other than Mr. Newton. He got his discard yesterday.

It is in the evening. Nancy and myself have been to visit our little
garden [you have frequently heard me speak of it]. We were so
unfortunate as to make it on the side of the hill, and it is wash't very
much. Do you visit our dear pledge, and think of your Lucy? How often
do I think with rapture on the happy hours we spent sitting on the
fence, singing and looking at the river with the Moon shining on it. Oh,
how beautiful it look't! Adieu.


October 13.

[Sidenote: _Pecatone._ Residence of Mrs. Turberville.]

I had almost forgot to tell you that to-morrow Mrs. Pinkard, Cousin
Molly, and myself go below the ferry to _Pecatone_, and Mr.
Ballendine's. I am very busy getting ready for the trip. Adieu.

It is in the evening. There are two Beaux just come. Mrs. Pinkard tels
me I must go out and let her introduce them to me. The first I am
acquainted with: he is homely, but a mighty worthy Man. The second I
never saw before--he is tolerably clever. Nancy and myself are going to
pore out tea.


October 14.

I have but one moment to tell you that Nancy and myself are in a great
hurry dressing. We are afraid we shall not be ready for breakfast, and
we set off directly afterwards. This is Sunday. Cousin Washington and
Nancy go as far as the Church, and return to _Chantilly_. Adieu, my dear
Polly.


October 15.

[Sidenote A: _Nomini._ Built by "Counsellor Carter," son of "King
Carter."]

[Sidenote: _Bushfield._ Residence of Mr. Washington.]

Well, my dear, we arrived late last night at _Pecatone_. When I wrote
last we weare sitting off. We all dined at Doctor Thomson's[A] together.
Mrs. Washington and Milly called there in the evening on their way to
_Bushfield_. I never saw Milly before. I think I am a little
disappointed in her beauty. She is not so pretty as I expected to find.
I was distressed at parting with Nancy, but could not persuade her to
come.

I don't think you ever saw Cousin Turberville or Hannah. The first is
homely, but very polite and hospitable in her house. The latter has not
a handsome face, but is a genteel person. They gave us a very polite
reception. Hannah was dressed in a lead-courlered habbit, open, with a
lylack lutestring scirt. She had a butifull crape cushon on, ornamented
with gauze and flowers.

I must bid you Adieu, for the Ladies are just dressed, and I shall not
be ready for Breakfast.

I am just returned from riding out. While we were at Breakfast Cousin
Molly proposed a ride to the store. It is kept by a Mr. Thomson--Brother
to the Man it is said Miss H. Turberville is to Marry. Accordingly, we
three went in the Chariot, and left the two Married Ladys by themselves.

We have retired to dress for dinner. Shall I tell you our dresses? I
hear you say "Yes." Mrs. P. wears a brocade; Cousin M. her pink
Great-Coat, and I my pink. Adieu. Mrs. P. is going to dress my hair.

Every moment I can spare from the Company I dedicate to you. Two Beaux
dined here. Mr. James Thomson and Mr. Ford. In the evening two more
came--Mr. Beal and Mr. Joe Thomson. We are all preparing to dance.
Adieu: I hear the Fidle.


October 16.

We spent last night very agreeably. Danced till Eleven. My partner was
Mr. Beal. This is a beautiful situation--the Garden extends from the
House to the river [very much like _Retirement_]. I have been takeing a
very agreeable walk there. An airing is proposed this morning. We all go
in Mr. Turberville's Coach. Adieu: it is at the door.

I don't know when I've been happier than I am now. Every thing conspires
to make me so. Cousin Turberville is so Affectionate. She does every
thing in her power to make her Company happy. I had forgot to tell you
Cousin Hannah's dress yesterday. It was a blue lutestring habit, taffety
apron and handkerchief, with the most butiful little hat on the side of
her head I ever saw.

We are dressing for dinner: this is a ceremony always practiced here. I
wear my Great-Coat.

We are just done tea; and are to have the same Gentlemen to dance again
to-night.

I begin to want very much to see my Polly. Ah! what would I not give to
obtain that [happiness]. It appears a year since the morning I parted
from you, and how long, very long will it be before I clasp you to my
breast. I am deprived even the consolation of hearing from you. Adieu,
my love. I must return to the Company.


October 17.

We danced last night, and every one appeared to be happy. I can answer
for your Lucy: her partner was Mr. James Thomson--one of the best
dancers I most ever saw. Early this morning came one of the Miss
Ballendine's--truly Amiable, I believe, but not handsome. But how
prefarable is good sense and affability to Beauty: more pleasing a
thousand times!

Cousin Molly and Hannah T. have rode to Mr. Ballendine's to bring the
other Sister. She is to be married soon to a Mr. Murfey.

The old man being sick that plays the Fidle, we have diverted ourselves
playing _grind the bottle_ and _hide the thimble_. Our time passed away
agreeably enough.


October 18.

Miss Nancy Ballendine would not come yesterday. Miss Eliza is still
here; and a sweet Girl she is. I wish you could see her: I am sure my
Polly would be pleased with her. We have been taking a walk together in
the Garden, and talk't of my Polly. She told me Mr. Macrae intended
paying his addresses to you on his way up. I long to hear if he has.

We have the addition of two more Gentlemen to-night. A Doctor
Harrington--a handsome man, I think--and an elderly Gentleman, Captain
Grigg; the most laughable creature I ever saw. They tell me I shall be
highly diverted at the minuet he dances; and we intend to make him dance
one to-night.


October 19.

I don't think I ever laugh't so much in my life as I did last night at
Captain Grigg's minuet. I wish you could see him. It is really the most
ludicrous thing I ever saw; and what makes it more so is, he thinks he
dances a most delightful one.

To-day we go to Mr. Ballendine's. Adieu, my Love.

I am delighted with this Family. They take delight in promoting each
other's happiness, and they do it effectually; for I believe they are
perfectly happy. Mrs. Ballendine is handsome--more so than either of her
Daughters. Mr. Newton came this evening as we were at tea.


October 20.

To-day is disagreeable and rainy. The young Ladys have been showing us
the wedding-cloaths and some dresses they had from London; very genteel
and pretty. Mr. Newton is still here, and is, I think, a very
disagreeable creature. I wonder how Nancy did to bear with him. The
young Ladys have been singing for me: they are mighty obliging, and sing
whenever they are ask't.


October 21.

We have just returned this morning from visiting Mrs. Esquire Lee.

I never saw her before. She received us very graciously, and is, I
think, rather clever. We returned just as dinner was on the table. Miss
Nancy's sweetheart came to-day. Mr. Murfey is a very good Man, I
believe, but he is very homely. Adieu, my dearest.


October 22.

We return this morning to _Pecatone_. Adieu.

We are at _Pecatone_, and dressing. There are several Gentlemen to dine
here. Mr. Thomson has invited this Family and ourselves to drink tea
with him this evening. He has had a New Cargo of tea arrived. We intend
going, and I shall not scribble again to-night.


October 23.

We went to Mr. Thomson's; returned, and danced at night. Mr. Turberville
and Mr. Beal each made us all a present of a pound of Powder. I really
have a great Affection for Mrs. Pinkard. She always chooses my
head-dress, dresses my hair, and is the best Creature in lending you any
thing. If you just say you want a thing, if she happens to have it, she
will insist on your wearing it. Cousin Hannah has a quantity of Cloaths.
She has put on every day since I have been here a different dress of
muslin, and all handsome. Adieu, my best beloved. I have but little time
to scribble, and that is only when we retire to dress.


October 24.

We were entertained last night in the usual way--dancing. We have just
returned from taking a delightful walk. We went to the peach orchard and
eat a great many fine peaches. They are seldom met with this time of the
year.


October 25.

[Sidenote: _Lee Hall._ Residence of Richard Lee.]

To-day we dine at _Lee Hall_--that is, at the Squire's. To-morrow we
dine at _Bushfield_, with the _Pecatone_ Family. Adieu; I will write
when I get there.

I am at _Lee Hall_. Mrs. Lee is very polite. We found a Mrs. Ball here.
She has the remains of a very pretty Woman, and appears to have a fixt
melancholy on her countenance. I expect to see Nancy to-morrow at
Bushfield--pray send I may. Mr. Beal and Mr. Pinkard are come. Adieu: I
am called to supper.


October 26.

I have but one moment to tell you we are just going to set out for
_Bushfield_. Mr. Turberville's Coach is waiting for us at the road.


October 27.

When we got here we found the House pretty full. Nancy was here. I had
to dress in a great hurry for dinner. We spent the evening very
agreeably in chatting. Milly Washington is a thousand times prettyer
than I thought her at first, and very agreeable. About sunset, Nancy,
Milly, and myself took a walk in the Garden [it is a most butifull
place]. We were mighty busy cutting thistles to try our sweethearts,
when Mr. Washington caught us; and you can't conceive how he plagued
us--chased us all over the Garden, and was quite impertinent.

I must tell you of our frolic after we went in our room. We took it into
our heads, to want to eat; well, we had a large dish of bacon and beaf;
after that, a bowl of Sago cream; and after that, an apple pye. While we
were eating the apple pye in bed--God bless you! making a great
noise--in came Mr. Washington, dressed in Hannah's short gown and
peticoat, and seazed me and kissed me twenty times, in spite of all the
resistance I could make; and then Cousin Molly. Hannah soon followed,
dress'd in his Coat. They joined us in eating the apple pye, and then
went out. After this we took it in our heads to want to eat oysters. We
got up, put on our rappers, and went down in the Seller to get them: do
you think Mr. Washington did not follow us and scear us just to death.
We went up tho, and eat our oysters. We slept in the old Lady's room
too, and she sat laughing fit to kill herself at us. She is a charming
old lady--you would be delighted with her. I forgot to tell, Mr. Beal
attended us here. I have been makeing Milly play on the forti-pianer for
me; she plays very well. I am more and more delighted with her. She has
just returned from the Fredericksburg races, and has given me a full
account of them.

I have been filling out tea, and after that we took a walk to the river
by Moonlight. The garden extends to the river. Nancy observed walking by
moonlight, she thought, reminded us of our absent Friends. I joined her
in thinking so, and my thoughts were at that instant with my Polly. We
returned in the house, and I prevailed on Milly to entertain us an hour
or two on the forti-pianer. We wanted very much to sleep in a room by
ourselves to-night and try the _dum cake_, but could not persuade
Nancy--she was afraid to sleep in the room with us.


October 28.

[Sidenote B: _Nomini._]

To-day, which is Sunday, we dine at Doctor Thomson's,[B] and in the
evening go to _Chantilly_. Nancy stays, and goes to-Morrow with Corbin
and Hannah in the Pheyton. Adieu, my ever dear Polly.


October 29.

[Sidenote C: Beal's--a family distinguished in the Revolution. This one
is probably the same who was an officer in the war. Died a bachelor.]

_Chantilly._ We got here late last night. In the evening, at Doctor
Thomson's, we heard, just by, there were six people to be dipt. We had
Curiosity to see them, and accordingly went. I assure you it is a very
Solemn Sight. We brought two Beaux home with us--Mr. Beal[C] and Mr.
Stark.


October 30.

To-day is rainy and disagreeable, which will prevent their comeing from
_Bushfield_. I have entertained myself all day reading _Telemachus_. It
is really delightful, and very improveing. Just as I have seated myself
they are come to tell me tea is ready. Farewell.


October 31.

Mr. Beal is still here. I assure you I think him very clever. Nancy is
not yet come. I am quite lost without her. I have seated myself at
Nancy's desk to scribble a little--interrupted already. It is Cousin
Molly. She is come to propose dressing Mr. Pinkard in Woman's cloaths. I
assent, so away goes the pen.

Just as we had got Mr. Pinkard dress't, came Corbin, Hannah, and Nancy.


Nov. 1.

Nancy and myself have just returned from a delightful walk. What do you
think of her? She sais she could almost sware Mr. Beal is my slave! I
laugh, and tell her there is nothing in it; nor do I believe he is.

Mr. Pinkard came in just now, and like to have taken this from me, tho I
luckily got it in my pocket before he could get it.


Nov. 2.

To-day, Corbin and Hannah go to _Blenheim_, the seat of Mr. W.
Washington. Hariot is going with them.

How much do I want to see my Polly! I hope, by this time, you are almost
through your Book.


Nov. 3.

To-day the Beaux took their leave. Last night Nancy had a fire made up
in one of the up-stairs rooms, and was busily engaged in conversation,
when Mr. Pinkard bolted in upon us and overheard part of our
conversation--which hily delighted him.

To-morrow, Mrs. Pinkard, Nancy, and myself go to _Blenheim_. All the
_Bushfield_ Family are there. How often do we wish for our dear Polly!
but she is denied us.


Nov. 4.

We are now at _Blenheim_. The Hurry of dress prevented my writeing
before I sat off. I am delighted with this Family, and still more
delighted with Milly Washington. She is indeed a sweet Girl.

There came this evening a Major More Fauntleroy. We have had a heartty
laugh at him; he is a Monstrous Simpleton; and likewise came this
evening the hopefull Youth--A. Spotswood. He has lately commenced
Milly's lover. Nancy and myself have been teasin to get [something] out
of her, but she is inflexible.

I have been very much entertained hearing Cousin Washington perform on
the Spinnet. Adieu, my Friend. I can write no more.


Nov. 5.

This is Sunday. We have just breakfasted. There came this morning one
of the cleverest young Beaux I have seen for some time--a Mr. Turner.

Cousin Hannah and Hariet take our places this morning in the Chariot.
Nancy and myself stay till the evening, and go with Mr. Washington in
his Pheyton.

Nancy, Milly, and myself have shut ourselves in a room up stairs, and
intend not to go down till summoned to dinner. The Topic of our
Conversation is, regretting the manner in which we have spent our past
life. It will tend to some good, you will say, if it will make us mend
in future.

I have, for the first time in my life, just read Pope's _Eloiza_. Just
now I saw it laying in the Window. I had heard my Polly extol it
frequently, and curiosity lead me to read it. I will give you my
opinion of it: the poetry I think beautiful, but do not like some of the
sentiments. Some of Eloiza's is too Ammorous for a female, I think.

We set off this evening for _Chantilly_--but the Pheyton wheel broke,
and we were obliged to turn back. Old Mrs. Washington has promised her
Carriage to us to go in the morning.


Nov. 6.

_Chantilly._ We sat off early in the morning, and we reached here this
morning before breakfast. I found Mama's Jem here. How delighted I am to
hear of the Health of all my Friends above. He could not give me any
information about you, except that he believes you are very well, which
I am very much pleased to hear.

Aunt Lee has been very sick for several days with a violent toothache.


Nov. 7.

[Sidenote: _Berry Hill._ A country-seat of Thomas L. Lee.]

This is a delightful evening, my dear. Nancy and myself have just
returned from a delightfull walk to the river. On our return we two
loll'd on the Sopha. I shall go up to _Berry Hill_ directly the Pheyton
is mended. Mr. Washington is to carry me.


Nov. 8.

To-day Old Mrs. Washington and Milly came. Nancy and myself have been
dressing for dinner. N. looks handsomer to-day than I have seen her
since I came. Adieu. I have not another moment to scribble.

Milly and myself took a walk to-night by moonlight. She knows you, she
says, and thinks you beautifull.

We are going to join Nancy and Mr. Washington in the dineing-room.
Adieu, my beloved.


Nov. 9.

Mrs. Thomson, Mrs. Leland, and a Miss Leland are all just come, and
unexpectedly too. I never saw the two last before. The first is a very
clever old Lady, the latter very homely indeed. We are all going to
dress. Adieu.

Dinner is just over. Harry, the Fiddler, is sent for, and we are going
to dance. I had forgot to tell, Mr. Spotswood came to-day. You can't
conceive how angry Milly was. I soon got from her that he had promised
never to trouble her again on the Subject, and she was displeased at his
following her. Adieu--Harriet insists on my going out. She says the
fiddle is come. Farewell, my love; may Heaven shower blessings on your
head, prays your Lucinda. I always forget to make use of our other name.


Nov. 10.

[Sidenote: _Menokin._ Residence of Francis L. Lee.]

To-day Old Mrs. W. goes to _Bushfield_, and leaves Milly behind. I have
promised to go with Milly when she goes, if I don't go up before that
time. Hannah and Corbin go with the Old Lady to-day. Cousin Molly and
Mr. Pinkard go to _Menoken_ to-day.

Mr. Spotswood took his leave this evening; which Milly rejoiced at.

Nancy sleeps up stairs to-night with her Sister Pinkard. Milly, Miss
Leland, and myself have the nurcery to ourselves. We want Nancy very
much, but she is obliged to sleep up stairs.

I had forgot to tell you, the second night at _Blenheim_, Milly, Nancy,
and myself had a room to ourselves, and tried the _salt and egg_; but
neither of us dreamt.

I have undrest myself, and Sibby is going to comb my hair. Milly and
Miss Leland are gone in the Garden. I propose to Sibby to go and
frighten them: she agrees, and we are going to put it in execution.

We scared them a good deal. Milly screamed pretty lustily.


Nov. 11.

We have just breakfasted. Mrs. Thomson and the Lelands have just
departed. We are going hard to work. Milly is making herself a very
pretty cap.

Cousin Molly came to-night; quite wet, as she was caught in a hard rain.
We shall sit up very late to-night--I trimming my dress, and the rest
makeing caps. I expect to go on Monday to _Bushfield_, with Milly. Nancy
and Molly will go about that time to Miss A. Ballendine's wedding.


Nov. 12.

What a surprise, my Polly, have we all had this morning, and a
delightful one too. Before we were out of bed a servant from Mr.
Macarty's came to let us know Aunt Fendall is arrived, and at Mr.
Macarty's. We are all invited to dine there to-day. I am delighted at
the thought of seeing Flora before I go up. The Pheyton is mended, and I
shall set off in a day or two.

[Sidenote: McCartys, married into the Lee family, lived at "Marmion."]

I am not going to Mr. Macarty's to-day. I stay with Milly W. and Mrs.
Pinkard. Aunt Lee, Molly, and Nancy go. It was my own choice to stay,
for Nancy insisted on my going and her staying. They are gone. I drest
Nancy's hair--she really look't beautiful to-day.

We are going to seat ourselves and hear Mr. Pinkard read a Novel.

Hannah and Corbin are just come from _Bushfield_. Mr. Washington sais he
shall set off to-morrow.

Milly will set off directly after dinner. She has promised to correspond
with me.

Milly has taken her leave, and I assure you I was a good deal affected
at parting with her. She is a sweet Girl; and told me at parting that
she was preposes'd with the notion we should never meet again. God
forbid! I can write no more, my Marcia, for I have got to pack up my
cloaths.

I believe I shall scrible a little more to-night, if they should bring
Flora home with them, if it is only to give you my opinion of her.

Well, my dear, they are come, and, as I expected, brought Flora with
them. She is very genteal, and wears monstrous Bustles. Her face is just
as it always was. You, my dearest, that posses a great deal of
Sencibility, would have supposed she would have been delighted to see
me--far from it, I assure you. She saluted me just as if I had been a
common acquaintance, and was not, I thought, at all glad to see me; but
I suppose it is fashionable to affect indifference. I hope, my dearest,
we shall always stear clear of such unnatural Fashions. She received
Nancy in the same manner; that dear Friend and myself have just
returned from a walk in the Garden--the last we shall take for some
time, I am afraid.

Dear Mrs. Pinkard sets off this morning, and Cousin Molly goes as far as
_Peccatone_ with her.

The arrival of Flora has prevented Nancy from going.

I have just taken a last farewell of my dear Mrs. Pinkard--did I say a
last farewell? I hope not. I should be unhappy did I think it a last
farewell.

Mr. W. and myself have defer'd setting off till the evening, and then we
go as far as _Blenheim_ to-night....

[Illustration]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF A YOUNG LADY OF VIRGINIA,
1782***


******* This file should be named 22487.txt or 22487.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/2/4/8/22487



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

