The Project Gutenberg EBook of The New Minister's Great Opportunity, by 
Heman White Chaplin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The New Minister's Great Opportunity
       First published in the "Century Magazine"

Author: Heman White Chaplin

Release Date: October 12, 2007 [EBook #23003]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINISTER'S GREAT OPPORTUNITY ***




Produced by David Widger





THE NEW MINISTER'S GREAT OPPORTUNITY.

By Heman White Chaplin

1887

First published in the "Century Magazine."


"The minister's got a job," said Mr. Snell.

Mr. Snell had been driven in by a shower from the painting of a barn,
and was now sitting, with one bedaubed overall leg crossed over the
other, in Mr. Hamblin's shop.

Half-a-dozen other men, who had likewise found in the rain a call to
leisure, looked up at him inquiringly.

"How do you mean?" said Mr. Noyes, who sat beside him, girt with a
nail-pocket. "'The minister 's got a job'? How do you mean?" And Mr.
Noyes assumed a listener's air, and stroked his thin yellow beard.

Mr. Snell smiled, with half-shut, knowing eyes, but made no answer.

"How do you mean?" repeated Mr. Noyes; "'The minister's got a job'--of
course he has--got a stiddy job. We knew that before."

"Very well," said Mr. Snell, with a placid face; "seeing's you know so
much about it, enough said. Let it rest right there."

"But," said Mr. Noyes, nervously blowing his nose; "you lay down this
proposition: 'The minister's got a job.' Now I ask, what is it?"

Mr. Snell uncrossed his legs, and stooped to pick up a last, which he
proceeded to scan with a shrewd, critical eye.

"Narrer foot," he said to Mr. Hamblin.

"Private last--Dr. Hunter's," said Mr. Hamblin, laying down a boot upon
which he was stitching an outer-sole, and rising to make a ponderous,
elephantine excursion across the quaking shop to the earthen
water-pitcher, from which he took a generous draught.

"Well, Brother Snell," said Mr. Noyes,--they were members together of a
secret organization, of which Mr. Snell was P. G. W. T. F.,--"ain't you
going to tell us? What--is this job? That is to say, what--er--is it?"

Brother Snell set his thumbs firmly in the armholes of his waistcoat,
surveyed the smoke-stained pictures pasted on the wall, looked keen, and
softly whistled.

At last he condescended to explain.

"Preaching Uncle Capen's funeral sermon."

There was a subdued general laugh. Even Mr. Hamblin's leathern apron
shook.

Mr. Noyes, however, painfully looking down upon his beard to draw out a
white hair, maintained his serious expression.

"I don't see much 'job' in that," he said; "a minister's supposed to
preach a hundred and four sermons in each and every year, and there's
plenty more where they come from. What's one sermon more or less, when
stock costs nothing? It's like wheeling gravel from the pit."

"O.K.," said Mr. Snell; "if 't aint no trouble, then 't ain't But
seeing's you know, suppose you specify the materials for this particular
discourse."

Mr. Noyes looked a little disconcerted.

"Well," he said; "of course, I can't set here and compose a funereal
discourse, off-hand, without no writing-desk; but there's stock enough
to make a sermon of, any time."

"Oh, come," said Mr. Snell, "don't sneak out: particularize."

"Why," said Mr. Noyes, "you 've only to open the leds of your Bible, and
choose a text, and then: When did this happen? Why did this happen? To
who did this happen? and so forth and so on; and there's your sermon. I
've heard 'em so a hunderd times."

"All right," said Mr. Snell; "I don't doubt you know; but as for me,
I for one never happened to hear of anything that Uncle Capen did but
whitewash and saw wood. Now what sort of an autobiographical sermon
could you make out of sawing wood?"

Whereat Leander Buffum proceeded, by that harsh, guttural noise well
known to country boys, to imitate the sound of sawing through a log. His
sally was warmly greeted.

"The minister might narrate," said Mr. Blood, "what Uncle Capen said to
Issachar, when Issachar told him that he charged high for sawing wood.
'See here,' says Uncle Capen, 's'pos'n I do. My arms are shorter'n other
folks's, and it takes me just so much longer to do it.'"

"Well," said Mr. Noyes, "I'm a fair man; always do exactly right is the
rule I go by; and I will frankly admit, now and here, that if it's a
biographical discourse they want, they 'll have to cut corners."

"_Pre-cise-ly_" said Mr. Snell; "and that's just what they do want."

"Well, well," said Mr. Hamblin, laboriously rising and putting his
spectacles into their silver case,--for it was supper-time,--"joking one
side, if Uncle Capen never did set the pond afire, we 'd all rather take
his chances to-day, I guess, than those of some smarter men."

At which Mr. Snell turned red; for he was a very smart man and had just
failed,--to everybody's surprise, since there was no reason in the world
why he should fail,--and had created more merriment for the public than
joy among his creditors, by paying a cent and a half on the dollar.

"Come in; sit down," said Dr. Hunter, as the young minister appeared at
his office door; and he tipped back in his chair, and put his feet upon
a table. "What's the news?"

"Doctor," said Mr. Holt, laughing, as he laid down his hat and took an
arm-chair; "you told me to come to you for any information. Now I want
materials for a sermon on old Mr. Capen."

The Doctor looked at him with a half-amused expression, and then sending
out a curl of blue smoke, he watched it as it rose melting into the
general air.

"You don't smoke, I believe?" he said to the minister.

Holt smiled and shook his head.

The Doctor put his cigar back into his mouth, clasped one knee in his
hands, and fixed his eyes in meditation on a one-eared Hippocrates
looking down with a dirty face from the top of a bookcase. Perhaps the
Doctor was thinking of the two or three hundred complimentary visits he
had been permitted to make upon Uncle Capen within ten years.

Presently a smile broke over his face.

"I must tell you, before I forget it," he said, "how Uncle Capen
nursed one of my patients. Years and years ago, I had John Ellis, our
postmaster now, down with a fever. One night Uncle Capen watched--you
know he was spry and active till he was ninety. Every hour he was to
give Ellis a little ice-water; and when the first time came, he took a
table-spoonful--there was only a dim light in the room--and poured the
ice-water down Ellis's neck. Well, Ellis jumped, as much as so sick a
man could, and then lifted his finger to his lips: 'Here 's my mouth,'
said he. 'Why, why,' said Uncle Capen, 'is that your mouth? I took that
for a wrinkle in your forehead."

The minister laughed.

"I have heard a score of such stories to-day," he said; "there seem to
be enough of them; but I can't find anything adapted to a sermon, and
yet they seem to expect a detailed biography."

"Ah, that's just the trouble," said the Doctor. "But let us go into the
house; my wife remembers everything that ever happens, and she can post
you up on Uncle Capen, if anybody can."

So they crossed the door-yard into the house.

Mrs. Hunter was sewing; a neighbor, come to tea, was crocheting wristers
for her grandson.

They were both talking at once as the Doctor opened the sitting-room
door.

"Since neither of you appears to be listening," he said, as they started
up, "I shall not apologize for interrupting. Mr. Holt is collecting
facts about Uncle Capen for his funeral sermon, and I thought that my
good wife could help him out, if anybody could. So I will leave him."

And the Doctor, nodding, went into the hall for his coat and
driving-gloves, and, going out, disappeared about the corner of the
house.

"You will really oblige me very much, Mrs. Hunter," said the minister,
"--or Mrs. French,--if you can give me any particulars about old Mr.
Capen's life. His family seem to be rather sensitive, and they depend
on a long, old-fashioned funeral sermon; and here I am utterly bare of
facts."

"Why, yes," said Mrs. Hunter; "of course, now--"

"Why, yes; everybody knows all about him," said Mrs. French.

And then they laid their work down and relapsed into meditation.

"Oh!" said Mrs. Hunter, in a moment. "No, though--"

"Why, you know," said Mrs. French,--"no--I guess, on the whole--"

"You remember," said the Doctor's wife to Mrs. French, with a faint
smile, "the time he papered my east chamber--don't you--how he made the
pattern come?"

And then they both laughed gently for a moment.

"Well, I have always known him," said Mrs. French. "But really, being
asked so suddenly, it seems to drive everything out of my head."

"Yes," said Mrs. Hunter, "and it's odd that I can't think of exactly
the thing, just at this min-ute; but if I do, I will run over to the
parsonage this evening."

"Yes, so will I," said Mrs. French; "I know that I shall think of oceans
of things just as soon as you are gone."

"Won't you stay to tea?" said Mrs. Hunter, as Holt rose to go. "The
Doctor has gone; but we never count on him."

"No, I thank you," said Mr. Holt. "If I am to invent a biography, I may
as well be at it."

Mrs. Hunter went with him to the door.

"I must just tell you," she said, "one of Uncle Capen's sayings. It was
long ago, at the time I was married and first came here. I had a young
men's Bible-class in Sunday-school, and Uncle Capen came into it. He
always wore a cap, and sat at meetings with the boys. So, one Sunday,
we had in the lesson that verse,--you know,--that if all these things
should be written, even the world itself could not contain the books
that should be written; and there Uncle Capen stopped me, and said he,
'I suppose that means the world as known to the ancients?'"

Holt put on his hat, and with a smile turned and went on his way toward
the parsonage; but he remembered that he had promised to call at what
the local paper termed "the late residence of the deceased," where, on
the one hundredth birthday of the centenarian, according to the poet's
corner,--

     "Friends, neighbors, and visitors he did receive
     From early in the morning till dewy eve."

So he turned his steps in that direction. He opened the clicking latch
of the gate and rattled the knocker on the front door of the little
cottage; and a tall, motherly woman of the neighborhood appeared and
ushered him in.

Uncle Capen's unmarried daughter, a woman of sixty, her two brothers
and their wives, and half-a-dozen neighbors were sitting in the tidy
kitchen, where a crackling wood-fire in the stove was suggesting a
hospitable cup of tea.

The ministers appearance, breaking the formal gloom, was welcomed.

"Well," said Miss Maria, "I suppose the sermon is all writ by this time.
I think likely you 've come down to read it to us."

"No," said Holt, "I have left the actual writing of it till I get all my
facts. I thought perhaps you might have thought of something else."

"No; I told you everything there was about father yesterday," she said.
"I 'm sure you can't lack of things to put in; why, father lived a
hundred years--and longer, too, for he was a hundred years and six days,
you remember."

"You know," said Holt, "there are a great many things that are very
interesting to a man's immediate friends that don't interest the
public." And he looked to Mr. Small for confirmation.

"Yes, that 's so," said Mr. Small, nodding wisely.

"But, you see, father was a centenarian," said Maria, "and so that makes
everything about him interesting. It's a lesson to the young, you know."

"Oh, yes, that's so," said Mr. Small, "if a man lives to be a
centurion."

"Well, you all knew our good friend," said Mr. Holt. "If any of you will
suggest anything, I shall be very glad to put it in."

Nobody spoke for a moment.

"There's one interesting thing," said one of the sons, a little old man
much like his father; "that is, that none of his children have ever gone
meandering off; we've all remained"--he might almost have said remained
seated--"all our lives, right about him."

"I will allude to that," said Mr. Holt. "I hope you have something else,
for I am afraid of running short of material: you see I am a stranger
here."

"Why, I hope there won't be any trouble about it," said Maria, in sudden
consternation. "I was a little afraid to give it out to so young a man
as you, and I thought some of giving the preference to Father Cobb, but
I did n't quite like to have it go out of the village, nor to deprive
you of the opportunity; and they all assured me that you was smart. But
if you 're feeling nervous, perhaps we 'd better have him still; he 's
always ready."

"Just as you like," said Holt, modestly; "if he would be willing to
preach the sermon, we might leave it that way, and I will add a few
remarks." But Maria's zeal for Father Cobb was a flash in the pan. He
was a sickly farmer, a licensed preacher, who, when he was called
upon occasionally to meet a sudden exigency, usually preached on the
beheading of John the Baptist.

"I guess you 've got things enough to write," said Maria, consolingly;
"you know how awfully a thing doos drag out when you come to write it
down on paper. Remember to tell how we 've all stayed right here."

When Holt went out, he saw Mr. Small beckoning him to come to where his
green wagon stood under a tree.

"I must tell you," he said, with an awkwardly repressed smile, "about a
trade of Uncle Capen's. He had a little lot up our way that they wanted
for a schoolhouse, and he agreed to sell it for what it cost him, and
the selectmen, knowing what it cost him,--fifty dollars,--agreed
with him that way. But come to sign the deed, he called for a hundred
dollars. 'How 's that,' says they; 'you bought it of Captain Sam Bowen
for fifty dollars.' 'Yes, but see here,' says Uncle Capen, 'it's cost
me on an average five dollars a year, for the ten year I 've had it, for
manure and ploughing and seed, and that's fifty dollars more.' But you
've sold the garden stuff off it, and had the money,' says they. 'Yes,'
says Uncle Capen, 'but that money 's spent and eat up long ago!'"

The minister smiled, shook hands with Mr. Small, and went home.

The church was crowded. Horses filled the sheds, horses were tied to the
fences all up and down the street. Funerals are always popular in the
country, and this one had a double element of attractiveness. The whole
population of the town, having watched with a lively interest, for years
back, Uncle Capen's progress to his hundredth birthday, expected now
some electrical effect, analogous to an apotheosis.

In the front pews were the chief mourners, filled with the sweet
intoxication of pre-eminence.

The opening exercises were finished, a hymn was sung,--

     "Life is a span,"

and Father Cobb arose to make his introductory remarks.

He began with some reminiscences of the first time he saw Uncle Capen,
some thirty years before, and spoke of having viewed him even then as
an aged man, and of having remarked to him that he was walking down the
valley of life with one foot in the grave. He called attention to Uncle
Capen's virtues, and pointed out their connection with his longevity.
He had not smoked for some forty years; therefore, if the youth who were
present desired to attain his age, let them not smoke. He had been a
total abstainer, moreover, from his seventieth year; let them, if they
would rival his longevity, follow his example. The good man closed with
a feeling allusion to the relatives, in the front pew, mourning like the
disciples of John the Baptist after his "beheadment" Another hymn was
sung,--

     "A vapor brief and swiftly gone."

Then there was deep silence as the minister rose and gave out his text:
"_I have been young, and now I am old_."

"At the time of the grand review in Washington," he said, "that mighty
pageant that fittingly closed the drama of the war, I was a spectator,
crippled then by a gun-shot wound, and unable to march. From an upper
window I saw that host file by, about to record its greatest triumph by
melting quietly into the general citizenship,--a mighty, resistless army
about to fade and leave no trace, except here and there a one-armed man,
or a blue flannel jacket behind a plough. Often now, when I close my
eyes, that picture rises: that gallant host, those tattered flags; and
I hear the shouts that rose when my brigade, with their flaming scarfs,
went trooping by. Little as I may have done, as a humble member of that
army, no earthly treasure could buy from me the thought of my fellowship
with it, or even the memory of that great review.

"But that display was mere tinsel show compared with the great pageant
that has moved before those few men who have lived through the whole
length of the past hundred years.

"Before me lies the form of a man who, though he has passed his days
with no distinction but that of an honest man, has lived through some of
the most remarkable events of all the ages. For a hundred years a mighty
pageant has been passing before him. I would rather have lived that
hundred years than any other. I am deeply touched to reflect that he who
lately inhabited this cold tenement of clay connects our generation with
that of Washington. And it is impossible to speak of one whose great age
draws together this assembly, without recalling events through which he
lived.

"Our friend was born in this village. This town then included the
adjoining towns to the north and south. The region was then more
sparsely settled, although many houses standing then have disappeared.
While he was sleeping peacefully in the cradle, while he was opening on
the world childhood's wide, wondering eyes, those great men whose names
are our perpetual benediction were planning for freedom from a foreign
yoke. While he was passing through the happy years of early-childhood,
the fierce clash of arms resounded through the little strip of territory
which then made up the United States. I can hardly realize that, as a
child, he heard as a fresh, new, real story, of the deeds of Lexington,
from the lips of men then young who had been in the fight, or listened
as one of an eager group gathered about the fireside, or in the old, now
deserted tavern on the turnpike, to the story of Bunker Hill.

"And when, the yoke of tyranny thrown off, in our country and in France,
Lafayette, the mere mention of whose name brings tears to the eyes of
every true American, came to see the America that he loved and that
loved him, he on whose cold, rigid face I now look down, joined in one
of those enthusiastic throngs that made the visit like a Roman Triumph.

"But turn to the world of Nature, and think of the panoramic scenes that
have passed before those now impassive eyes. In our friend's boyhood
there was no practical mode of swift communication of news. In great
emergencies, to be sure, some patriot hand might flash the beacon-light
from a lofty tower; but news crept slowly over our hand-breath nation,
and it was months after a presidential election before the result was
generally known. He lived to see the telegraph flashing swiftly about
the globe, annihilating time and space and bringing the scattered
nations into greater unity.

"And think, my hearers, for one moment, of the wonders of electricity.
Here is a power which we name but do not know; which flashes through
the sky, shatters great trees, burns buildings, strikes men dead in the
fields; and we have learned to lead it, all unseen, from our house-tops
to the earth; we tame this mighty, secret, unknown power into serving us
as a a daily messenger; and no man sets the limits now to the servitude
that we shall yet bind it down to.

"Again, my hearers, when our friend was well advanced in life, there
was still no better mode of travel between distant points than the slow,
rumbling stage-coach; many who are here remember well its delays and
discomforts. He saw the first tentative efforts of that mighty factor
steam to transport more swiftly. He saw the first railroad built in the
country; he lived to see the land covered with the iron net-work.

"And what a transition is this! Pause for a moment to consider it.
How much does this imply. With the late improvements in agricultural
machinery, with the cheapening of steel rails, the boundless prairie
farms of the West are now brought into competition with the fields
of Great Britain in supplying the Englishman's table, and seem not
unlikely, within this generation, to break down the aristocratic holding
of land, and so perhaps to undermine aristocracy itself."

So the preacher continued, speaking of different improvements, and
lastly of the invention of daguerreotypes and photographs. He called
the attention of his hearers to this almost miraculous art of indelibly
fixing the expression of a countenance, and drew a lesson as to the
permanent effect of our daily looks and expression on those among whom
we live. He considered at length the vast amount of happiness which had
been caused by bringing pictures of loved ones within the reach of all;
the increase of family affection and general good feeling which must
have resulted from the invention; he suggested a possible change in the
civilization of the older nations through the constant sending home, by
prosperous adopted citizens, of photographs of themselves and of
their homes, and alluded to the effect which this must have had upon
immigration.

Finally he adverted to the fact that the sons of the deceased, who sat
before him, had not yielded to the restless spirit of adventure, but had
found "no place like home."

"But I fear," he said at last, "that the interest of my subject has made
me transgress upon your patience; and with a word or two more I will
close.

"When we remember what hard, trying things often arise within a single
day, let us rightly estimate the patient well-doing of a man who has
lived a blameless life for a hundred years. When we remember what harm,
what sin, can be crowded into a single moment, let us rightly estimate
the principle that kept him so close to the Golden Rule, not for a day,
not for a decade or a generation, but for a hundred years.

"And now, as we are about to lay his deserted body in the earth, let not
our perceptions be dulled by the constant repetition in this world of
death and burial. At this hour our friend is no longer aged; wrinkles
and furrows, trembling limbs and snowy locks he has left behind him, and
he knows, we believe, to-day, more than the wisest philosopher on earth.
We may study and argue, all our lives, to discover the nature of life,
or the form it takes beyond the grave; but in one moment of swift
transition the righteous man may learn it all. We differ widely one from
another, here, in mental power. A slight hardening of some tissue of
the brain might have left a Shakspeare an attorney's clerk. But, in the
brighter world, no such impediments prevent, I believe, clear vision and
clear expression; and differences of mind that seem world-wide here, may
vanish there. When the spirit breaks its earthly prison and flies away,
who can tell how bright and free the humblest of us may come to
be! There may be a more varied truth than we commonly think, in the
words,--'The last shall be first.'

"Let this day be remembered. Let us think of the vast display of
Nature's forces which was made within the long period of our old
neighbor's life; but let us also reflect upon the bright pageant that is
now unrolling itself before him in a better world."

That evening Miss Maria and her brothers, sitting in state in the little
old house, received many a caller; and the conversation was chiefly upon
one theme,--not the funeral sermon, although that was commended as a
frank and simple biographical discourse, but the great events which had
accompanied Uncle Capen's progress through this world, almost like those
which Horace records in his Ode to Augustus.

"That's trew, every word," said Apollos Carver; "when Uncle Capen was
a boy there wasn't not one railroad in the hull breadth of the United
States, and just think: why now you can go in a Pullerman car clear'n
acrost to San Francisco. My daughter lives in Oakland, just acrost a
ferry from there."

"Well, then, there 's photographing," said Captain Abel. "It doos seem
amazing, as the minister said: you set down, and square yourself, and
slick your hair, and stare stiddy into a funnel, and a man ducks his
head under a covering, and pop! there you be, as natural as life,--if
not more so. And when Uncle Capen was a young man, there wasn't nothing
but portraits and minnytures, and these black-paper-and-scissors
portraits,--what do they call 'em? Yes, sir, all that come in under his
observation."

"Yes," said one of the sons, "'tis wonderful; my wife and me was took
setting on a settee in the Garding of Eden,--lions and tigers and other
scriptural objects in the background."

"And don't forget the telegrapht," said Maria; "don't forget that."

"Trew," said Apollos, "that's another thing. I hed a message come once-t
from my son that lives to Taunton. We was all so sca't and faint when
we see it, that we did n't none of us dast to open it, and finally the
feller that druv over with it hed to open it fur us."

"What was there in it?" said Mr. Small; "sickness?--death?"

"No, he wanted his thick coat expressed up. But my wife didn't get over
the shock for some time. Wonderful thing, that telegraph--here's a man
standing a hundred miles off, like enough, and harpooning an idea chock
right into your mind."

"Then that was a beautiful truth," said Maria: "that father and
Shakspeare would like enough be changed right round, in Heaven; I always
said father wasn't appreciated here."

"Well," said Apollos, "'tis always so; we don't begin to realize the
value of a thing tell we lose it. Now that we sort o' stand and gaze at
Uncle Capen at a fair distance, as it were, he looms. Ef he only hed n't
kep' so quiet, always, about them 'ere wonders. A man really ought, in
justice to himself, to blow his own horn--jest a little. But that was a
grand discourse, wa'n't it, now?"

"Oh, yes," said Maria, "though I did feel nervous for the young man.
Still, when you come to think what materials he had to make a sermon out
of,--why, how could he help it! And yet, I doubt not he takes all the
credit to himself."

"I should really have liked to have heard Father Cobb treat the
subject," said Mrs. Small, rising to go, and nodding to her husband. "'T
was a grand theme. But 't was a real chance for the new minister. Such
an opportunity doesn't happen not once in a lifetime."

The next morning, after breakfast, on his way home from the post-office,
the minister stopped in at Dr. Hunter's office. The Doctor was reading a
newspaper.

Mr. Holt took a chair in silence.

The Doctor laid down the paper and eyed him quizzically, and then slowly
shook his head.

"I don't know about you ministers," he said. "I attended the funeral;
I heard the biographical discourse; I understand it gave great
satisfaction; I have reflected on it over night; and now, what I want to
know is, what on earth 'there was in it about Uncle Capen."

The minister smiled.

"I think," he replied, "that all that I said about Uncle Capen was
strictly true."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The New Minister's Great Opportunity, by 
Heman White Chaplin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINISTER'S GREAT OPPORTUNITY ***

***** This file should be named 23003.txt or 23003.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/0/0/23003/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
