The Project Gutenberg EBook of "Run To Seed", by Thomas Nelson Page

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: "Run To Seed"
       1891

Author: Thomas Nelson Page

Release Date: October 12, 2007 [EBook #23015]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "RUN TO SEED" ***




Produced by David Widger








"RUN TO SEED."

By Thomas Nelson Page

1891




I.

Jim's father died at Gettysburg; up against the Stone Fence; went to
heaven in a chariot of fire on that fateful day when the issue between
the two parts of the country was decided: when the slaughter on the
Confe'd-erate side was such that after the battle a lieutenant was in
charge of a regiment, and a major commanded a brigade.

This fact was much to Jim, though no one knew it: it tempered his mind:
ruled his life. He never remembered the time when he did not know the
story his mother, in her worn black dress and with her pale face, used
to tell him of the bullet-dented sword and faded red sash which hung on
the chamber wall.

They were the poorest people in the neighborhood. Everybody was poor;
for the county lay in the track of the armies, and the war had swept
the country as clean as a floor. But the Uptons were the poorest even
in that community. Others recuperated, pulled themselves together, and
began after a time to get up. The Uptons got flatter than they were
before. The fences (the few that were left) rotted; the fields grew up
in sassafras and pines; the barns blew down; the houses decayed; the
ditches filled; the chills came.

"They're the shiftlesses' people in the worl'," said Mrs. Wagoner with a
shade of asperity in her voice (or was it satisfaction?). Mrs. Wagoner's
husband had been in a bombproof during the war, when Jim Upton (Jim's
father) was with his company. He had managed to keep his teams from the
quartermasters, and had turned up after the war the richest man in the
neighborhood. He lived on old Colonel Duval's place, which he had bought
for Confederate money.

"They're the shiftlesses' people in the worl'," said Mrs. Wagoner. "Mrs.
Upton ain't got any spirit: she jus' sets still and cries her eyes out."

This was true, every word of it. And so was something else that Mrs.
Wagoner said in a tone of reprobation, about "people who made their beds
having to lay on them"; this process of incubation being too well known
to require further discussion.

But what could Mrs. Upton do? She could not change the course of
Destiny. One--especially if she is a widow with bad eyes, and in feeble
health, living on the poorest place in the State--cannot stop the stars
in their courses. She could not blot out the past, nor undo what she had
done. She would not if she could. She could not undo what she had done
when she ran away with Jim and married him. She would not if she could.
At least, the memory of those three years was hers, and nothing could
take it from her--not debts, nor courts, nor anything. She knew he
was wild when she married him. Certainly Mrs. Wagoner had been careful
enough to tell her so, and to tell every one else so too. She would
never forget the things she had said. Mrs. Wagoner never forgot the
things the young girl said either--though it was more the way she had
looked than what she had said. And when Mrs. Wagoner descanted on the
poverty of the Uptons she used to end with the declaration: "Well, it
ain't any fault of _mine_: she can't blame _me_, for Heaven knows I
warned her: I did _my_ duty!" Which was true. Warning others was a duty
Mrs. Wagoner seldom omitted. Mrs. Upton never thought of blaming her, or
any one else. Not all her poverty ever drew one complaint from her sad
lips. She simply sat down under it, that was all. She did not expect
anything else. She had given her Jim to the South as gladly as any woman
ever gave her heart to her love. She would not undo it if she could--not
even to have him back, and God knew how much she wanted him. Was not his
death glorious--his name a heritage for his son? She could not undo the
debts which encumbered the land; nor the interest which swallowed it up;
nor the suit which took it from her--that is, all but the old house and
the two poor worn old fields which were her dower. She would have given
up those too if it had not been for her children, Jim and Kitty, and
for the little old enclosure on the hill under the big thorn-trees where
they had laid him when they brought him back in the broken pine box from
Gettysburg. No, she could not undo the past, nor alter the present, nor
change the future. So what could she do?

In her heart Mrs. Wagoner was glad of the poverty of the Uptons; not
merely glad in the general negative way which warms the bosoms of most
of us as we consider how much better off we are than our neighbors--the
"Lord-I-thank-thee-that-I-am-not-as-other-men-are" way;--but Mrs.
Wagoner was glad positively. She was glad that any of the Uptons and
the Duvals were poor. One of her grandfathers had been what Mrs. Wagoner
(when she mentioned the matter at all) called "Manager" for one of the
Duvals. She was aware that most people did not accept that term. She
remembered old Colonel Duval--the _old_ Colonel--tall, thin, white,
grave. She had been dreadfully afraid of him. She had had a feeling of
satisfaction at his funeral. It was like the feeling she had when she
learned that Colonel Duval had not forgiven Betty nor left her a cent.

Mrs. Wagoner used to go to see Mrs. Upton--she went frequently. It was
"her duty" she said. She carried her things--especially advice. There
are people whose visits are like spells of illness. It took Mrs. Upton
a fortnight to get over one of these visits--to convalesce. Mrs. Wagoner
was "a mother to her": at least, Mrs. Wagoner herself said so. In some
respects it was rather akin to the substance of that name which forms in
vinegar. It was hard to swallow: it galled. Even Mrs. Upton's gentleness
was overtaxed--and rebelled. She had stood all the homilies--all the
advice. But when Mrs. Wagoner, with her lips drawn in, after wringing
her heart, recalled to her the warning she had given her before she
married, she stopped standing it. She did not say much; but it was
enough to make Mrs. Wagoner's stiff bonnet-bows tremble. Mrs. Wagoner
walked out feeling chills down her spine, as if Colonel Duval were at
her heels. She had "meant to talk about sending Jim to school": at least
she said so. She condoled with every one in the neighborhood on the
"wretched ignorance" in which Jim was growing up, "working like a common
negro." She called him "that ugly boy."

Jim was ugly--Mrs. Wagoner said, very ugly. He was slim, red-headed,
freckle-faced, weak-eyed; he stooped and he stammered. Yet there was
something about him, with his thin features, which made one look twice.
Mrs. Wagoner used to say she did not know where that boy got all his
ugliness from, for she must admit his father was rather good-looking
before he became so bloated, and Betty Duval would have been "passable"
if she had had any "vivacity." There were people who said Betty Duval
had been a beauty. She was careful in her limitations, Mrs. Wagoner
was. Some women will not admit others are pretty, no matter what the
difference in their ages: they feel as if they were making admissions
against themselves.

Once when Jim was a boy Mrs. Wagoner had the good taste to refer in his
presence to his "homeliness," a term with which she sugar-coated her
insult. Jim grinned and shuffled his feet, and then said, "Kitty's
pretty." It was true: Kitty was pretty: she had eyes and hair. You could
not look at her without seeing them--big brown eyes, and brown tumbled
hair. Kitty was fifteen--two years younger than Jim in 187-.

Jim never went to school. They were too poor. All he knew his mother
taught him and he got out of the few old books in the book-case left by
the war,--odd volumes of the Waverley novels, and the _Spectator_, "Don
Quixote," and a few others, stained and battered. He could not have gone
to school if there had been a school to go to: he had to work: work,
as Mrs. Wagoner had truthfully said, "like a common nigger." He did not
mind it; a bird born in a cage cannot mind it much. The pitiful part is,
it does not know anything else. Jim did not know anything else. He did
not mind anything much--except chills. He even got used to them; would
just lie down and shake for an hour and then go to ploughing again as
soon as the ague was over, with the fever on him. He had to plough; for
corn was necessary. He had this compensation: he was worshipped by two
people--his mother and Kitty. If other people thought him ugly, they
thought him beautiful. If others thought him dull, they thought him
wonderfully clever; if others thought him ignorant, they knew how wise
he was.

Mrs. Upton's eyes were bad; but she saw enough to see Jim: the light
came into the house with him; Kitty sat and gazed at him with speechless
admiration; hung on his words, which were few; watched for his smile,
which was rare. He repaid it to her by being--Jim. He slaved for her;
waited for her (when a boy waits for his little sister it is something);
played with her when he had time.

They always went to church--old St. Ann's--whenever there was service.
There was service there since the war only every first and third
Sunday and every other fifth Sunday. The Uptons and the Duvals had been
vestrymen from the time they had brought the bricks over from
England, generations ago. They had sat, one family in one of the front
semicircular pews on one side the chancel, the other family in the
other. Mrs. Upton, after the war, had her choice of the pews; for all
had gone but herself, Jim, and Kitty. She had changed, the Sunday after
her marriage, to the Upton side, and she clung loyally to it ever after.
Mrs. Wagoner had taken the other pew--a cold, she explained at first,
had made her deaf. She always spoke of it afterward as "our pew." (The
Billings, from which Mrs. Wagoner came, had not been Episcopalians until
Mrs. Wagoner married.) Carry Wagoner, who was a year older than Kitty,
used to sit by her mother, with her big hat and brown hair. Jim, in
right of his sex, sat in the end of his pew.

On this Sunday in question Jim drove his mother and Kitty to church in
the horse cart.

The old carriage was a wreck, slowly dropping to pieces. The chickens
roosted in it. The cart was the only vehicle remaining which had two
sound wheels, and even one of these "wabbled" a good deal, and the
cart was "shackling." But straw placed in the bottom made it fairly
comfortable. Jim always had clean straw in it for his mother and sister.
His mother and Kitty remarked on it. Kitty looked so well. They reached
church. The day was warm, Mr. Bickersteth was dry. Jim went to sleep
during the sermon. He frequently did this. He had been up since four.
When service was over he partially waked--about half-waked. He was
standing in the aisle moving toward the door with the rest of the
congregation. A voice behind him caught his ear:

"What a lovely girl Kitty Upton is." It was Mrs. Harrison, who lived at
the other end of the parish. Jim knew the voice. Another voice replied:

"If she only were not always so shabby!" Jim knew this voice also. It
was Mrs. Wagoner's. Jim waked.

"Yes, but even her old darned dress cannot hide her. She reminds me of
------" Jim did not know what it was to which Mrs. Harrison likened her.
But he knew it was something beautiful.

"Yes," said Mrs. Wagoner; then added, "Poor thing, she's got no
education, and never will have. To think that old Colonel Duval's
fam'bly's come to this! Well, they can't blame me. They're clean run to
seed."

Jim got out into the air. He felt sick. He had been hit vitally. This
was what people thought! and it was true. They were "clean run to seed."
He went to get his cart. (He did not speak to Kitty.) His home came
before his eyes like a photograph: fences down, gates gone, houses
ruinous, fields barren. It came to him as if stamped on the retina by a
lightning-flash. He had worked--worked hard. But it was no use. It was
true: they were "clean run to seed." He helped his mother and Kitty into
the cart silently--doggedly. Kitty smiled at him. It hurt him like a
blow. He saw every worn place, every darn in her old dress, and little,
faded jacket. Mrs. Wagoner drove past them in her carriage, leaning out
of the window and calling that she took the liberty of passing as she
drove faster than they. Jim gave his old mule a jerk which made him
throw up his head and wince with pain. He was sorry for it. But he had
been jerked up short himself. He was quivering too.




II.

On the following Friday the President of one of the great railway lines
which cross Virginia was in his office when the door opened after
a gentle knock and some one entered. (The offices of presidents of
railroads had not then become the secret and mysterious sanctums which
they have since become.) The President was busily engaged with two or
three of the Directors, wealthy capitalists from the North, who had come
down on important business. He was very much engrossed; and he did not
look up immediately. When he did so he saw standing inside the door a
queer figure,--long, slim, angular,--a man who looked like a boy, or a
boy who looked like a man--red-headed, freckled-faced, bashful,--in a
coat too tight even for his thin figure, breeches too short for his long
legs; his hat was old and brown; his shirt was clean.

"Well, what do you want?" The President was busy.

It was Jim. His face twitched several times before any sound came:

"--I-w-w-w want t-t-t-to ge-get a place."

"This is not the place to get it. I have no place for you."

The President turned back to his friends. At the end of ten minutes,
seeing one of his visitors look toward the door, he stopped in the
middle of a sentence and glanced around.

The figure was still there--motionless. The President thought he had
been out and come back. He had not.

"Well?" His key was high.

"---------I-I-w-w-want to-to get a place."

"I told you I had no place for you. Go to the Superintendent."

"------_I_ i've b-b-b-been to him."

"Well, what did he say?"

"S-s-s-says he ain't got any place."

"Well, I haven't any. Go to Mr. Blake."

"------Iv'e b-been to _him_.

"Well, go to--to--" The President was looking for a paper. It occupied
his mind.

He did not think any further of Jim. But Jim was there.

"--Go-go where?"

"Oh, I don't know--go anywhere--go out of _here_."

Jim's face worked. He turned and went slowly out. As he reached the door
he said:

"Go-go-good-evening g-gentlemen."

The President's heart relented: "Go to the Superintendent," he called.

Next day he was engaged with his Directors when the door opened and the
same apparition stepped within--tall, slim, red-haired, with his little
tight coat, short trousers, and clean shirt.

The President frowned.

"Well, what is it?"

"-- --I-I-I w-w-w-went to-to the S-S-Superintendent."

"Well, what about it?"

"Y-y-you told me to-to go-go to him. H-e-e ain't got any place." The
Directors smiled. One of them leaned back in his chair, took out a cigar
and prepared to cut the end.

"Well, I can't help it. I haven't anything for you. I told you that
yesterday. You must not come here bothering me; get out."

Jim stood perfectly still--perfectly motionless. He looked as if he had
been there always--would be there always. The Director with the cigar,
having cut it, took out a gold match-box, and opened it slowly, looking
at Jim with an amused smile. The President frowned and opened his mouth
to order him out. He changed his mind.

"What is your name?"

"J-J-James Upton."

"Where from?"

Jim told him.

"Whose son are you?"

"C-C-C-Captain J-J-James Upton's."

"What! You don't look much like him!"

Jim shuffled one foot. One corner of his mouth twitched up curiously.
It might have been a smile. He looked straight at the blank wall before
him.

"You are not much like your mother either--I used to know her as a girl.
How's that?"

Jim shuffled the other foot a little.

"R-r-run to seed, I reckon."

The President was a farmer--prided himself on it. The reply pleased him.
He touched a bell. A clerk entered.

"Ask Mr. Wake to come here."

"Can you carry a barrel of flour?" he asked Jim.

"I-I'll get it there," said Jim. He leaned a little forward. His eyes
opened.

"Or a sack of salt? They are right heavy."

"I-I-I'll get it there," said Jim. His form straightened.

Mr. Wake appeared.

"Write Mr. Day to give this man a place as brakeman."

"Yes, sir. Come this way." This to Jim.

Jim electrified them all by suddenly bursting out crying.

The tension had given way. He walked up to the wall and leaned his head
against it with his face on his arm, shaking from head to foot, sobbing
aloud.

"Thank you, I--I'm ever so much obliged to you," he sobbed.

The President rose and walked rapidly about the room.

Suddenly Jim turned and, with his arm over his eyes, held out his hand
to the President.

"Good-by." Then he went out.

There was a curious smile on the faces of the Directors as the door
closed.

"Well, I never saw anything like that before," said one of them. The
President said nothing.

"Run to seed," quoted the oldest of the Directors, "rather good
expression!"

"Damned good seed, gentlemen," said the President, a little shortly.
"Duval and Upton.--That fellow's father was in my command. Died at
Gettysburg. He'd fight hell."

Jim got a place--brakeman on a freight-train.

That night Jim wrote a letter home. You'd have thought he had been
elected President.

It was a hard life: harder than most. The work was hard; the fare was
hard; the life was hard. Standing on top of rattling cars as they rushed
along in the night around curves, over bridges, through tunnels, with
the rain and snow pelting in your face, and the tops as slippery as ice.
There was excitement about it, too: a sense of risk and danger. Jim did
not mind it much. He thought of his mother and Kitty.

There was a freemasonry among the men. All knew each other; hated or
liked each other; nothing negative about it.

It was a bad road. Worse than the average. Twice the amount of traffic
was done on the single track that should have been done. Result was
men were ground up--more than on most roads. More men were killed in
proportion to the number employed than were killed in service during the
war. The _esprit de corps_ was strong. Men stood by their trains and
by each other. When a man left his engine in sight of trouble, the
authorities might not know about it, but the men did. Unless there was
cause he had to leave. Sam Wray left his engine in sight of a broken
bridge after he reversed. The engine stopped on the track. The officers
never knew of it; but Wray and his fireman both changed to another road.
When a man even got shaky and began to run easy, the superintendent
might not mind it; but the men did: he had to go. A man had to have not
only courage but nerve.

Jim was not especially popular among men. He was reserved, slow,
awkward. He was "pious" (that is, did not swear). He was "stuck up" (did
not tell "funny things," by which was meant vulgar stories; nor laugh at
them either). And according to Dick Rail, he was "stingy as h--l."

These things were not calculated to make him popular, and he was not. He
was a sort of butt for the free and easy men who lived in their cabs and
cabooses, obeyed their "orders," and owned nothing but their overalls
and their shiny Sunday clothes. He was good-tempered, though. Took all
their gibes and "dev'ling" quietly, and for the most part silently. So,
few actually disliked him. Dick Rail, the engineer of his crew, was
one of those few. Dick "dee-spised" him. Dick was big, brawny, coarse:
coarse in looks, coarse in talk, coarse every way, and when he had
liquor in him he was mean. Jim "bothered" him, he said. He made Jim's
life a burden to him. He laid himself out to do it. It became his
occupation. He thought about it when Jim was not present; laid plans for
it. There was something about Jim that was different from most others.
When Jim did not laugh at a "hard story," but just sat still, some men
would stop; Dick always told another harder yet, and called attention
to Jim's looks. His stock was inexhaustible. His mind was like a spring
which ran muddy water; its flow was perpetual. The men thought Jim did
not mind. He lost three pounds; which for a man who was six feet (and
would have been six feet two if he had been straight) and who weighed
122, was considerable.

It is astonishing how one man can create a public sentiment. One woman
can ruin a reputation as effectually as a churchful. One bullet can kill
a man as dead as a bushel, if it hits him right. So Dick Rail injured
Jim. For Dick was an authority. He swore the biggest oaths, wore the
largest watch-chain, knew his engine better and sat it steadier than any
man on the road. He had had a passenger train again and again, but he
was too fond of whiskey. It was too risky. Dick affected Jim's standing:
told stories about him: made his life a burden to him. "He shan't stay
on the road," he used to say.

"He's stingier'n ------! Carries his victuals about with him--I b'lieve
he sleeps with one o' them Italians in a goods box." This was true--at
least, about carrying his food with him. (The rest was Dick's humor.)
Messing cost too much. The first two months' pay went to settle an old
guano-bill; but the third month's pay was Jim's. The day he drew that he
fattened a good deal. At least, he looked so. It was eighty-two dollars
(for Jim ran extra runs;--made double time whenever he could). Jim had
never had so much money in his life; had hardly ever seen it. He walked
about the streets that night till nearly midnight, feeling the wad of
notes in his breast-pocket. Next day a box went down the country, and
a letter with it, and that night Jim could not have bought a chew of
tobacco. The next letter he got from home was heavy. Jim smiled over it
a good deal, and cried a little too. He wondered how Kitty looked in
her new dress, and if the barrel of flour made good bread; and if his
mother's shawl was warm.

One day he was changed to the passenger service, the express. It was a
promotion, paid more, and relieved him from Dick Rail.

He had some queer experiences being ordered around, but he swallowed
them all. He had not been there three weeks when Mrs. Wagoner was a
passenger on the train. Carry was with her. They had moved to town. (Mr.
Wagoner was interested in railroad development.) Mrs. Wagoner called him
to her seat, and talked to him--in a loud voice. Mrs. Wagoner had a loud
voice.

It had the "carrying" quality. She did not shake hands; Carry did
and said she was so glad to see him: she had been down home the week
before--had seen his mother and Kitty. Mrs. Wagoner said, "We still keep
our plantation as a country place." Carry said Kitty looked so well; her
new dress was lovely. Mrs. Wagoner said his mother's eyes were worse.
She and Kitty had walked over to see them, to show Kitty's new dress.
She had promised that Mr. Wagoner would do what he could for him
(Jim) on the road. Next month Jim went back to the freight service. He
preferred Dick Rail to Mrs. Wagoner. He got him. Dick was worse than
ever, his appetite was whetted by abstinence; he returned to his attack
with renewed zest. He never tired--never flagged. He was perpetual: he
was remorseless. He made Jim's life a wilderness. Jim said nothing, just
slouched along silenter than ever, quieter than ever, closer than
ever. He took to going on Sunday to another church than the one he had
attended, a more fashionable one than that. The Wagoners went there. Jim
sat far back in the gallery, very far back, where he could just see the
top of Carry's head, her big hat and her face, and could not see Mrs.
Wagoner, who sat nearer the gallery. It had a curious effect on him:
he never went to sleep there. He took to going up-town walking by the
stores--looking in at the windows of tailors and clothiers. Once he
actually went into a shop and asked the price of a new suit of clothes.
(He needed them badly.) The tailor unfolded many rolls of cloth and
talked volubly: talked him dizzy. Jim looked wistfully at them, rubbed
his hand over them softly, felt the money in his pocket; and came out.
He said he thought he might come in again. Next day he did not have the
money. Kitty wrote him she could not leave home to go to school on their
mother's account, but she would buy books, and she was learning; she
would learn fast, her mother was teaching her; and he was the best
brother in the world, the whole world; and they had a secret, but he
must wait.

One day Jim got a big bundle from down the country. It was a new suit
of clothes. On top was a letter from Kitty. This was the secret. She
and her mother had sent for the cloth and had made them; they hoped they
would fit. They had cried over them. Jim cried a little too. He put them
on. They did not fit, were much too large. Under Dick Rail's fire Jim
had grown even thinner than before. But he wore them to church. He felt
that it would have been untrue to his mother and Kitty not to wear
them. He was sorry to meet Dick Rail on the street. Dick had on a black
broadcloth coat, a velvet vest, and large-checked trousers. Dick looked
Jim over. Jim winced, flushed a little: he was not so sunburned now.
Dick saw it. Next week Dick caught Jim in a crowd in the "yard" waiting
for their train. He told about the meeting. He made a double shot. He
said, "Boys, Jim's in love, he's got new clothes! you ought to see 'em!"
Dick was graphic; he wound up: "They hung on him like breechin' on his
old mule. By ----! I b'lieve he was too ------ stingy to buy 'em and
made 'em himself." There was a shout from the crowd. Jim's face worked.
He jumped for him. There was a handspike lying near and he seized it.
Some one grabbed him, but he shook him off as if he had been a child.
Why he did not kill Dick no one ever knew. He meant to do it.

For some time they thought he was dead. He laid off for over a month.
After that Jim wore what clothes he chose: no one ever troubled him.

So he went on in the same way: slow, sleepy, stuttering, thin, stingy,
ill-dressed, lame.

He was made a fireman; preferred it to being a conductor, it led to
being an engineer, which paid more. He ran extra trips whenever he
could, up and double straight back. He could stand an immense amount of
work. If he got sleepy he put tobacco in his eyes to keep them open. It
was bad for the eyes, but waked him up. Kitty was going to take music
next year, and that cost money. He had not been home for several months,
but was going at Christmas.

They did not have any sight tests then. But the new Directory meant
to be thorough. Mr. Wagoner had become a Director, had his eye on the
presidency. Jim was one day sent for, and was asked about his eyes. They
were bad. There was not a doubt about it. They were inflamed; he could
not see a hundred yards. He did not tell them about the extra trips and
putting the tobacco in them. Dick Rail must have told about him. They
said he must go. Jim turned white. He went to his little room, close up
under the roof of a little dingy house in a back street, and sat down in
the dark; thought about his mother and Kitty, and dimly about some
one else; wrote his mother and Kitty a letter; said he was coming
home--called it "a visit"; cried over the letter, but was careful not to
cry on it. He was a real cry-baby--Jim was.

"Just run to seed," he said to himself, bitterly, over and over; "just
run to seed." Then he went to sleep.

The following day he went down to the railroad. That was the last day.
Next day he would be "off." The train-master saw him and called him. A
special was just going out. The Directors were going over the road in
the officers' car. Dick Rail was the engineer, and his fireman had been
taken sick. Jim must take the place. Jim had a mind not to do it. He
hated Dick. He thought of how he had pursued him. But he heard a voice
behind him and turned. Carry was standing down the platform, talking
with some elderly gentlemen. She had on a travelling cap and ulster. She
saw him and came forward--a step:

"How do you do?" she held out her little gloved hand. She was going out
over the road with her father. Jim took off his hat and shook hands with
her. Dick Rail saw him, walked round the other side of the engine, and
tried to take off his hat like that. It was not a success; Dick knew it.

Jim went.

"Who was that?" one of the elderly gentlemen asked Carry.

"An old friend of mine--a gentleman," she said.

"Rather run to seed--hey?" the old fellow quoted, without knowing
exactly why; for he only half recognized Jim, if he recognized him at
all.

They started.

It was a bad trip. The weather was bad, the road was bad, the engine
bad; Dick bad;--worse than all. Jim had a bad time: he was to be off
when he got home. What would his mother and Kitty do?

Once Carry came (brought by the President) and rode in the engine for a
little while. Jim helped her up and spread his coat for her to sit on,
put his overcoat under her feet; his heart was in it. Dick was sullen,
and Jim had to show her about the engine. When she got down to go back
to the car she thanked him--she "had enjoyed it greatly"--she "would
like to try it again." Jim smiled. He was almost good-looking when he
smiled.

Dick was meaner than ever after that, sneered at Jim--swore; but Jim
didn't mind it. He was thinking of some one else, and of the rain which
would prevent her coming again.

They were on the return trip, and were half-way home when the accident
happened. It was just "good dusk," and it had been raining all night and
all day, and the road was as rotten as mud. The special was behind and
was making up. She had the right of way, and she was flying. She rounded
a curve just above a small "fill," under which was a little stream,
nothing but a mere "branch." In good weather it would never be noticed.
The gay party behind were at dinner. The first thing they knew was the
sudden jerk which came from reversing the engine at full speed, and the
grind as the wheels slid along under the brakes. Then they stopped with
a bump which jerked them out of their seats, set the lamps to swinging,
and sent the things on the table crashing on the floor. No one was hurt,
only shaken, and they crowded out of the car to learn the cause. They
found it. The engine was half buried in wet earth on the other side of
the little washout, with the tender jammed up into the cab. The whole
was wrapped in a dense cloud of escaping steam. The roar was terrific.
The big engineer, bare-headed and covered with mud, and with his face
deadly white, was trying to get down to the engine. Some one was in
there.

They got him out after a while (but it took some time), and laid him on
the ground, while a mattress was got. It was Jim.

Carry had been weeping and praying. She sat down and took his head in
her lap, and with her lace handkerchief wiped his blackened and bleeding
face, and smoothed his wet hair.

The newspaper accounts, which are always reflections of what
public sentiment is, or should be, spoke of it--some, as "a
providential"--others, as "a miraculous"--and yet others as "a
fortunate" escape on the part of the President and the Directors of
the road, according to the tendencies, religious or otherwise, of their
paragraphists.

They mentioned casually that "only one person was hurt--an employee,
name not ascertained." And one or two had some gush about the devotion
of the beautiful young lady, the daughter of one of the directors of
the road, who happened to be on the train, and who, "like a ministering
angel, held the head of the wounded man in her lap after he was taken
from the wreck." A good deal was made of this picture, which was
extensively copied.

Dick Rail's account, after he had come back from carrying the broken
body down to the old Upton place in the country, and helping to lay it
away in the old enclosure under the big trees on the hill, was this:

"By ----!" he said, when he stood in the yard, with a solemn-faced group
around him, "we were late, and I was just shaking 'em up. I had been
meaner'n hell to Jim all the trip (I didn't know him, and you all didn't
neither), and I was workin' him for all he was worth: I didn't give
him a minute. The sweat was rolling off him, and I was damnin' him with
every shovelful. We was runnin' under orders to make up, and we was just
rounding the curve this side of Ridge Hill, when Jim hollered. He saw
it as he raised up with the shovel in his hand to wipe the sweat off his
face, and he hollered to me, 'My God! Look, Dick! Jump!'

"I looked and Hell was right there. He caught the lever and reversed,
and put on the air and sand before I saw it, and then grabbed me, and
flung me clean out of the cab: 'Jump!' he says, as he give me a swing.
I jumped, expectin' of course he was comin' too; and as I lit, I saw him
turn and catch the lever. The old engine was jumpin' nigh off the track.
But she was too near. In she went, and the tender right on her. You may
talk about his eyes bein' bad; but by ----! when he gave me that swing,
they looked to me like coals of fire. When we got him out 'twarn't Jim!
He warn't nothin' but mud and ashes. He warn't quite dead; opened his
eyes, and breathed onct or twict; but I don't think he knew anything, he
was so mashed up. We laid him out on the grass, and that young lady took
his head in her lap and cried over him (she had come and seed him in
the engine), and said she knew his mother and sister down in the country
(she used to live down there); they was gentlefolks; that Jim was
all they had. And when one of them old director-fellows who had been
swilling himself behind there come aroun', with his kid gloves on and
his hands in his great-coat pockets, lookin' down, and sayin' something
about, 'Poor fellow, couldn't he 'a jumped? Why didn't he jump?' I let
him have it; I said, 'Yes, and if it hadn't been for him, you and I'd
both been frizzin' in h--l this minute.' And the President standin'
there said to some of them, 'That was the same young fellow who came
into my office to get a place last year when you were down, and said
he had "run to seed." 'But,' he says, 'Gentlemen, it was d----d good
seed!'"

How good it was no one knew but two weeping women in a lonely house.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of "Run To Seed", by Thomas Nelson Page

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "RUN TO SEED" ***

***** This file should be named 23015.txt or 23015.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/0/1/23015/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
