The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dead Are Silent, by Arthur Schnitzler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Dead Are Silent
       1907

Author: Arthur Schnitzler

Release Date: October 17, 2007 [EBook #23061]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEAD ARE SILENT ***




Produced by David Widger





THE DEAD ARE SILENT

By Arthur Schnitzler

Copyright, 1907, by Courtland H. Young


HE could endure the quiet waiting in the carriage no longer; it was
easier to get out and walk up and down. It was now dark; the few
scattered lamps in the narrow side street quivered uneasily in the wind.
The rain had stopped, the sidewalks were almost dry, but the rough-paved
roadway was still moist, and little pools gleamed here and there.

"Strange, isn't it?" thought Franz. "Here we are scarcely a hundred
paces from the Prater, and yet it might be a street in some little
country town. Well, it's safe enough, at any rate. She won't meet any of
the friends she dreads so much here."

He looked at his watch. "Only just seven, and so dark already! It is an
early autumn this year... and then this confounded storm I..." He turned
his coat-collar up about his neck and quickened his pacing. The glass in
the street lamps rattled lightly.

"Half an hour more," he said to himself, "then I can go home. I could
almost wish--that that half-hour were over." He stood for a moment
on the corner, where he could command a view of both streets. "She'll
surely come to-day," his thoughts ran on, while he struggled with his
hat, which threatened to blow away. "It's Friday.... Faculty meeting
at the University; she needn't hurry home." He heard the clanging of
street-car gongs, and the hour chimed from a nearby church tower. The
street became more animated. Hurrying figures passed him, clerks of
neighboring shops; they hastened onward, fighting against the storm.
No one noticed him; a couple of half-grown girls glanced up in idle
curiosity as they went by. Suddenly he saw a familiar figure coming
toward him. He hastened to meet her.... Could it be she? On foot?

She saw him, and quickened her pace.

"You are walking?" he asked.

"I dismissed the cab in front of the theatre. I think I've had that
driver before."

A man passed them, turning to look at the lady. Her companion glared at
him, and the other passed on hurriedly. The lady looked after him. "Who
was it?" she asked, anxiously.

"Don't know him. We'll see no one we know here, don't worry. But come
now, let's get into the cab."

"Is that your carriage?"

"Yes."

"An open one?"

"It was warm and pleasant when I engaged it an hour ago."

They walked to the carriage; the lady stepped in.

"Driver!" called the man.

"Why, where is he?" asked the lady.

Franz looked around. "Well, did you ever? I don't see him anywhere."

"Oh--" her tone was low and timid.

"Wait a moment, child, he must be around here somewhere."

The young man opened the door of a little saloon, and discovered his
driver at a table with several others. The man rose hastily. "In a
minute, sir," he explained, swallowing his glass of wine.

"What do you mean by this?"

"All right, sir... Be there in a minute." His step was a little unsteady
as he hastened to his horses. "Where'll you go, sir?"

"Prater--Summer-house."

Franz entered the carriage. His companion sat back in a corner,
crouching fearsomely under the shadow of the cover.

He took both her hands in his. She sat silent. "Won't you say good
evening to me?"

"Give me a moment to rest, dear. I'm still out of breath."

He leaned back in his corner. Neither spoke for some minutes. The
carriage turned into the Prater Street, passed the Tegethoff Monument,
and a few minutes later was rolling swiftly through the broad, dark
Prater Avenue.

Emma turned suddenly and flung both arms around her lover's neck. He
lifted the veil that still hung about her face, and kissed her.

"I have you again--at last!" she exclaimed.

"Do you know how long it is since we have seen each other?" he asked.

"Since Sunday."

"Yes, and that wasn't good for much."

"Why not? You were in our house."

"Yes--in your house. That's just it. This can't go on. I shall not enter
your house again.... What's the matter?"

"A carriage passed us."

"Dear girl, the people who are driving in the Prater at such an hour,
and in such weather, aren't noticing much what other people are doing."

"Yes--that's so. But some one might look in here, by chance."

"We couldn't be recognized. It's too dark."

"Yes--but can't we drive somewhere else?"

"Just as you like." He called to the driver, who did not seem to hear.
Franz leaned forward and touched the man.

"Turn around again. What are you whipping your horses like that for?
We're in no hurry, I tell you. Drive--let me see--yes--drive down the
avenue that leads to the Reichs Bridge."

"The Reichsstrasse?"

"Yes. But don't hurry so, there's no need of it."

"All right, sir. But it's the wind that makes the horses so crazy."

Franz sat back again as the carriage turned in the other direction.

"Why didn't I see you yesterday?"

"How could I?"...

"You were invited to my sister's."

"Oh--yes."

"Why weren't you there?"

"Because I can't be with you--like that--with others around. No, I just
can't." She shivered. "Where are we now?" she asked, after a moment.

They were passing under the railroad bridge at the entrance to the
Reichsstrasse.

"On the way to the Danube," replied Franz. "We're driving toward the
Reichs Bridge. We'll certainly not meet any of our friends here," he
added, with a touch of mockery.

"The carriage jolts dreadfully."

"We're on cobblestones again."

"But he drives so crooked."

"Oh, you only think so."

He had begun to notice himself that the vehicle was swaying to and
fro more than was necessary, even on the rough pavement. But he said
nothing, not wishing to alarm her.

"There's a great deal I want to say to you today, Emma."

"You had better begin then; I must be home at nine o'clock."

"A few words may decide everything."

"Oh, goodness, what was that!" she screamed. The wheels had caught in a
car-track, and the carriage turned partly over as the driver attempted
to free it. Franz caught at the man's coat. "Stop that!" he cried. "Why,
you're drunk, man!"

The driver halted his horses with some difficulty. "Oh, no--sir--"

"Let's get out here, Emma, and walk."

"Where are we?"

"Here's the bridge already. And the wind is not nearly as strong as
it was. It will be nicer to walk a little. It's so hard to talk in the
carriage."

Emma drew down her veil and followed him. "Don't you call this windy?"
she exclaimed as she struggled against the gust that met her at the
corner.

He took her arm, and called to the driver to follow them.

They walked on slowly. Neither spoke as they mounted the ascent of the
bridge; and they halted where they could hear the flow of the water
below them. Heavy darkness surrounded them. The broad stream stretched
itself out in gray, indefinite outlines; red lights in the distance,
floating above the water, awoke answering gleams from its surface.
Trembling stripes of light reached down from the shore they had just
left; on the other side of the bridge the river lost itself in the
blackness of open fields. Thunder rumbled in the distance; they looked
over to where the red lights soared. A train with lighted windows rolled
between iron arches that seemed to spring up out of the night for an
instant, to sink back into darkness again. The thunder grew fainter and
more distant; silence fell again; only the wind moved, in sudden gusts.

Franz spoke at last, after a long silence. "We must go away."

"Of course," Emma answered, softly.

"We must go away," he continued, with more animation. "Go away
altogether, I mean--"

"Oh, we can't!"

"Only because we are cowards, Emma."

"And my child?"

"He will let you have the boy, I know."

"But how shall we go?" Her voice was very low. "You mean--to run away--"

"Not at all. You have only to be honest with him; to tell him that you
cannot live with him any longer; that you belong to me."

"Franz--are you mad?"

"I will spare you that trial, if you wish. I will tell him myself."

"No, Franz, you will do nothing of the kind."

He endeavored to read her face. But the darkness showed him only that
her head was turned toward him.

He was silent a few moments more. Then he spoke quietly: "You need not
fear; I shall not do it."

They walked toward the farther shore. "Don't you hear a noise?" she
asked. "What is it?"

"Something is coming from the other side," he said.

A slow rumbling came out of the darkness. A little red light gleamed out
at them. They could see that it hung from the axle of a clumsy country
cart, but they could not see whether the cart was laden or not and
whether there were human beings on it. Two other carts followed the
first. They could just see the outlines of a man in peasant garb on the
last cart, and could see that he was lighting his pipe. The carts passed
them slowly. Soon there was nothing to be heard but the low rolling
of the wheels as their own carriage followed them. The bridge dropped
gently to the farther shore. They saw the street disappear into
blackness between rows of trees. Open fields lay before them to the
right and to the left; they gazed out into gloom indistinguishable.

There was another long silence before Franz spoke again. "Then it is the
last time--"

"What?--" Emma's tone was anxious.

"The last time we are to be together. Stay with him, if you will. I bid
you farewell."

"Are you serious?"

"Absolutely."

"There, now you see, it is you who always spoil the few hours we have
together?--not I."

"Yes, you're right," said Franz. "Let's drive back to town."

She held his arm closer. "No," she insisted, tenderly, "I don't want to
go back. I won't be sent away from you."

She drew his head down to hers, and kissed him tenderly. "Where would we
get to if we drove on down there?" she asked.

"That's the road to Prague, dear."

"We won't go quite that far," she smiled, "but I'd like to drive on a
little, down there." She pointed into the darkness.

Franz called to the driver. There was no answer; the carriage rumbled
on, slowly. Franz ran after it, and saw that the driver was fast asleep.
Franz roused him roughly. "We want to drive on down that street. Do you
hear me?"

"All right, sir."

Emma entered the carriage first, then Franz. The driver whipped his
horses, and they galloped madly over the moist earth of the road-bed.
The couple inside the cab held each other closely as they swayed with
the motion of the vehicle.

"Isn't this quite nice?" whispered Emma, her lips on his.

In the moment of her words she seemed to feel the cab mounting into the
air. She felt herself thrown over violently, readied for some hold, but
grasped only the empty air. She seemed to be spinning madly like a top,
her eyes closed, suddenly she found herself lying on the ground, a great
silence about her, as if she were alone, far away from all the world.
Then noises began to come into her consciousness again; hoofs beat the
ground near her; a low moaning came from somewhere; but she could
see nothing. Terror seized her; she screamed aloud. Her terror grew
stronger, for she could not hear her own voice. Suddenly she knew what
had happened; the carriage had hit some object, possibly a mile-stone;
had upset, and she had been thrown out. Where is Franz? was her next
thought. She called his name. And now she could hear her voice, not
distinctly yet, but she could hear it. There was no answer to her call.
She tried to get up. After some effort she rose to a sitting, posture,
and, reaching out, she felt something, a human body, on the ground
beside her. She could now begin to see a little through the dimness.
Franz lay beside her, motionless. She put out her hand and touched
his face; something warm and wet covered it. Her heart seemed to
stop beating--Blood?--Oh, what had happened? Franz was wounded and
unconscious. Where was the coachman? She called him, but no answer
came. She still sat there on the ground. She did not seem to be injured,
although she ached all over. "What shall I do?" she thought; "what shall
I do? How can it be that I am not injured? Franz!" she called again. A
voice answered from somewhere near her.

"Where are you, lady? And where is the gentleman? Wait a minute,
Miss--I'll light the lamps, so we can see. I don't know what's got into
the beasts to-day. It ain't my fault, Miss, sure--they ran into a pile
of stones."

Emma managed to stand up, although she was bruised all over. The fact
that the coachman seemed quite uninjured reassured her somewhat.
She heard the man opening the lamp and striking a match. She waited
anxiously for the light. She did not dare to touch Franz again. "It's
all so much worse when you can't see plainly," she thought. "His eyes
may be open now--there won't be anything wrong...."

A tiny ray of light came from one side. She saw the carriage, not
completely upset, as she had thought, but leaning over toward the
ground, as if one wheel were broken. The horses stood quietly. She saw
the milestone, then a heap of loose stones, and beyond them a ditch.
Then the light touched Franz's feet, crept up over his body to his face,
and rested there. The coachman had set the lamp on the ground beside the
head of the unconscious man. Emma dropped to her knees, and her heart
seemed to stop beating as she looked into the face before her. It was
ghastly white; the eyes were half open, only the white showing. A thin
stream of blood trickled down from one temple and ran into his collar.
The teeth were fastened into the under lip. "No--no--it isn't possible,"
Emma spoke, as if to herself.

The driver knelt also and examined the face of the man. Then he took
the head in both his hands and raised it. "What are you doing?" screamed
Emma, hoarsely, shrinking back at the sight of the head that seemed to
be rising of its own volition.

"Please, Miss--I'm afraid--I'm thinking--there's a great misfortune
happened--"

"No--no--it's not true!" said Emma. "It can't be true!--You are not
hurt? Nor am I--"

The man let the head he held fall back again into the lap of the
trembling Emma. "If only some one would come--if the peasants had only
passed fifteen minutes later."

"What shall we do?" asked Emma, her lips trembling.

"Why, you see, Miss, if the carriage was all right--but it's no good as
it is--we've got to wait till some one comes--" he talked on, but Emma
did not hear him. Her brain seemed to awake suddenly, and she knew what
was to be done. "How far is it to the nearest house?" she asked.

"Not much further, Miss--there's Franz-Josef's land right there. We'd see
the houses if it was lighter--it won't take five minutes to get there."

"Go there, then; I'll stay here--Go and fetch some one."

"I think I'd better stay here with you, Miss. Somebody must come; it's
the main road."

"It'll be too late; we need a doctor at once."

The coachman looked down at the quiet face, then he looked at Emma, and
shook his head.

"You can't tell," she cried.

"Yes, Miss--but there'll be no doctor in those houses."

"But there'll be somebody to send to the city--"

"Oh, yes, Miss--they'll be having a telephone there, anyway! We'll
telephone to the Rescue Society."

"Yes, yes, that's it. Go at once, run--and bring some men back with you.
Why do you wait? Go at once. Hurry!"

The man looked down again at the white face in her lap. "There'll be no
use here for doctor or Rescue Society, Miss."

"Oh, go!--for God's sake go!"

"I'm going, Miss--but don't get afraid in the darkness here."

He hurried down the street. "'Twasn't my fault," he murmured as he ran.
"Such an idea! to drive down this road this time o' night."

Emma was left alone with the unconscious man in the gloomy street.

"What shall I do now?" she thought "It can't be possible--it can't." The
thought circled dizzily in her brain--"It can't be possible." Suddenly
she seemed to hear a low breathing. She bent to the pale lips--no--not
the faintest breath came from them. The blood had dried on temple and
cheek. She gazed at the eyes, the half-closed eyes, and shuddered. Why
couldn't she believe it?... It must be true--this was Death! A shiver
ran through her--she felt but one thing--"This is a corpse. I am here
alone with a corpse!--a corpse that rests on my lap!" With trembling
hands she pushed the head away, until it rested on the ground. Then
a feeling of horrible alone-ness came over her. Why had she sent the
coachman away? What should she do here all alone with this dead man in
the darkness? If only some one would come--but what was she to do then
if anybody did come? How long would she have to wait here? She looked
down at the corpse again. "But I'm not alone with him," she thought,
"the light is there." And the light seemed to her to become alive,
something sweet and friendly, to which she owed gratitude. There was
more life in this little flame than in all the wide night about her. It
seemed almost as if this light was a protection for her, a protection
against the terrible pale man who lay on the ground beside her. She
stared into the light until her eyes wavered and the flame began to
dance. Suddenly she felt herself awake--wide awake. She sprang to her
feet. Oh, this would not do! It would not do at all--no one must find
her here with him. She seemed to be outside of herself, looking at
herself standing there on the road, the corpse and the light below her;
she saw herself grow into strange, enormous proportions, high up into
the darkness. "What am I waiting for?" she asked herself, and her brain
reeled. "What am I waiting for? The people who might come? They don't
need me. They will come, and they will ask questions--and I--why am I
here? They will ask who I am--what shall I answer? I will not answer
them--I will not say a word--they cannot compel me to talk."

The sound of voices came from the distance.

"Already?" she thought, listening in terror. The voices came from the
bridge. It could not be the men the driver was bringing with him. But
whoever it was would see the light--and they must not see it, for then
she would be discovered. She overturned the lantern with her foot,
and the light went out. She stood in utter darkness. She could see
nothing--not even him. The pile of % stones shone dimly. The voices came
nearer. She trembled from head to foot; they must not find her here.
That was the only thing of real importance in all the wide world--that
no one should find her here. She would be lost if they knew that
this--this corpse--was her lover. She clasps her hands convulsively,
praying that the people, whoever they were, might pass by on the farther
side of the road, and not see her. She listens breathless. Yes, they are
there, on the other side--women, two women, or perhaps three. What are
they talking about? They have seen the carriage, they speak of it--she
can distinguish words. "A carriage upset--" What else do they
say? She cannot understand--they walk on--they have passed
her--Ah--thanks--thanks to Heaven!--And now? What now? Oh, why isn't
she dead, as he is? He is to be envied; there is no more danger, no more
fear for him. But so much--so much for her to tremble for. She shivers
at the thought of being found here, of being asked, "Who are you?" She
will have to go to the police station, and all the world will know about
it--her husband--her child. She cannot understand why she has stood
there motionless so long. She need not stay here--she can do no good
here--and she is only courting disaster for herself. She makes a step
forward--Careful! the ditch is here--she crosses it--how wet it is--two
paces more and she is in the middle of the street. She halts a moment,
looks straight ahead, and can finally distinguish the gray line of the
road leading onward into darkness. There--over there--lies the city. She
cannot see it, but she knows the way. She turns once more. It does
not seem so dark now. She can see the carriage and the horses quite
distinctly--and, looking hard, she seems to see the outline of a human
body on the ground. Her eyes open wide. Something seems to clutch at her
and hold her here--it is he--she feels his power to keep her with him.
With an effort she frees herself. Then she perceives that
it was the soft mud of the road that held her. And she walks
onward--faster--faster--her pace quickens to a run. Only to be away from
here, to be back in the light--in the noise--among men. She runs along
the street, raising her skirt high, that her steps may not be hindered.
The wind is behind her, and seems to push her along. She does not know
what it is she flees from. Is it the pale man back there by the ditch?
No, now she knows, she flees the living, not the dead, the living, who
will soon be there, and who will look for her. What will they think?
Will they follow her? But they cannot catch up with her now, she is so
far away, she is nearing the bridge, there is danger. No one can know
who she was, no one can possibly imagine who the woman was who drove
down through the country road with the dead man. The driver does not
know her; he would not recognize her if he should ever see her again.
They will not take the trouble to find out who she is. Who cares? It was
wise of her not to stay--and it was not cowardly either. Franz himself
would say it was wise. She must go home; she has a husband, a child; she
would be lost if any one should see her there with her dead lover. There
is the bridge; the street seems lighter--she hears the water beneath
her. She stands there, where they stood together, arm in arm--when was
it? How many hours ago? It cannot be long since then. And yet--perhaps
she lay unconscious long, and it is midnight now, or near morning, and
they have missed her at home. Oh, no--it is not possible. She knows
that she was not unconscious, she remembers everything clearly. She runs
across the bridge, shivering at the sound of her own steps. Now she sees
a figure coming toward her; she slows her pace. It is a man in uniform.
She walks more slowly, she does not want to attract attention. She feels
the man's eyes resting on her--suppose he stops her! Now he is quite
near; it is a policeman. She walks calmly past him, and hears him stop
behind her. With an effort she continues in the same slow pace. She
hears the jingle of street-car bells--ah, it cannot be midnight yet. She
walks more quickly--hurrying toward the city, the lights of which begin
there by the railroad viaduct--the growing noise tells her how near she
is. One lonely stretch of street, and then she is safe. Now she hears
a shrill whistle coming rapidly nearer--a wagon flies swiftly past her.
She stops and looks after it; it is the ambulance of the Rescue Society.
She knows where it is going. "How quickly they have come," she thinks;
"it is like magic." For a moment she feels that she must call to them,
must go back with them. Shame, terrible, overwhelming shame, such las
she has never known before, shakes her from head to foot--she knows how
vile, how cowardly she is. Then, as the whistle and the rumble of
wheels fade away in the distance, a mad joy takes hold of her. She is
saved--saved! She hurries on; she meets more people, but she does not
fear them--the worst is over. The noise of the city grows louder, the
street is lighter, the skyline of the Prater street rises before her,
and she knows that she can sink into a flood tide of humanity there and
lose herself in it. When she comes to a street lamp she is quite calm
enough now to take out her watch and look at it. It is ten minutes to
nine. She holds the watch to her ear--it is ticking merrily. And she
thinks: "Here I am, alive, unharmed--and he--he--dead. It is Fate." She
feels as if all had been forgiven--as if she had never sinned. And what
if Fate had willed otherwise? If it were she lying there in the ditch,
and he who remained alive? He would not have run away--but then he is
a man. She is only a woman, she has a husband, a child--it was her
right--her duty--to save herself. She knows that it was not a sense of
duty that impelled her to do it. But what she has done was right--she
had done right instinctively--as all good people do. If she had stayed
she would have been discovered by this time. The doctors would question
her. And all the papers would report it next morning; she would have
been ruined forever, and yet her ruin could not bring him back to life.
Yes, that was the main point, her sacrifice would have been all in
vain. She crosses under the railway bridge and hurries on. There is the
Tegethoff Column, where so many streets meet. There are but few people
in the park on this stormy evening, but to her it seems as if the life
of the city was roaring about her. It was so horribly still back there.
She had plenty of time now. She knows that her husband will not be home
before ten o'clock. She will have time to change her clothes. And then
it occurs to her to look at her gown. She is horrified to see how soiled
it is. What shall she say to the maid about it? And next morning the
papers will all bring the story of the accident, and they will tell of a
woman. Who had been in the carriage, and who had run away. She trembled
afresh. One single carelessness and she is lost, even now. But she has
her latch-key with her; she can let herself in; no one will hear her
come. She jumps into a cab and is about to give her address, then
suddenly she remembers that this would not be wise. She gives any number
that occurs to her.

As she drives through the Prater street she wishes that she might feel
something--grief-horror--but she cannot. She has but one thought, one
desire--to be at home, in safety. All else is indifferent to her. When
she had decided to leave him alone, dead, by the roadside--in that
moment everything seemed to have died within her, everything that
would mourn and grieve for him. She has no feeling but that of fear for
herself. She is not heartless--she knows that the day will come when her
sorrow will be despair--it may kill her even. But she knows nothing now,
except the desire to sit quietly at home, at the supper table with her
husband and child. She looks out through the cab window. She is driving
through the streets of the inner city. It is brilliantly light here,
and many people hurry past. Suddenly all that she has experienced in
the last few hours seems not to be true, it is like an evil dream;
not something real, irreparable. She stops her cab in one of the side
streets of the Ring, gets out, turns a corner quickly, and takes another
carriage, giving her own address this time. She does not seem able to
think of anything any more. "Where is he now?" She closes her eyes and
sees him on the litter, in the ambulance. Suddenly she feels that he is
here beside her. The cab sways, she feels the terror of being thrown out
again, and she screams aloud. The cab halts before the door of her home.
She dismounts hastily, hurries with light steps through the house door,
unseen by the concierge, runs up the stairs, opens her apartment door
very gently, aind slips unseen into her own room. She undresses hastily,
hiding the mud-stained clothes in her cupboard. To-morrow, when they are
dry, she can clean them herself. She washes hands and face, and slips
into a loose housegown.

The bell rings. She hears the maid open the door, she hears her
husband's voice, and the rattle of his cane on the hat-stand. She feels
she must be brave now or it will all have been in vain. She hurries to
the dining-room, entering one door as her husband comes in at the other.

"Ah, you're home already?" he asks.

"Why, yes," she replies, "I have been home some time."

"They evidently didn't hear you come in."

She smiles without effort. But it fatigues her horribly to have to
smile. He kisses her forehead.

The little boy is already at his place by the table. He has been waiting
some time, and has fallen asleep, his head resting on an open book.

She sits down beside him; her husband takes his chair opposite, takes
up a paper, and glances carelessly at it. Then he says: "The others are
still talking away there."

"What about?" she asks.

And he begins to tell her about the meeting, at length. Emma pretends to
listen, and nods now and then. But she does not hear what he is saying,
she feels dazed, like one who has escaped terrible danger as by a
miracle; she can feel only this: "I am safe; I am at home." And while
her husband is talking she pulls her chair nearer the boy's and lifts
his head to her shoulder. Fatigue inexpressible comes over her. She can
no longer control herself; she feels that her eyes are closing, that she
is dropping asleep.

Suddenly another possibility presents itself to her mind, a possibility
that she had dismissed the moment she turned to leave the ditch where
she had fallen. Suppose he were not dead! Suppose--oh, but it is
impossible--his eyes--his--lips--not a breath came from them! But there
are trances that are like death, which deceive even practised eyes, and
she knows nothing about such things. Suppose he is still alive--suppose
he has regained consciousness and found himself alone by the
roadside--suppose he calls her by her name? He might think she had been
injured; he might tell the doctors that there was a woman with him, and
that she must have been thrown to some distance. They will look for her.
The coachman will come back with the men he has brought, and will tell
them that she was there, unhurt--and Franz will know the truth. Franz
knows her so well--he will know that she has run away--and a great anger
will come over him. He will tell them her name in revenge. For he is
mortally injured, and it will hurt him cruelly that she has left him
alone in his last hour. He will say: "That is Mrs. Emma ------. I am her
lover. She is cowardly and stupid, too, gentlemen, for she might have
known you would not ask her name; you would be discreet; you would have
let her go away unmolested. Oh, she might at least have waited until you
came. But she is vile--utterly vile--ah!--"

"What is the matter?" asks the Professor, very gravely, rising from his
chair.

"What? What?"

"Yes, what is the matter with you?"

"Nothing." She presses the boy closer to her breast.

The Professor looks at her for a few minutes steadily.

"Didn't you know that you had fallen asleep, and--"

"Well?-- And--"

"And then you screamed out in your sleep."

"Did I?"

"You screamed as if you were having a nightmare. Were you dreaming?"

"I don't know--"

And she sees her face in a mirror opposite, a face tortured into a
ghastly smile. She knows it is her own face, and it terrifies her. She
sees that it is frozen; that this hideous smile is frozen on it, and
will always be there, all her life. She tries to cry out. Two hands are
laid on her shoulders, and between her own face and the mirrored one her
husband's face pushes its way in; his eyes pierce into hers. She knows
that unless she is strong for this last trial all is lost. And she
feels that she is strong; she has regained control of her limbs, but the
moment of strength is short. She raises her hands to his, which rest
on her shoulders; she draws him down to her, and smiles naturally and
tenderly into his eyes.

She feels his lips on her forehead, and she thinks: "It is all a
dream--he will never tell--he will never take revenge like that--he is
dead--really dead--and the dead are silent--"

"Why did you say that?" she hears her husband's voice suddenly.

She starts. "What did I say?" And it seems to her as if she had told
everything, here at the table--aloud before every one--and again she
asks, shuddering before his horrified eyes, "What did I say?"

"The dead are silent," her husband repeats very slowly.

"Yes," she answers.

And she reads in his eyes that she can no longer hide anything from him.
They look long and silently at each other. "Put the boy to bed," he says
at last. "You have something to tell me, have you not?"

"Yes--"

She knows now that within a few moments she will tell this man
everything--this man, whom she has deceived for many years.

And while she goes slowly through the door, holding her boy, she feels
her husband's eyes still resting on her, and a great peace comes over
her, the assurance that now many things would be right again.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Dead Are Silent, by Arthur Schnitzler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEAD ARE SILENT ***

***** This file should be named 23061.txt or 23061.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/0/6/23061/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
