The Project Gutenberg EBook of Frictional Electricity, by Max Adeler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Frictional Electricity
       From "The Saturday Evening Post."

Author: Max Adeler

Release Date: October 24, 2007 [EBook #23179]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRICTIONAL ELECTRICITY ***




Produced by David Widger






FRICTIONAL ELECTRICITY

By Max Adeler

Reprinted by permission of the author, Charles Heber Clark, from "The
Saturday Evening Post."


I happened to visit the accident ward of St. Paracelsus' Hospital
because a friend of mine who is interested in the Flower Mission asked
me to stop there during my afternoon walk and give a few flowers to the
sufferers.

When I had arranged the last half-dozen of the roses in a vase upon
the little stand by the bedside of one bruised and battered patient, he
looked at me gratefully, and said:

"Oh, thank you, sir! And would you mind, sir, stopping for a bit of
talk? I'm so lonely and miserable."

I sat upon the chair by the bed and with my hand smoothed the
counterpane, while the patient asked me:

"Do I really look like a burglar, sir, do you think?"

I hesitated to reply as I examined his face. It was really covered with
bandages, but his nose seemed swollen and there were bruises about both
eyes.

"I don't wonder you don't like to speak your mind when you see me here a
broken wreck, smashed all up and not looking a bit like myself, sir. But
if you would see me well and strong and all fixed up for going to church
you'd say right off that I don't favor no burglar in looks."

I asked the unfortunate man his name.

"Mordecai Barnes, sir, and I'm a journeyman plumber, sir, with a good
character, and don't take no second place in that business with no man.
How did I get here? What banged me all up into a shame and a disgrace
like this? Well, I'll tell you, sir, if you have the patience to listen,
for it does me good to talk who has been used so hard, and can get
no attention from the nurses or nobody in this here asylum. Do you
understand about frictional electricity, sir? No? I thought not; and
well had it been for me, for this shattered hulk that you see a-lying
here, if I had never heard of it neither! I'll tell you how it was, sir.
My mate, George Watkins, and there ain't no better man nowheres if
you go clear round the globe--George Watkins is one of these men with
inquiring minds, always a-hungering for knowledge, and so George off
he goes week after week to the lectures up at the Huxley Institute. You
know it; in that yallow building over by Nonpareil Square. And George
often he told me about the wonderful things he learned there, and among
others he was fond of explaining to me about frictional electricity.

"It seems, sir, for you may not know it any" more'n I knowed it until
George explained it to me, that there's three different kinds of
electricity. There's the kind you make with a steam engine, and the
kind you make with acid, and the kind you make with friction. Well, sir,
would you believe--or, let me say first, have you ever rubbed a black
cat on the back in a dark room and seen the sparks fly? Of course, and,
sir, I know it's almost beyond belief, but, positive, they told George
Watkins, my mate, up at the Huxley Institute, that them sparks and the
aurora borealis that you see sometimes a-lighting up the heavens is
one and the same thing! Wonderful, isn't it, sir, that Science should
discover that a black cat is some kind of kin to the aurora borealis?
But George says that's what they said, for the aurora borealis is caused
by the earth a-rolling around and rubbing the air just as the sparks is
caused by stroking the cat's back.

"And George he says that this here frictional electricity is the only
kind that'll cure pain. The steam-engine kind won't do it, and the acid
kind won't do it, but the frictional kind'll do it every time if you
only know how to apply it.

"Well, sir, now I pass to the sorrerful part of my story. There is a
girl named Bella Dougherty that does housework for a man named Muffitt,
and a mighty nice girl she is; or, I used to think her nice. Maybe you
know where Mr. Muffitt lives, on 149th Street, just above Parvin Street,
the third house on the left with white shutters.

"Anyhow, I got to be fond of Bella and often used to set and talk with
her in the evenings in Mr. Muffitt's kitchen, and maybe have two or
three other girls come in sometimes, with a few men; though I never
cared, sir, for much flocking together at such times, for Bella
Dougherty she was good enough company for me, just her and I by
ourselves.

"Howsomdever, there was another man that had a kind of fancy for Bella
Dougherty, although in my opinion he isn't fit to wipe her feet on, and
his name is William Jones.

"This yer William Jones used to come intruding around there in Mr.
Muffitt's kitchen when he wasn't wanted and when he seen that me and
Bella would rather be a-setting there by ourselves. And so, sir, one
night, just to kill the time till he'd quit and go, I begun to tell them
what George Watkins said to me about the Huxley Institute and frictional
electricity being a sure cure for pain.

"And William Jones, a-winking at Bella Dougherty, as much as to say,
sir, that he'd be having the laugh on me, said he had a pain that minute
in his head from neuralgia and he'd bet me a quarter no frictional
electricity would drive it out. I know now what was the matter with the
head of William Jones. Not neuralgia, nor nothing of the sort, sir. It
was vacuum. My mate, George Watkins, tells me that at the Institute they
say that vacuum always produces pain, and that was the only thing the
matter with this William Jones I'm a-telling you about.

"I never take no dare, not from no man of that kind, anyways, sir, so
I bet him a quarter I'd cure him, and cure him with frictional
electricity, too. So he set down on the chair a-laughing and a-winking
at Bella Dougherty, who set over by the range holding the quarters;
and I begun to rub William Jones's eye-brows with my two thumbs;
just gently, but right along just like stroking a cat; keeping it up,
a-rubbing and a-rubbing, until at last I asked him how he felt now; and,
you can imagine my supprise, sir, when I seen that William Jones was
fast asleep! I was skeered at first; but in a minute I seen that I had
hypnertized him unbeknown to myself, and there set William Jones 's if
he was froze stiff.

"I wa'n't so very sorry, sir, when I found out how things was a-going,
although if I could have seen what was the consequences of this strange
occurrence I'd 'a' seized my hat and bid Bella Dougherty good-by and
started straight for home.

"But, sir, of course I acted like a fool, for I'd read in the papers how
a man who hypnertizes another man can make him believe anything and
do anything, and so I thought I'd have some fun with William Jones and
enjoy a lovely, quiet evening with Bella Dougherty.

"So I says to William Jones:

"'Now, William, you're a little school-scholar oncet again and you've
missed your lesson, and so you just go over there in that corner by the
china closet and stand with your face to the wall and say over and over
your multiplication table till you know it right.'

"And so, to the supprise of Bella Dougherty, William Jones went right
over in the corner, like I told him, and there he stood, saying: 'Six
sixes is thirty-six, six sevens is forty-two,' and so on, whilst I set
over with Bella Dougherty peacefully enjoying ourselves just exactly 's
if William Jones wasn't anywheres about.

"And so, sir, it went on until Mrs. Muffitt she come down and said to
Bella Dougherty it was time to shut the house up, and then I bid her
good-night and told William to go home and go straight to bed, which he
did, and a-saying the multiplication table all the way down the street.
He would have said it all night, sir, I do believe, if I hadn't ordered
him to stop and to begin saying his prayers when I passed him in at his
front door.

"You may believe me, sir, that I had William Jones on my mind all night
and was a-worrying a little about him too, for fear maybe he'd never
come to. So around I goes the first thing in the morning to his
boarding-house, and his landlady tells me he had been a-saying his
prayers all mixed up like with the multiplication table ever since he
come home the night before. She was a bit troubled about it, sir, as
you may imagine, for William Jones was a good boarder and it 'd 'a' been
money out of her pocket if he had lost his mind.

"So, then, I seen William Jones and knowed at oncet that the
hypnertizing still had hold of him. Very well; I had no idea how to get
him out of it and it didn't hurt him nohow, so I just commanded William
Jones to drop the multiplication table and his prayers and to fix all
his intellect in the regular way on plumbing; and William Jones at oncet
calmed down and seemed his old self again.

"Then a wicked thought flashed into my mind. You know how it is
yourself, sir; you are tempted and you are weak and you fall, and then
the first thing you know, to be sure your sin'll find you out and there
you are! Here I am, a shattered hulk. It suddenly occurred to me, sir,
that if I could control William Jones, why not turn his affections away
from Bella Dougherty, who might take a fancy to him? who knows? women
are so queer! and direct his thoughts toward my own Aunt Maggie, who is
a middle-aged widder and not so bad-looking, and far too good for such
a man as William Jones, although to speak the plain truth I had no
objections to having him for an uncle by marriage.

"Therefore I did so, sir, and before the week was out I heard that
William Jones was plumbing in the most supprising manner, plumbing here
and plumbing there, and paying attentions vigorously, so to speak, to
Aunt Maggie every evening.

"In the meantime, sir, believe me, I did not lose time in my suit with
Bella Dougherty, who seemed real mad at William Jones when people began
to talk about his courting Aunt Maggie, so that in less than two weeks,
when Bella Dougherty heard that William Jones and Aunt Maggie had agreed
to marry, I got Bella Dougherty about as good as to say, although she
never quite said it square, that she would have me.

"I never knowed how it happened, sir, whether somebody waked William
Jones up or he just come to by himself, but, sir, anyhow, William Jones
about that time dropped hypner-tism and was himself again. Imagine, sir,
how things stood! There never was a man as mad as William Jones; mad
with me, and mad with Aunt Maggie, to whom he sent a cruel message that
he wa'n't marrying no grandmas, and that made Aunt Maggie mad; and then
William Jones sat down and wrote me a letter to the general effect that
whenever he met me my course in this life would be short.

"Naturally, sir, as you may believe, I kept out of William Jones's way,
for I am not fond of quarreling, and besides, William Jones is forty
pounds heavier, sir, than I am.

"But one night while I was setting in the kitchen at Muffitt's, having
some uplifting conversation with Bella Dougherty, there was a sudden
knock on the side door, and up she jumps, pale and skeered, and says:
'I do believe that is William Jones. He said he might call, maybe, this
evening!' So, of course, as I never hunt trouble, I raised the window
sash over by the kitchen table at the back and went out just as William
Jones come in the side door. He kept the door open a-watching for me,
and so as I couldn't get to the gate I climbed over the high fence into
the next yard.

"I ought to have gone right home, sir, without stopping, but I hated to
leave William Jones there with Bella Dougherty, and me just driven out;
so, as it was raining hard and I had on my Sunday suit, what does I
do but try the latch on the kitchen door of the house next to Mr.
Muffitt's, and finding the door opened, in I walked and set down in a
chair to await what was going to happen. That was a bad job for me, sir!
It isn't safe to take one false step.

"For the next minute the inside door from the dining-room springs open
and a man jumps out and grabs me and says: 'I've got thee at last, have
I!' He was a Quaker, sir; a big man and with a grip like iron. I never
knowed a man with a grip like that. Did you ever, sir, have your fingers
in the crack of a door and somebody a-leaning hard on the door? That was
the way this Quaker held me. Then he calls out 'Amelia! Amelia!' and in
a minute a sweet old Quaker lady comes out with a candle, and he says to
her: I've caught that burglar, Amelia; thee get the clothes line.'"

"So the lady she gets the clothes line and that man he ties my hands and
my arms behind my back, good and tight, and then he made me set down
and he ties me to the chair, and at last he gives the rope two or three
turns around the leg of the kitchen table and says to me: 'Friend, thee
can just set there while I go to get an officer!' Gave me no chance to
explain. Took it all for granted; whereas if he would have listened to
me I could have cleared up the whole mystery in two minutes.

"So then, sir, out he goes for a policeman, and the old lady sets down
in a chair not far from me and said she was sorry I was so wicked and
asked me about my mother, and if I ever went to First-Day school, and
a whole lot of things. Then a thought seemed to strike her and she went
into the next room and came back with a book in her hand, and she said
she would read a good book to me while we waited for justice to take its
course.

"She was lovely to look at, sir, with her tidy brown frock and the crape
handkerchief folded acrost her bosom and her cap and the smile on her
face; a sweet face, sir; an angel face; yes, sir, but sweet faces often
has cruel dispositions behind them. For then she told me that the book
was called Barclay's Apology for the People called Quakers, or something
like that, and she begun to read it to me.

"Have you ever read that book, sir? It is dedicated, I think, to Charles
the Second, and it begins with Fifteen Propositions, and she read every
one of them Propositions from first to last. Then she turned to the
section, sir, about Salutations and Recreations, and she read and read
and read until, sir, actually it made my head swim.

"Do you know, sir, is Barclay still alive--the man who wrote that book?
Is there no way of getting even with him?

"I couldn't get away. I might have walked out somehow with the chair
fastened to me; but I couldn't go, could I, sir, with the table tied to
my leg, and particularly if I had to climb the fence? So I had to set
there and be regarded as a burglar.

"But at last I _would_ be heard, and I told her I was no burglar but an
innercent man; and then she looked in the index to find if Barclay had
anything interesting to say about the wickedness of telling falsehoods.
And then I said I was a member of the Baptist Society, and she said at
once she would read Barclay on the errors of that sect; but I insisted
on being heard, and I explained to her that I got into this trouble by
trying to cure William Jones by frictional electricity, and she said:
'Thee has an ingenious and fruitful mind to invent such a story. Oh,
that it had been turned to better devices than following a life of
evil!'

"'And it seems hard, too,' I said, 'that a perfectly respectable Baptist
plumber should be arrested as a burglar simply because he tried to
relieve the pain of William Jones by a scientific method invented by the
Huxley Institute.'

"Where is thy friend William Jones?' she asked.

"Do you know, sir, at that very moment you could hear through the
partition William Jones and Bella Dougherty laughing next door! It
seemed like mockery to me, a-setting there in chains, so to speak.

"'He is next door, ma'am,' I said, 'a-courting the hired girl.'

"'I will prove if thee is telling the truth,' she said, and she got up
and moved toward the door.

"'No, ma'am, no!' I said; 'please don't do that! William mustn't know
that I am here'; and so she comes back and sets down again, and picks up
Barclay, and looks sorrerful at me, and says:

"'It is wicked for thee to have such vain imaginations. Why does thee
persist in pretending that there is a William Jones?' And then she
started to look through Barclay to find if he had anything that would
fit the William Jones part of the case.

"What could I do? I daresn't call in William Jones to prove my
innercence; he was mad all over at me and a bigger man, too, and here
I was tied; and I couldn't call Bella Dougherty without William Jones
knowing it. It was hard, sir, for a man as innercent as a little babe
to set there with that sweet and smooth old lady considering him a
shameless story-teller and firing Barclay at him, now wasn't it,
sir? Would you have called William Jones, sir, under them there
circumstances, and his laughter and Bella Dougherty's still a-resounding
through the partition?

"Well, sir, that policeman was a long time a-coming with the old Quaker.
I never knowed why; but Friend Amelia she set down again and turned over
the leaves of Barclay and begun oncet more to read about Salutations and
Recreations while, strange as it may seem to you, sir, I felt that I'd
rather see the policeman and be locked up in a dungeon than to hear more
of it.

"But, howsomdever, after a while in comes the Quaker and the officer
with him, and the very first minute the officer seen me he says:

"'I reckernize him as an old offender.'

"'No you don't!' says I; 'I'm no old offender nor a young offender. I'm
a perfeckly honest Baptist plumber, and I kin prove it, too.'

"'How kin you prove it?' says the officer.

"'By William Jones,' says I, 'who is a-setting in that kitchen right
next door, a-wooing the hired girl.'

"I was bold about it, sir, because I knowed William Jones daresn't
strike at me while the officer was there.

"'We'll see about that,' says the officer, and in he goes to Mr.
Muffitt's yard next door and comes back with William Jones. I have no
use for a man like William Jones. What do you think he does, sir? Why,
he looks me over, from head to foot, in a blank sort of a way, and then,
turning to the policeman, he says: 'I don't know the man, officer; never
seen him before'; then that low-down plumber walks out and leaves me
there and goes back, and in a minute I hear him and Bella Dougherty
a-laughing worse than ever.

"'I thought not,' says the officer, slipping the handcuffs on me, 'and
so now you come right along.' And Friend Amelia looked mournful at me
and says to me she would come around regular and read Barclay to me in
my cell after I was convicted.

"And so, sir, to make a long story short, I was took up before the
magistrate and held for burglary, and my mate, George Watkins, went my
bail and so I was let go.

"I might stop here, sir, but I must tell you that the following Thursday
I met William Jones up a kind of a blind alley where I was working,
while he was working in a house on the opposite side. He had me in a
corner where there was no chance to run, so I put on a bold face and
went right up to him and says:

"'William, there's been some differences betwixt us, but I'm not the man
to bear grudges and I forgive you."

"'What's that?' says he, savage.

"'Why,' says I, 'the whole thing is just one of them unpleasant
misunderstandings'; and then I started to explain to him about the
Huxley Institute theory of frictional electricity and the aurora
borealis.

"I can't tell what he said, sir, in reply, with reference to the aurora
borealis, because I'm a decent man and never use no low language; but
suddenly he jumped on me, and the first thing I knowed I was being
lifted in the ambulance and fetched to this yer hospital. Was it right,
sir, do you think, for William Jones to strike me foul, like that, while
I was trying to state my case to him? No, sir. But that's not the worst
of it. Last Tuesday word came to me that Bella Dougherty had throwed
me over and is going to marry William Jones on Decoration Day! Think
of that, sir!" and Mordecai Barnes turned his head upon his pillow and
moaned.

Turning again toward me, he was about to resume his statement, when
suddenly he exclaimed: "Why, there's Aunt Maggie."

A woman of fifty years, nicely clad, came to the bedside and said to him
coldly:

"Is that you, Mordecai Barnes?"

"Yes, Aunt Maggie."

"I'm ashamed of you, Mordecai Barnes," said she; "ashamed of you. It
served you right. You got just what was comin' to you. I wish William
had banged you worse."

Mordecai Barnes groaned.

"And more than that," continued Aunt Maggie, glaring at him through her
spectacles, "I've torn up my old will which named you my sole heir and
made a new one and left all my property to this yer very hospital."

With these words Aunt Maggie walked away and left the room.

Mordecai Barnes could not speak for a few minutes. He looked as if death
would be welcome. Then, pulling the bedclothes up under his chin and
closing his eyes wearily, he said:

"Curse the day, say I, when George Watkins first went to the Huxley
Institute and heard about frictional electricity."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Frictional Electricity, by Max Adeler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRICTIONAL ELECTRICITY ***

***** This file should be named 23179.txt or 23179.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/1/7/23179/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
