Project Gutenberg's Thomas Jefferson Brown, By James Oliver Curwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Thomas Jefferson Brown

Author: James Oliver Curwood

Release Date: October 24, 2007 [EBook #23181]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THOMAS JEFFERSON BROWN ***




Produced by David Widger






THOMAS JEFFERSON BROWN

By James Oliver Curwood

Copyright, The Frank A. Munsey Co




I

There are not many who will remember him as Thomas Jefferson Brown. For
ten years he had been mildly ashamed of himself, and out of respect for
people who were dead, and for a dozen or so who were living, he had the
good taste to drop his last name. The fact that it was only Brown didn't
matter.

"Tack Thomas Jefferson to Brown," he said, "and you've got a name that
sticks!"

It had an aristocratic sound; and Thomas Jefferson, with the Brown cut
off, was still aristocratic, when you came to count the red corpuscles
in him. In some sort of way he was related to two dead Presidents, three
dead army officers, a living college professor, and a few common people.
He was legitimately born to the purple, but fate had sent him off on a
curious ricochet in a game all of its own, and changed him from Thomas
Jefferson Brown into just plain Thomas Jefferson without the Brown.

He was one of those specimens who, when you meet them, somehow make you
feel there are a few lost kings of the earth, as well as lost lambs. He
was what we called a "first-sighter"--that is, you liked him the instant
you looked at him. You knew without further acquaintance that he was a
man whom you could trust with your money, your friendship--anything you
had. He was big, with a wholesome brown face, blond hair, and gray
eyes that seemed always to be laughing and twinkling, even when he was
hungry. He carried about with him a load of cheerfulness so big that it
was constantly spilling over on other people.

There was a time when Thomas Jefferson Brown had little white cards
with his name on them. That was when he went to college, and his lungs
weren't so good. It was then that some big doctor told him that if he
wanted to live to have grandchildren, the best thing for him to do was
to "tramp it" for a time--live out of doors, sleep out of doors, do
nothing but breathe fresh air and walk. That doctor was Fate, playing
his game behind a pair of spectacles and a bumpy forehead. He saved
Thomas Jefferson Brown, all right; but he turned him into plain Thomas
Jefferson.

For Thomas Jefferson Brown never got over taking his medicine. He kept
on tramping. He got big and broad and happy. Somewhere, perhaps in a
barn, he caught a microbe that made him dislike ordinary work. He would
set to and help a farmer saw wood all day, just for company and grub;
but you couldn't hire him to go into an office, or settle down to
anything steady, for twenty-five dollars a day. He had a scientific name
for the thing that was in him--the _wanderlust_ bug, I think he called
it; and he said it was better than the Chinese lady-bugs that the
government imports to save California fruit.

The nearest Thomas Jefferson ever came to going back to Thomas Jefferson
Brown was when he took a job at braking on the Southern Pacific. That
held him for three, days less than two weeks.

"The _wanderlust_ bug wouldn't stand for it," he explained.

Right after that he struck a farmer's house where the farmer was sick,
almost dying, with three little kids and a frail little woman trying
to keep things up. He worked like ten men for more than a month on that
farm, and when he went away he wouldn't take a cent. That's the sort of
ne'er-do-well Thomas Jefferson was.

He wouldn't beg. He'd go three days without grub, and laugh all the
time. It was mostly in the country and in small villages that he made
his living. He could play seven different kinds of instruments without
any instruments at all. Did it all with his mouth. And the kids--they
went wild over him. In return for his entertainment, Thomas Jefferson
wasn't ashamed to take whatever came to him in the way of odd nickels
and dimes.

Once the manager of a vaudeville house heard him on a street corner, and
offered him a job at fifty a week if he'd sign a contract for a dozen
weeks.

"Good Lord," said Thomas Jefferson, "I wouldn't know what to do with six
hundred dollars!"

The next week he was cooking in a lumber-camp for his board. That's
Thomas Jefferson--or, rather, that's what he was.

And now we're coming to the girl who killed the bug in Thomas
Jefferson--and rescued the king. She was born swell. She has blue
eyes--the sort that can light up a dark day, and can make your head turn
dizzy when they smile at you. And she's got the right sort of hair to
go with 'em--red and gold and brown all mixed up, until you can't tell
which is which; the sort that makes you wonder if some big artist hasn't
been painting a picture for you, when you see it out in the sunshine.

She comes of a titled family, but she'd want to die to-morrow if Thomas
Jefferson Brown didn't worship her from the tips of her little toes to
the top of her pretty head. She thinks he's a king. And he is--one of
those great, big, healthy kings that nature sometimes grows when it has
half a chance.




II

It's curious how the whole thing happened. Thomas Jefferson wandered up
to Portland at the time we were fitting out a ship for a whaling cruise.
We saw him imitating a banjo for a lot of kids down on the wharf, and
the minute our eyes lit on him--Tucker's and mine--we liked him. It
isn't necessary to go into the details of what happened after that. Just
a week later, when Thomas Jefferson and I were shaking hands for the
last time, a queer sort of look came into his eyes, and he said:

"Bobby, you're the first man I ever knew that makes me feel like crying
when you leave me."

He said it just like one of the kids he'd tickled half to death on the
wharf. There was a little jerking in his throat, and there came into his
face a look so gentle that it made me think of a girl.

"Why don't you come along on this cruise with me?" I said.

Thomas Jefferson gave a sudden start, and a queer expression came into
his eyes, as if he saw something out on the sea that had startled him.
Then he laughed. You could hear that laugh of Thomas Jefferson's three
blocks away, and sunshine in winter couldn't bring more cheer than the
sound of it. He looked at me for a moment, and then said:

"Bobby, I'll go!"

It wasn't forty-eight hours before Thomas Jefferson had a first mortgage
on every soul aboard the "Sleeping Sealer," from the cap'n to the oiler
down in the engine-room. He was able, all right, but you couldn't have
made an able seaman out of him in a hundred years. For all that, he did
the work of three men. The first thing you heard when you woke up in the
morning was his whistle, and the last thing you heard at night was his
laugh or his song. He did everything, from cooking to telling us why
Germany couldn't lick England, and how the United States could clean up
the map of the earth if Congress would spend less money on job-making
bureaus and a little more on war-ships.

Then we discovered what was in the old alligator-skin valise he carried.
It was books. Half the time he didn't have to read to us, but just
talked off the stuff he'd learned by heart. We got to know a lot before
the trip was half begun, just by associating with Thomas Jefferson
Brown--or Thomas Jefferson, as he was then.

We spent three months up about the Spicer Islands, and then came down
toward Southampton Land. Thomas Jefferson was the happiest man aboard
until we caught sight of a coast, and then the change began. After that
he'd get restless whenever land hove in sight.

Six weeks later we came down into Roes Welcome Sound, planning to get
out through Hudson Strait before winter set in. The fact that we were
almost homeward bound didn't seem to affect Thomas Jefferson. I saw the
beginning of the end when he said to me one day:

"Bobby, I've never seen this northern country. It's a big, glorious
country, and I'd like to go ashore."

There wasn't any use arguing with him. The cap'n tried it, we all tried
it, and at last Thomas Jefferson prepared to take his leave of us at
Point Fullerton, just eight hundred miles north of civilization, where
there's an Eskimo village and a police station of the Royal Northwest
Mounted. He came to me the day before we were going to take him ashore,
and said:

"Bobby, why don't you come along? Let's chum it, old man, and see what
happens."

When he went ashore, the next day, I went with him, and we each took
three months' supply of grub and our pay. From that hour there began the
big change--the change which turned Thomas Jefferson back into Thomas
Jefferson Brown, and which it took a girl to finish.

It came first in his eyes, and then in his laugh. After that he seemed
to grow an inch or two taller, and he lost that careless, shiftless way
which comes of what he called the _wanderlust_ bug. There wasn't so
much laughter in his eyes, but something better had taken its place--a
deeper, grayer, more thoughtful look, and he didn't play those queer
things with his mouth any more.

The police at Point Fullerton hardly had a glimpse of him as the
big, sunny, loose-jointed giant, Thomas Jefferson. He had become a
bronze-bearded god, with the strength of five men in his splendid
shoulders, and a port to his head that made you think of a piece of
sculpture.

"You can't be anything but a _man_ up here, Bobby," he said one day, and
I knew what he meant. "It's not the air, it's not the cold, and it's not
the fight you make to keep life in your body," he added, "but it's
God! That's what it is, Bobby. There's not a sound or a sight up here,
outside of that little cabin, that's human. It's all God--there's
nothing else--and it makes you think!"




III

It was spring when we came down to Fort Churchill, and it was summer
when we struck York Factory. It was the middle of one of those summer
days when strawberries ripen even up there, that the last prop fell out
from under Thomas Jefferson, and he became Thomas Jefferson Brown. He
met Lady Isobel. The title did not really belong to her, for she was
only the cousin of Lord Meton; but Thomas Jefferson Brown called her
that from the first.

It was down close to the boats, where their launch lay, and the wind had
frolicked with Lady Isobel's hair until it rippled about her face
and shoulders like a net of spun gold. She was bareheaded, and he was
bareheaded, and they stared for a moment, her blue eyes flashing into
his gray ones; and then there came into her face a color like rose, and
he bowed, as one of the old-time Presidents might have bowed to a
hair-powdered beauty in the days when the Capitol was young.

That was the beginning, and to his honor be it said that Thomas
Jefferson Brown never revealed that he was a gentleman born, though his
heart was stricken with love at that first sight of Lady Isobel's lovely
face. Lord Meton wanted a man--one who could handle a canoe and shoulder
two hundred pounds of duff; and "Tom" became the man, working like a
slave for a month; but always with the pride and bearing of a king.

It wasn't difficult to see what was happening. Lord Meton saw, and
understood; but he knew that the proud blood in Lady Isobel was an
invulnerable armor that would protect her from indiscretion. And as for
Thomas Jefferson Brown--

"Bobby," he said, standing up straight and tall, "if she can only love a
gentleman, and not a man, what's the use of playing cards?"

One day, when he had to carry Lady Isobel ashore from a big York boat,
something inside him got the best of his arms, and he held her tight--so
tight that her eyes came down to his with a frightened look, and he
heard a breath come from her that was almost a sob. They gazed at each
other for a moment, and it was then that Thomas Jefferson Brown told her
that he loved her--not in words, but in a way that she understood.

When he set her down on shore she was as white as death. From that day
she treated him a little coolly--up to the last moment, out on the bay.

It was a bright, sunshiny day when the three--Lord Meton, Lady Isobel,
and Thomas Jefferson Brown--set off in a big birchbark canoe, bound for
Harrison's Island, a dozen miles out from the mainland. But you can't
tell much about sunshine and calm on Hudson Bay. They're like a jealous
woman's smile, masking something hidden. Four miles out, the wind came
up; midway between the island and the mainland, it was a small gale.
Even at that, Thomas Jefferson Brown would have made it all right if the
beat of the sea hadn't broken a rotten thread under the bow, letting the
birch seam part with a suddenness that sent a little spurt of water up
into Lady Isobel's face.

What? No, this isn't going to have the regulation hero-act end, in
which Thomas Jefferson Brown saves the life of the lady he loves. It's
something different--something that Thomas Jefferson Brown never guessed
at when the water spurted in, and Lady Isobel turned to him with a
little scream, her beautiful blue eyes wide and filled with horror.

"Don't be afraid," he said. "Here, take this jacket and hold it down
tight over the seam. We'll reach the island, all right."

Lady Isobel held the jacket over the hole, and Thomas Jefferson Brown
put a strength into his paddle that threatened to crack off the handle.
After a minute or two, he saw a little trickle of water, beginning to
ooze in about the edges of the jacket. He leaned back for an instant,
and signaled Lord Meton to bend over toward him.

"Take off your clothes," he said, so low that Lady Isobel couldn't hear.
"Can you swim?"

"Not a stroke," said Lord Meton, and his face went as white as chalk;
but it was no whiter than Thomas Jefferson Brown's.

When a birchbark seam begins to part there's no power on earth that will
hold it when the canoe is heavily loaded. A few minutes later, the water
was gushing in by the quart about Lady Isobel's feet. She fought hard
to hold it back. When at last she saw that it was hopeless, she turned
again, to see Lord Meton in his underwear, and Thomas Jefferson Brown
stripped of everything but his shirt and his buckskin trousers, which
don't water-sog. He laughed straight into her face, as if it was all an
amusing joke; and then, suddenly, he began playing that banjo thing with
his mouth.

It was all so strange, with the beat of the sea, the wail of the wind,
and Thomas Jefferson Brown sitting there as if nothing were happening,
that Lady Isobel just stared in astonishment, while the water gushed in
about her. At last he put down his paddle, and stretched out both hands;
and it seemed the most natural thing in the world that her two hands
should come out to meet his.

"Listen," he said, and his eyes were telling her again what they told
her on the day when he brought her in from the York boat. "You'll do as
I tell you, won't you? And you won't be afraid?"

For an instant Lady Isobel looked at Lord Meton, shrinking and shivering
in the stern of the canoe; and then she looked back to the other man's
face, and blue fires seemed to leap into her eyes.

"With _you_--no, I'm not afraid," she said.

She leaned toward him, nearer and nearer, as the water rose about them,
looking straight into his eyes. They both knew in that moment that it
was the man and the woman who had triumphed, and that for them the lady
and the gentleman were dead.

"I'm not afraid--with you," she said again.

Her lips trembled, and her golden hair swept over his breast, and Thomas
Jefferson Brown bent down and kissed her once upon the mouth. Then he
said, as if he were speaking to a little girl:

"Do not be afraid, and hold to the edge of the canoe when it fills. The
wind will carry us to Harrison's Island."

He turned to Lord Meton, and repeated the words; and just then the
birchbark began to settle under them. With one hand gripping the side,
Thomas Jefferson Brown leaped over the sea. Lower and lower settled the
canoe with almost a scream, Lord Meton cried above the wind:

"Good Lord, it won't hold us up!"

For a few moments Thomas Jefferson relieved the canoe of his weight, and
the bark rose again, slowly. Then, with a gasp, he clutched at the side
again, and into Lady Isobel's drenched face, half hid the wet veil of
her shining hair.

"The canoe won't hold us all up," he said trying to smile. "But it will
hold two--you two and the wind is taking it to the island, four miles to
the island, and I may be make it."

He knew that he never could make it; no man could swim so far in the
chill waters of Hudson Bay; but he spoke as if his words were "I'm going
to let go and try. Isobel, my love, will you kiss me?"

She threw one arm about his neck. Meton, clutching with frantic terror
to the canoe saw nothing of what happened, nor did he hear the sobbing
cry of Lady Isobel's heart as she kissed Thomas Jefferson Brown, once,
and then three times, before he dropped back into the sea again.

"Good-by, sweetheart!" he said.

In the eyes that looked up at her, in his eyes in the one last look of
love that he said, "Good-by." Lady Isobel saw the truth, and stretched
out her arm to him.

"Stop! Come back! Take me with you!" she cried. "I want to go with you!"

And there, in the wildness of that sea, four miles from shore, Thomas
Jefferson Brown seemed to heave himself up out of the water, as if the
strength of a thousand swimmers had suddenly come to him. He let out a
cry of triumph, of love, of joy; and he came back and gripped the canoe
again, his gray eyes flashing, his face glowing with a strange flush.

"You want to go with me?" he said. "Come!"

He held up his arms, and with a cry that wasn't fear Lady Isobel went
into them, while Thomas Jefferson Brown called to Lord Meton:

"Stick to the canoe! It will take you to the island!"




IV

The shore was a low, dark streak, four miles away--an appalling distance
away; but as she clung lightly to his shoulders, as Thomas Jefferson
Brown told her to do, the horror and the fear of the big sea went out
of Lady Isobel's brave little heart. She put her face down against his
neck, pulled back his wet hair, and kissed him. God bless all such true
hearts, wherever they be!

"We'll make it, Tom--we'll make it!" she told him a hundred times.

He felt the warm caresses of her lips, the thrilling love of her voice,
and he knew that she was ready to die with him.

He swam in a strange way--a wonderfully strange way--did Thomas
Jefferson Brown. He stood almost erect in the water, his head and
shoulders clear; and now and then he stopped to rest, and it seemed no
test for him at all to float with the weight of the woman he loved, his
face turned up to her in those moments, her glorious blue eyes devouring
him, her sweet lips kissing him--still kissing him.

He was doing a thing that she knew no other man in the world could do.
She kept telling him so, while the land drew nearer and nearer, until at
last she cried out in joy that she could see the little bushes along the
shore.

"Another mile, Tom!" she said. "Only another mile, and then--"

"And then--" he said.

"And then--life!" she cried. "Life for you and me!"

He went on, seeming to grow stronger as the shore drew nearer. It was
wonderful; but at last, when they came to the beach, he dropped down
like a dead man. Lady Isobel caught his head to her dripping breast, and
rocked him back and forth, sobbing a paean of love and pride, while far
out she saw the canoe and Lord Meton drifting shoreward.

A few minutes later, Thomas Jefferson Brown went out into the sea again,
until he was not much more than a speck, and brought in the canoe and
Lord Meton, while Lady Isobel stood to her knees in the water, praising
her God that from riches and splendor she had come out into a wilderness
to find such a man as this.

After that, at York Factory, there was nothing left for Thomas Jefferson
Brown to do but to reveal himself, and when Lord Meton discovered that
there ran as good blood through his rescuer's veins as through his
own, he gripped hands with the man who had saved him, and gave his
congratulations cm the spot. But it made no difference to Isobel. If
anything, she was a little disappointed.

Thomas Jefferson Brown arranged to go back with them on their yacht. The
wedding would take place in London, a quiet affair. One day Isobel and
her lover came along hand in hand, and Thomas Jefferson Brown said to
me:

"Bobby, you're going to be best man."

"Not best man," Lady Isobel added, "but second best, Bobby. There's only
one best man in the world!"

But I haven't been able to come to the point of this story yet--the
remarkable part of it. Two weeks later, when we were up the river
and our canoe struck a snag, I discovered that Thomas Jefferson Brown
"couldn't swim a stroke!"

"Good Lord!" I said, but waited.

Back at the post, Thomas Jefferson Brown took me into his little room,
and said:

"Bobby, you've found that I can't swim, and I'm going to trust you with
a great secret. Love can accomplish miracles; and love did--out there.
For when I let go of the canoe, Bobby, I knew that I was going straight
down to my death. But a wonderful thing happened." He brought a little
map from a drawer. "Look at this map, Bobby. See all those little marks
off Harrison's Island--figures--twos and threes and fives, and
nothing above sixes? That's the depth of water for five miles out from
Harrison's Island, at low tide; and it was low tide when I jumped from
the canoe. That's all, Bobby. _I waded ashore_. But what would be the
good of saying anything about it when it brought me love like hers?"

Yes, what would be the use? For Thomas Jefferson Brown stepped out
deliberately to go to his death, and found life. He's a hero and a man,
is Thomas Jefferson Brown, even if fate did step in to make heroism a
little easy for him at the time!







End of Project Gutenberg's Thomas Jefferson Brown, By James Oliver Curwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THOMAS JEFFERSON BROWN ***

***** This file should be named 23181.txt or 23181.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/1/8/23181/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
