The Project Gutenberg EBook of Good Blood, by Ernst Von Wildenbruch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Good Blood

Author: Ernst Von Wildenbruch

Release Date: October 27, 2007 [EBook #23223]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOOD BLOOD ***




Produced by David Widger






GOOD BLOOD

By Ernst Von Wildenbruch


Is it possible that there are people quite free from curiosity? People
who can pass on behind any one they see gazing earnestly and intently
toward some unknown object without feeling an impulse to stop, to follow
the direction of the other's eyes, to discover what odd thing he may be
looking at?

For my part, if I were asked whether I counted myself among that class
of cold natures, I do not know that I could honestly answer "Yes." At
any rate, there was once a moment in my life when I was not only goaded
by such an impulse, but when I actually yielded to the temptation and
fell into the way of any mere curiosity seeker.

The place in which it happened was in a wine-room in the old town where
as Referendar {1} I was practising at court; the time was an afternoon
in summer.

     1 The title conferred in Prussia on the candidate who has
     passed the first of the two examinations held before
     appointment as judge.

The wine-room, situated on the ground floor of a house in the great
square which from the window one could look out upon in every direction,
was at this hour nearly empty. To me this was all the more agreeable,
for I have ever been a lover of solitude.

There were three of us: the fat waiter, who from a gray, dust-covered
bottle was pouring out the golden-yellow Muscatel into my glass; then
myself, who sat in a nook of the cozy, odd-cornered room and smacked the
fragrant wine; and still another guest, who had taken his place at one
of the two open windows, a tumbler of red wine lying before him on
the window-sill, in his mouth a long brown, smoke-seasoned meerschaum
cigar-holder, out of which he wrapped himself in a cloud of smoke.

This man, who had a long gray beard framing a ruddy face tinged bluish
in places, was an old retired colonel, whom every one in town knew. He
belonged to that colony of the Superannuated who had settled down in
this pleasant place to wearily drag out the end of their days.

Toward noon they could be seen strolling deliberately in groups of twos
or threes down the street, shortly to disappear into the wine-room,
where between twelve and one they assembled at the round table to
gossip. On the table stood pint bottles of sourish Moselle, over the
table floated a thick mist of cigar smoke, and through the mist came
voices, peevish, grating, discussing the latest event in the Army
Register.

The old colonel, too, was a regular patron of the wine-room, but he
never came at the hour of general assembly, but later, in the afternoon.

He was a man of lonely disposition. Rarely was he seen in the company of
others; his lodging was in the suburbs on the other side of the river,
and from the window of his room one could look out over a wide stretch
of meadow land which the river regularly inundated every spring, when it
overflowed its banks. Many a time have I passed by his lodging and seen
him standing at the window, his bloodshot eyes, rimmed with deep bags
beneath, thoughtfully gazing out toward the gray waste of water beyond
the embankment.

And now he sits there at the window of the wine-room and gazes out upon
the square, over whose surface the wind sweeps along in a whirl of dust.

But what is he looking at, I wonder?

The fat waiter, bored to death over his two silent fees, had his
attention already drawn toward the colonel's behavior; he stood in the
middle of the room, his hands clasped behind the tail of his coat, and
was gazing through the other window out on to the square.

Something must surely be going on there.

Quietly as possible, so as not to break the interest of the other two,
I rose from my seat. But there was really nothing to be seen. The square
was nearly empty; only in the center, under the great street lamps,
I noticed two schoolboys who were facing each other in threatening
attitude.

Could it be this, then, that so fixed the attention of the old colonel?

But having once begun, such is the nature of man, I could not withdraw
my attention before knowing whether this threat of a fight would really
swell to an outbreak. The boys had just come from afternoon school
session; they were still carrying their portfolios under their arms.
They may have been of equal age, but one was a head taller than the
other. This bigger one, a tall, lank, overgrown schoolboy, with an
unpleasant look in his freckled face, was blocking the way of the other,
who was short and plump and had an honest face with chubby, red cheeks.
The-bigger boy seemed to be nagging at the other with taunting words,
but by reason of the distance it was impossible to understand what he
said. After this had been going on for a while, the quarrel suddenly
broke out. Both boys dropped their portfolios to the ground; the little
chubby boy lowered his head, as though to ram his opponent in the
stomach, and then rushed at him.

"The big fellow there will soon have him in a fix," now said the
colonel, who was earnestly following the movements of the enemy, and who
seemed not to approve the tactics of the little chubby boy.

For whom he intended these words it would be hard to say; he spoke them
to himself without addressing any one of us.

His prediction was at once justified.

The big fellow dodged the onset of his enemy; the next moment he had
his left arm squeezed around the other's neck, so that the head of the
latter was caught as in a noose; he had him, as they say, "in chancery."
With his right hand he gripped the right fist of his opponent, who was
trying to pummel him with it on the back, and when he had regularly
trapped him and brought him completely under his power he dragged him
again and again round and about the lamp-post.

"Clumsy lad," muttered the old colonel, continuing his monologue,
"always to let himself get caught in that way." He was plainly
disappointed in the little chubby boy, and could not endure the long,
lanky one.

"They fight that way every day," he explained, noticing the waiter, to
whom he seemed willing to account for his interest in the matter.

Then he turned his face again toward the window. "Wonder if the little
one will turn up."

Scarcely had he mumbled this to the end when there came rushing from the
city park that adjoined the square a slender little slip of a lad.

"There he is," said the old colonel. He swallowed a mouthful of red wine
and stroked his beard.

The little fellow, who one felt sure by the resemblance must be a
brother of little Chubby Cheeks, but a finer and improved edition, ran
up, lifted high his portfolio with both hands and gave Long-Shanks a
blow on the back that resounded away over to where we sat.

"Bravo!" said the old colonel.

Long-Shanks kicked like a horse at this new assailant. Little-Boy
dodged, and the same instant Long-Shanks got a second blow, this time on
the head, that sent his cap flying.

Nevertheless, he still kept his prisoner held in the trap and fast by
the right hand.

Then Little-Boy tore open his portfolio with frantic haste; from the
portfolio he drew out a pen-case, from the pen-case a pen-holder, which
all at once he began jabbing into the hand of Long-Shanks that held his
brother prisoner.

"Clever lad!" said the colonel to himself. "Fine lad!" His red eyes
fairly gleamed with delight.

The affair was now becoming too hot for Long-Shanks. Stung with pain,
he released his first opponent to throw himself with furious blows on
Little-Boy.

But the latter was now transformed into a veritable little wild-cat.
His hat had flown from his head, his curly hair clung round his fine,
deathly pale face, out of which his eyes fairly burned; the portfolio
with all its contents was lying on the ground--over cap, portfolio and
all he went for the anatomy of Long-Shanks.

He threw himself on the enemy, and with little, clenched, convulsive
fists belabored him so on stomach and body that Long-Shanks began to
retreat step by step.

In the mean while Chubby-Cheeks had recovered himself, snatched up
his portfolio, and with blow after blow on the sides and back of his
oppressor, pushed into the fight again.

Long-Shanks at last threw off Little-Boy, took two steps backward and
picked up his cap from the ground. The fight was drawing to a finish.
Panting and out of breath, the three stood looking at one another.
Long-Shanks showed an ugly grin, behind which he tried to hide the shame
of his defeat; Little-Boy, with fists still doubled, followed every
one of his movements with blazing eyes, ready at a moment to spring once
more upon the enemy should the latter renew the attack. But Long-Shanks
did not advance again; he had had enough. Sneering and shrugging his
shoulders, he kept drawing away farther and farther until he had reached
a safe distance, when he began to call out names. The two brothers now
collected the belongings of Little-Boy that lay scattered about, stuffed
them into the portfolio, picked up their caps, whipped the dust from
them, and turned home ward. On the way they passed the windows of our
wine-room. I could now plainly see the brave little fellow; he was a
thoroughbred, every inch of him. Long-Shanks was again approaching
from behind and bawling after them through the length of the square.
Little-Boy shrugged his shoulders with fine contempt. "You great,
cowardly bully," said he, and stopping suddenly, turned right about and
faced the enemy. At once Long-Shanks stopped too, and the two brothers
broke out into derisive laughter.

They were now standing directly under the window at which the old
colonel was sitting. He leaned out.

"Bravo, youngster!" said he, "you are a plucky one--here--drink this on
the strength of it." He had taken up the tumbler and was holding it
out of the window toward Little-Boy. The boy looked up, surprised, then
whispered something to his older brother, gave him his portfolio to
hold, and gripped the big glass in his two little hands.

When he had drunk all he wanted, with one hand he held the glass by
its stem, with the other took back the portfolio from his brother, and
without asking by your leave, handed the glass over to him.

Chubby-Cheeks then took a long swallow.

"The blessed boy," muttered the colonel to himself. "I give him my
glass, and without further ado he makes his _cher frere_ drink out of
it, too."

But by the face of Little-Boy, who now reached the glass up to the
window again, one could see that he had only been doing something which
seemed to him quite a matter of course.

"Do you like the bouquet?" asked the old colonel.

"Yes, thanks, very well," said the boy, who snatched at his cap
politely, and went on his way with his brother.

The colonel looked after them until they had turned a corner of the
street and disappeared from his sight.

"With boys like that"--then said the colonel, returning to his
soliloquizing--"it is often an odd thing about boys like that."

"That they should fight so in the public streets!" said the fat waiter
with disapproval, still standing at his post. "One wonders how the
teacher can allow it; and they seem to belong to good family, too."

"It isn't that that does the harm," grunted the old colonel. "Young
people must have their liberty, teachers can't always be keeping an eye
on them. Boys all fight--must fight."

He rose heavily from his place so that the chair creaked beneath him,
scraped the cigar butt out of its holder into the ash-tray, and walked
stiffly over to the wall where his hat hung on a nail. At the same time
he continued his reverie.

"In young blood like that nature will show itself--everything, just as
it _really_ is--afterward, when older, things look all much alike--then
one is able to study more carefully--young blood like that."

The waiter had put his hat into his hand; the colonel took up his
tumbler again, in which there were still a few drops of the red wine.

"God bless the youngsters," he murmured; "they have hardly left me a
drop." He looked, almost sadly, into what remained of the wine, then set
the tumbler down again without drinking.

The fat waiter became suddenly alive.

"Will the colonel, perhaps, have another glass?"

The old man, standing at the table, had opened the wine list and was
mumbling to himself.

"H'm--another sort, maybe--but one can't buy it by the glass--only by
the bottle--somewhat too much."

Slowly his gaze wandered over in my direction; I read in his eyes the
dumb inquiry a man sometimes throws his neighbor when he wants to go
halves with him over a bottle of wine.

"If the colonel will allow me," I said, "it would give me great pleasure
to drink a bottle with him."

He agreed, plainly not unwilling. He pushed the wine list over to
the waiter, lining with his finger the sort he wanted, and said in a
commanding tone: "A bottle of that."

"That is a brand I know well," he said, turning to me, while he threw
his hat on a chair and sat down at one of the tables--"it's good blood."

I had placed myself at a table with him so that I could see his face in
profile. His look was again turned toward the window, and as he gazed
past me up into the heavens, the glow of the sunset was reflected in his
eyes.

It was the first time I had seen him at such close quarters.

By the look of his eyes he was lost in dreams, and as his hand played
mechanically through his long beard, there seemed to rise before him out
of the flood of the years that had rushed behind, forms that were once
young when he was young, and which were now--who can say where? The
bottle which the waiter had brought and placed at a table before us
contained a rare wine. An old Bordeaux, brown and oily, poured into our
glasses. I recalled the expression which the old man had used a short
time before.

"I must admit, colonel, that this is indeed 'good blood.'"

His flushed eyes came slowly back from the far away, turned upon me, and
remained fixed there, as if he would say: "What do you know about it?"

He took a deep draft, wiped his beard, and gazed at his glass.
"Strange," he said, "when a man grows old--he recalls the earliest days
far easier than those that come later."

I was silent; I felt that I ought neither to speak nor question. When
a man is lost in recollections he is making poetry, and one must not
question a poet.

A long pause followed. "What an assortment of people one has to meet
with," he continued. "When one thinks of it--many who live on and on--it
were often better they did not live at all--and others have to go so
much too early." He passed the palm of his hand over the surface of the
table. "Beneath that lies much."

It seemed as if the table had become to him as the surface of the earth,
and that he was thinking of those lying beneath the ground.

"Had to keep thinking of this a little while ago"--his voice sounded
hollow--"when I saw that little fellow. With a boy like that nature
comes right out, fairly gushes out--thick as your arm. You can see blood
in it. Pity, though, that good blood flows so freely--more freely than
the other. I once knew a little chap like that."

And there it was.

The waiter had seated himself in a back corner of the room; I kept
perfectly quiet; the heavy voice of the old colonel went laboring
through the stillness of the room like a gust of wind that precedes a
storm or some serious outbreak in nature.

His eyes turned toward me as if to search me, whether I could bear to
listen. He did not ask, I did not speak, but I looked at him, and my
look eagerly replied: "Go on."

But not yet did he begin; first he drew from the breast pocket of his
coat a large cigar-case of hard, brown leather, took out a cigar and
slowly lighted it.

"You know Berlin, of course," said he, as he blew out the match and
puffed the first cloud of smoke over the table. "No doubt you have
traveled before this on the street railway--"

"Oh, yes; often."

"H'm--well, then, as you go along behind the New Friedrich Street from
Alexander Square to the Jannowiz Bridge, there stands there on the
right-hand side in new Friedrich Street, a great ugly old building; it
is the old military school."

I nodded.

"The new one over there in Lichterfelde I do not know, but the old one,
that I do know--yes--h'm--was even a cadet there in my time--yes--that
one I do know."

This repetition of words gave me the feeling that he knew not only the
house, but probably many an event that had taken place in it.

"As you come from Alexander Square," he continued, "there first comes
a court with trees. Now grass grows in the court; in my time it was not
so, for the drills took place there and the cadets went walking there
during the hours of recreation. After that comes the great main building
that encloses a square court, which is called the 'Karreehof,' and
there, too, the cadets used to walk. Passing by from the outside, you
can't see into the court."

I nodded again in confirmation.

"And then comes still a third court; it is smaller, and on it stands
a house. Don't know what it is used for now; at that time it was the
infirmary. You can still see there the roof of the gymnasium as you pass
by; then next to the infirmary was the principal outdoor gymnasium. In
it was a jumping ditch and a climbing apparatus and every other possible
thing--now it has all gone. From the infirmary a door led out into the
gymnasium, but it was always kept locked. When one wanted to go into the
infirmary, one had to cross the court and enter in front. The door
then, as I said, was always locked; that is, it was opened only on some
special occasion, and that, indeed, was always a very mournful occasion.
For behind the door was the mortuary, and when a cadet died he was laid
therein, and the door remained open until the other cadets had filed by,
and looked at him once more--and he was then taken out--yes--h'm."

A long pause followed.

"Concerning the new house over there in Lichterfelde," continued the old
colonel in* a somewhat disparaging tone, "I know nothing, as I said, but
have heard that it is become a big affair with a great number of
cadets. Here in New Friedrich Street there were not so many, only four
companies, and they divided themselves into two classes: Sekundaner
and Primaner, and to these two were added the Selektaner, or special
students, who afterward entered the army as officers, and who were
nicknamed 'The Onions,' because they had authority over the others and
were barely tolerated in consequence.

"Now in the company to which I belonged--it was the fourth--there
were two brothers who sat together in the same class with me, the
Sekun-daner. Their name is of no consequence--but--well, they were
called, then, von L; the older of the two was called by the superiors
L No. I, and the smaller, who was a year and a half younger than the
other, L No. II. Among the cadets, however, they were called Big and
Little L. Little L, indeed--h'm--"

He moved in his chair, his eyes gazed out into vacancy. It appeared that
he had reached the subject of his reveries.

"Such a contrast between brothers I have never seen," he continued,
blowing a thick cloud from his meerschaum pipe. "Big L was a strapping
fellow, with clumsy arms and legs and a big fat head; [1] Little L was like
a willow switch, so slender and supple. He had a small, fine head, and
light, wavy hair that curled of itself, and a delicate nose like a young
eagle's, but above all--he was a lad--"

     1 "Die Bollen," a term of dislike among the Berlin
     cadets.

The old colonel drew a deep sigh. "Now you must not think that all
this was a matter of indifference to the cadets; on the contrary. The
brothers had scarcely entered the Berlin Cadet. School from the
preparatory school (they came from the one at Wahlstatt, I believe) when
their status was at once fixed: Big L was neglected, and Little L was
the universal favorite.

"Now with such boys it is an odd thing: the big and the strong, they are
the leaders, and on whomsoever these bestow their favor, with that boy
all goes well. It also procures for him respect from the others, and no
one ventures lightly to attack him. Such boys--here again nature stands
right out--much as it is with the animals, before the biggest and
strongest all the rest must crouch."

Fresh, vigorous puffs from the meerschaum accompanied these words.

"When the cadets came down at recreation time those who were good
friends together met and would go walking arm in arm around the
'Karreehof and toward the court where the trees stood, and so it was
always until the trumpet sounded for return to work.

"Big L--well--he attached himself just wherever he could find
attachment, and stalked sullenly ahead by himself--Little L, on the
contrary, almost before he could reach the court was seized under the
arm by two or three big fellows and compelled to walk with them. And
they were Primaners at that. For ordinarily, you must know, it never
occurred to a Primaner to go with a 'Knapsack,' or Plebe, from the
Sekunda; it was far beneath his dignity; but with Little L it was
different, there an exception was made. And yet he was no less loved by
the Sekundaner than by the Primaner. One could see that in class, where
we Sekundaner boys, you know, were by ourselves. In class we were ranged
according to alphabet, so that the two L's sat together very nearly in
the centre.

"In their lessons they stood pretty nearly even. Big L had a good head
for mathematics; in other things he was not of much account, but in
mathematics he was, as you might say, a "shark," and Little L, who was
not strong in mathematics, used to "crib" from his brother. In all other
respects Little L was ahead of his older brother, and in fact one of the
best in his class. And right here appeared the difference between the
brothers; Big L kept his knowledge to himself, and never prompted;
Little L, _he_ prompted, he fairly shouted--yes, to be sure he did--"

A tender smile passed over the face of the old man.

"If any one on the front form was called upon and did not know the
answer--Little L hissed right across all the forms what he ought to
say: when it came the turn of the back benches little L spoke the answer
half-aloud to himself.

"There was there an old professor from whom we took Latin. During nearly
every lesson he would stop short in the middle of the class; 'L No.
II,' he would say, 'you are prompting again! And that, too, in a most
shameless fashion. Have a care, L No. II, next time I will make an
example of you. I say it to you now for the last time!"

The old colonel laughed to himself. "But it always remained the next to
last time, and the example was never made. For though Little L was no
model boy, more often quite the contrary, he was loved by both teachers
and officers as well--but how indeed could it have been otherwise? He
was always in high spirits, as if receiving a new present every day,
yet nothing ever got sent to him, for the father of the two was in
desperately poor circumstances, a major in some infantry regiment or
other, and the boys received hardly a groschen (2.4 cents) for pocket
money. And always as if just peeled out of the egg, so fresh,--without
and within--eh, eh, altogether--"

Here the colonel paused, as if searching for an expression that would
contain the whole of his love for this former little comrade.

"As if Nature had been for once in a proudly good-humor," he said, "and
had stood that little follow upright on his feet and cried: 'There you
have him!'

"Now this was to be observed," he continued, "that just so much as the
brothers differed, one from the other, the more they seemed to cling
to each other. In Big L, indeed, one did not notice it so much; he was
always sullen and displayed no feeling; but Little L could never conceal
anything. And because Little L felt conscious of this, how much better
he himself was treated by the other cadets, it made him sorry for his
brother. When we took our walks around the courtyard, then one could see
how Little L would look at his brother from time to time, to see if he,
too, had some one to walk with. That he prompted his brother in class
and allowed him to copy from himself when sight-exercises were dictated
was all a matter of course; but he also took care that no one teased
his brother, and when he observed him quietly from the side, as he often
did, without drawing his brother's attention to it, then his little face
was quite noticeably sad, almost as if he were a great care to him--"

The old man pulled hard at his pipe. "All that I put together for myself
afterward," said he, "when everything happened that was to happen; he
knew at the time much better than we did how matters stood with Big L,
and what was his brother's character.

"This was, of course, understood among the cadets, and it helped Big L
none the more, for he remained disliked after it as before, yet it made
Little L all the more popular, and he was generally called 'Brother
Love.'

"Now the two lived together in one room, and Little L, as I said, was
very clean and neat; the big one, on the contrary, was very slovenly.
And so Little L fairly made himself servant to his brother, and it
turned out that he even cleaned the brass buttons on his uniform for
him, and just before the ranks formed for roll-call would place himself,
with clothes-brush in hand, in front of his brother, and once more
regularly brush and scrub him--especially on those days when the 'cross
lieutenant' was on duty and received roll-call.

"Well, in the morning the cadets had to go down into the court for
roll-call, and there the officer on duty went up and down between the
lines and inspected their uniforms to see if they were in order.

"And when the 'cross lieutenant' attended to this, then there reigned
the most woful anxiety throughout the company, for he always found
something. He would go behind the cadets and flip at their coats with
his finger to make the dust fly, and if none came, then he would lift
their coat-pockets and snap at them, and so, beat our coats as much as
we would, there was sure to be left some dust lying on them, and as soon
as the 'cross lieutenant' saw it, he would sing out in a voice like that
of an old bleating ram: 'Write him down for Sunday report,' and then
Sunday's day off might go to the devil, and then that got to be a very
serious matter."

The old colonel paused, took a vigorous swallow of wine, and with the
palm of his hand squeezed the beard from his upper lip into his mouth
and sucked off the wine drops that sparkled on the hair. Recollection of
the "cross lieutenant" made him plainly furious.

"When one considers what sort of meanness it takes to so deprive a poor
little fellow of the Sunday holiday he has been hugging for a whole
week, and all for a trifle--bah! it's downright--whenever I have seen
any one annoying my men--in later days that sort of thing didn't happen
in my regiment; they knew this, that I was there and would not tolerate
it.--To be rough at times, ay, even to the extreme if necessary, to
throw one into the guard-house, that does no harm--: but to nag--for
that it takes a mean skunk!"

"Very true!" observed the waiter from the back part of the room, and
thus made it known that he was following the colonel's story.

The old man calmed himself and went on with his story.

"Things went on this way for a year, and then came the time for
examinations, always a very special occasion.

"The Primaners took their ensign's examination, and the Selektaners,
who, as I have said, Were called 'Onions,' the officer's examination,
and as fast as any had passed the examination, they were dismissed
from the cadet corps and sent home, and it came about that the second
classmen, or Sekundaner, who were to be promoted to first class, still
remained Sekundaner for a time.

"Well, this state of affairs lasted until the new Sekundaner entered
from the preparatory school and the newly dubbed 'Onions' returned, and
then once more the wheelbarrow trudged along its accustomed way. But in
the meantime a kind of disorder prevailed, more especially just after
the last of the Primaners had left--they were examined in sections, you
know, and then despatched, after which everything went pretty much at
sixes and sevens.

"There was now in the dormitory where the two brothers lived a certain
Primaner, a 'swell,' as he was called by the cadets, and because he had
made up his mind, as soon as he should pass the examination and breathe
the fresh air again, to conduct himself like a fine gentleman, he had
had made for himself, instead of a sword-belt like those the cadets
procured from the institution and wore, a special patent-leather belt of
his own, thinner and apparently finer than the ordinary regulation belt.
He was able to afford this much, you see, for he had money sent to him
from home. He had displayed this belt about everywhere, for he was
inordinately proud of it, and the other cadets admired it.

"Now as the day arrived for the Primaner to pack together his scattered
belongings in order to go home, he looked to buckle on his fine
belt--and all at once the thing was missing.

"A great to-do followed; search was made everywhere; the belt was not to
be found. The Primaner had not locked it in his wardrobe, but had put it
with his helmet in the dormitory behind the curtain where the helmets of
the other cadets lay openly--and from there it had disappeared.

"It could not possibly have disappeared in any other way;--some one must
have taken it.

"But who?

"First they thought of the old servant who was accustomed to blacken the
boots of the cadets, and keep the dormitory in order--but he was an old
trusty non-commissioned officer, who had never during the course of his
long life allowed himself to be guilty of the least irregularity.

"It surely could not be one of the cadets? But who could possibly think
such a thing? So the matter remained a mystery, and truly an unpleasant
one. The Primaner swore and scolded because he must now leave wearing
the ordinary institution belt; the other cadets in the room were
altogether silent and depressed; they had at once unlocked all their
wardrobes and offered to let the Primaner search them, but he had merely
replied: 'That's nonsense, of course; who could think of such a thing?'

"And now something remarkable happened, and caused more sensation than
all that went before; all at once the Primaner got back the belt.

"He had just left his room with his portmanteau in his hand, and had
reached the stairs, when he was hastily called from behind, and as
he turned about, Little L came running up, holding something in his
hand--it was the Primaner's belt.

"Two others happened to be passing at the time, and they afterward told
how deathly pale Little L was, and how every member of his body was
literally shaking. He had whispered something into the ear of the
Primaner, and the two had exchanged all quietly a couple of words, and
then the Primaner affectionately stroked the other's head, took off his
regulation belt, buckled on the fine one and was gone; he had handed
the regulation belt over to Little L to carry back. Naturally the story
could now no longer be concealed, and it all came out accordingly.

"A new assignment of rooms was ordered; Big L was transferred; and just
at the time all this was taking place, he had completed his removal to
the new quarters.

"Afterward it occurred to the cadets that he had kept strangely quiet
about the whole affair--but one always hears the grass growing after it
has grown. So much, however, was certain; he had allowed no one to help
him, and when Big L put his hands to the work, he became quite rough
toward his little brother. But Little L, ready to help as he always was,
did not allow himself to be deterred by this, and as he was taking out
of his brother's locker the gymnasium drill jacket that was lying neatly
folded together, he felt all at once something hard within--and it was
the belt of the Primaner.

"What the brothers said to each other at the moment, or whether they
spoke at all, no one has ever learned; for Little L had still so much
presence of mind that he went noiselessly from the room.

"But hardly was he out of the door and in the corridor, when he threw
the jacket on the ground, and without once thinking of what might be
made out of the affair, he ran up behind the Primaner with the belt.

"But now, of course, it could no longer be helped; in five minutes the
story was the property of the whole company.

"Big L had allowed himself to be driven by the devil and had become
light-fingered. Half an hour later it was whispered softly from room to
room: 'To-night, when the lamps are turned out, general consultation in
the company hall!'

"In every company quarters, you must know, there was a larger room,
where marks were given out, and certain public actions proceeded with,
in what was called the company hall.

"So that evening, when the lamps were out, and everything was quite
dark, there was a general movement from all the rooms, through the
corridor; not a door ventured to slam, all were in stocking feet, for
the captain and the officers still knew nothing and were allowed to know
nothing of the meeting, else we would have brought a storm about our
ears.

"As we came to the door of the company hall, there stood near the door
against the wall one as white as the plaster on the wall--it was Little
L. At the same moment a couple took him by the hands. 'Little L can
come in with us,' they said; 'he is not to blame.' Only one of them all
wished to oppose this; he was a long, big fellow--he was called--name
of no consequence--well, then, he was called K. But he was overruled at
once; Little L was taken in with us, a couple of tallow candles were lit
and placed on the table, and now the consultation began."

The colonel's glass was empty again. I filled it for him, and he took
a long swallow. "Over all this," he went on, "one can laugh now if one
wills; but this much I can say for us, we were not in a laughing mood,
but altogether dismal. A cadet a rascal--to us that was something
incomprehensible. All faces were pale, all speaking was but half aloud.
Ordinarily it was considered the most despicable piece of meanness if
one cadet reported another to the authorities--but when a cadet had done
such a thing as to steal, then he was for us no longer a cadet, and it
was for this reason that the consultation was being held, whether we
ought to report to the captain what Big L had done.

"Long K was the first to speak. He declared that we ought to go at
once to the captain and tell him everything, for at such meanness all
consideration ceases. Now Long K was the biggest and strongest boy
in the company; his words, therefore, made a marked impression, and
besides, we were all of his opinion at bottom.

"No one knew anything to object to this, and so there fell a general
silence. All at once, however, the circle that had formed around the
table opened and Little L, who had till now been flattening himself
against the farthest corner of the room, came forward into the centre.
His arms hung limp at the side of his body, and his face he kept lowered
to the ground; one saw that he wished to say something, but could not
find the courage.

"Long K was again laying down the law. 'L No. II,' said he, 'has no
right to speak here.'

"But this time he was not so fortunate. He had always been hostile to
the two, no one quite knew why, especially Little L. Moreover, he
was not a bit popular, for as such youngsters have once and for all a
tremendously fine instinct, they may have felt that in this long gawk
lay hidden a perfectly mean, cowardly, wretched spirit. He was one of
those who never venture to attack their equals in size, but bully the
smaller and weaker ones.

"At that broke out a whispering on all sides: 'Little L _shall_ speak!
All the more reason for him to speak.'

"As the little fellow, who was still standing there, ever motionless
and rigid, heard how his comrades were taking his part, suddenly the
big tears rolled down his cheeks; he doubled his two little fists and
screwed them into his eyes and sobbed so heart-breakingly that his whole
body shook from top to bottom and he could not utter a word.

"One of them went up to him and patted him on the back.

"'Take it easy,' said he; 'what is it you wish to say?'

"Little L still kept on sobbing.

"'If--he is shown up--' he then broke out at long intervals--'he will be
dismissed from the corps--and then what will become of him?'

"There was silence everywhere; we knew that the young one was perfectly
right, and that such would be the consequence if we reported him. Added
to this we also knew that the father was poor, and involuntarily each
thought of what his own father would say if he should learn the same of
his son.

"'But you must see yourself/ continued the cadet to Little L, 'that your
brother has done a very contemptible thing and deserves punishment for
it.'

"Little L nodded silently; his feelings were entirely with those who
were censuring his brother. The cadet reflected a moment, then he turned
to the others.

"'I make a proposition,' said he; 'and if it be accepted we will not
disgrace L No. I for life. We will prove on his body whether he has any
honorable feelings left. L No. I. himself shall choose whether he wishes
us to report him or whether we shall keep the matter to ourselves cudgel
him thoroughly for it, and then let the affair be buried.'

"That was an admirable way out. All agreed eagerly.

"The cadet laid his hand on Little L's shoulder. 'Go along, then,' said
he, 'and call your brother here.'

"Little L dried his tears and nodded his head quickly--then he was out
of the door and a moment after was back again, bringing his brother with
him.

"Big L ventured to look at no one; like an ox that has been felled on
the forehead, he stood before his comrades. Little L stood behind him,
and never once did his eyes leave his brother's slightest movement.

"The cadet who had made the foregoing proposition began the trial of L
No. I.

"'Does he admit that he took the belt?'

"'He admits it.'

"'Does he feel that he has done something that has made him absolutely
unworthy of being a cadet any longer?'

"'He feels it.'

"'Does he choose that we report him to the captain or that we thrash him
soundly and that the matter shall then be buried?'

"'He prefers to be soundly thrashed.'

"A sigh of relief went through the whole hall.

"It was determined to finish the matter at once then and there.

"One of the boys was sent out to fetch a rattan, such as we used for
beating our clothes.

"While he was gone we tried to induce Little L to leave the hall, so
that he should not be present at the execution.

"But he shook his head silently; he wished to remain on hand.

"As soon as the rattan came, Big L was made to lie face down on the
table, two cadets seized his hands and drew him forward, two others
took him by the feet so that his body lay stretched out lengthwise. The
tallow candles were taken from the table and lifted up high, and the
whole affair had an absolutely gruesome look.

"Long K, because he was the strongest, was to perform the execution; he
took the rattan in his hand, stepped to one side, and with the force
of his whole body let the cane come whistling down on to Big L, who was
clothed only in drill jacket and trousers.

"The young fellow fairly rose under the fearful blow and would have
cried out; but in a second Little L rushed up to him, took his head in
both hands and smothered it against himself.

"'Don't scream,' he whispered to him; 'don't scream, else the whole
affair will get out!'

"Big L swallowed down the cry and choked and groaned to himself.

"Long K again lifted up the cane, and a second swish resounded through
the hall.

"The body of the culprit actually writhed on the table, so that the
cadets were scarcely able to hold him down by his hands and feet. Little
L had wrapped both arms around the head of his brother, and was crushing
it with convulsive force against himself. His eyes were wide open, his
face like the plaster on the wall, his whole body was quivering.

"Throughout the hall was a stillness like death, so that one could only
hear the wheezing and puffing of the victim whom the little brother was
smothering against his breast.

"All eyes were hanging on the little fellow; we all had a feeling that
we could not look on at it any longer.

"When, therefore, the third blow had fallen and the whole performance
repeated itself just as before, a general excited whisper followed:
'Now, it is enough--strike no more!'

"Long K, who had become quite red from the exertion, was raising his
arm again for the fourth blow, but with one accord, three or four threw
themselves between him and Big L, tore the rattan from his grasp, and
thrust him back.

"The execution was at an end.

"The cadet aforesaid raised his voice once more, but only half aloud.

"'Now, the affair is over with and buried,' said he, 'let each one
give his hand to L No. I., and let him that breathes even a word of the
matter be accounted a rascal.'

"A general 'Yes, yes,' showed that he had spoken entirely in accord with
the mind of the others. They stepped up to Big L and stretched out their
hands to him, but then, as at a word of command, they threw themselves
upon Little L. There formed a regular knot about the lad, first one
and then another wished to grasp him by the hand and shake it. Those
standing at the back stretched out their hands 'way across those in
front, some even climbed on to the table to get at him; they stroked
his head, patted him on the shoulder, and with it all was a general
whispering: 'Little L, you glorious rascal, you superb Little L.'"

The old colonel lifted his glass to his mouth--it was as if he were
forcing something down behind it. When he set it down again, he drew a
deep sigh from the bottom of his heart.

"Boys like that," said he, "they have instinct--instinct and sentiment.

"The lights were turned out, all stole hushed through the corridor back
to their rooms. Five minutes later every boy was lying in his bed, and
the affair was ended.

"The captain and the other officers had heard not a sound of the whole
matter.

"The affair was ended"--the voice of the speaker grew thick; he had
buried both hands in his trousers' pockets and was gazing before him
through the fumes of the smoking cigar.

"So we thought that night, as we lay in bed.--Did Little L sleep that
night? In the days following, when we assembled in class, it did not
seem so. Before, it had been as if an imp were sitting in the place
where the lad sat, and, like a rooster, had crowed it over the whole
class--now it was as if there were a void in the place--so still and
pale he sat in his place.

"As when a man flicks the dust from the wings of a butterfly--so was it
with the little lad--I can not describe it otherwise.

"On afternoons one always saw him now walking with his brother. He may
have felt that Big L would now find less companionship than ever among
the others--so he provided company for him. And there the two went,
then, arm in arm, always around about the Karreehof and across the court
with the trees in it, one as well as the other with head bent to the
ground, so that one scarcely saw that they ever spoke a word."

Again there came a pause in the narrative, again I had to fill the empty
glass of the colonel, who smoked his cigar faster and faster.

"But all this," he continued, "would perhaps have worn itself out in
course of time and everything have gone on as before--but for people!"

He laid his clenched fist on the table.

"There are people," said he, scowling, "who are like the poisonous weed
in the field, at which beasts nibble themselves to death. With such
people the rest poison themselves!

"So, then, one day we were having lessons in physics. The teacher was
showing us experiments on the electric machine, and an electric shock
was to be passed through the whole class.

"To this end each one of us had to give his hand to his neighbor, so as
to complete the circuit.

"As now Big L, who was sitting next to Long K, held out his hand to him,
the lubber made a grimace as if he were about to touch a toad and drew
back his hand.

"Big L quietly shrank into himself and sat there as if covered with
shame. But at the same instant Little L is up and out of his place, over
to his brother's side, at whose place, next to Long K, he seats himself,
whose hand he grips and smashes with all the force of his body against
the wooden form, so that the long gawk cries out with pain.

"Then he grabbed Little L by the neck and the two now began regularly to
fight in the middle of class.

"The teacher, who had been tinkering all this time at his machine, now
rushed up with coat-tails flying.

"'Now! Now! Now!' he cried.

"He was, you must know, an old man for whom we had not exactly a great
respect.

"The two were so interlocked that they did not break away, even though
the professor was standing directly in front of them.

"'What disgraceful conduct!' cried the professor. 'What disgraceful
conduct! Will you separate at once!'

"Long K made a face as if he were about to cry.

"'L No. II began it,' he said, 'though I did nothing at all to provoke
him.'

"Little L stood straight up in his place--for we always had to stand
when a professor spoke to us--big drops of perspiration coursed slowly
down either cheek; he said not a word; he had bitten his teeth together
so hard that one could see the muscles of his jaw through the thin
cheeks. And as he heard what Long K said a smile passed over his face--I
have never seen anything like it.

"The old professor expatiated at some length in beautiful set phrases
over such disgraceful behavior, spoke of the 'utter depths of abysmal
bestiality, which such conduct betrayed'--we let him talk on; our
thoughts were with Little L and Long K.

"And scarcely was the lesson at an end and the professor out of the
door, when from the back a book came flying through the air the whole
length of the class straight at the skull of Long K. And as he turned
angrily toward the aggressor, from the other side he received another
book on his head, and now there broke out a general howling: 'Knock him
down! Knock him down!' The whole class sprang up over tables and benches
and there was a rush for Long K, whose hide was now so thoroughly tanned
that it fairly smoked."

The old colonel, pleased, smiled grimly to himself and contemplated his
hand as it still lay with fist doubled on the table.

"I helped," said he, "and with hearty good-will--I can tell you."

It was as if his hand had forgotten that it had grown fifty years older;
as the fingers closed convulsively one could see that it was in spirit
once again pummeling Long K.

"But as people must belong once and forever to their own kind,"
he continued his narrative, "so this Long K had to be naturally a
revengeful, spiteful, malicious, _canaille_. He would much rather have
gone to the captain and resentfully told him everything, but in our
presence he did not dare; for that he was too cowardly.

"But that he had received a thrashing before the whole class, and that
Little L was to blame for it, for that he did not forgive Little L.

"One afternoon, then, as recreation hour came round again, the cadets
went walking in the courts; the two brothers, as usual, by themselves;
Long K linked arm in arm with two others.

"To get from the Karreehof to the other court where the trees were, one
had to pass under one of the wings of the main building, and it was
a rule that the cadets must not pass through arm in arm, so as not to
obstruct the passageway.

"On this particular afternoon, as ill-luck would have it, Long K, as he
was about to pass through with his two chums from the Karreehof to the
other court, met the two brothers at the corridor, and they, deep in
their thoughts, had forgotten to let go of one another.

"Long K, although the affair was no concern of his, when he saw this
stood still, opened his eyes wide and his mouth still wider, and called
out to the two: 'What does this mean,' said he, 'that you go through
here arm in arm? Do you intend to block the way for honest people, you
set of thieves?'"

Here the colonel interrupted himself.

"That is now fifty years ago," said he, "and more--but I remember it as
if it had happened yesterday.

"I was just going with two others from the Karreehof, and suddenly we
heard a scream come from the corridor--I can not describe at all how it
sounded--when a tiger or other wild beast breaks loose from his cage and
throws himself on some one, then, I think, one would hear something like
it.

"It was so horrible that we three let our arms drop and stood there
quite paralyzed. And not only we, but everything in the Karreehof
stopped and suddenly grew quiet. And then everything that had two legs
to run with kept rushing up at full speed toward the corridor, so that
it fairly swarmed and thickened black around the corridor. I, naturally,
with the rest--and what I saw there--

"Little L had climbed on to Long K like a wildcat--nothing else--and
with his left hand hanging on by the latter's collar so that the tall
gawk was half-choked, with his right fist he kept up a crack--crack--and
crack right in the middle of Long K's face, wherever it happened
to strike, so that the blood was pouring from Long K's nose like a
waterfall.

"Now from the other court came the officer who was on duty and broke
his way through the cadets. 'L No. II, will you leave off at once!' he
thundered--for he was a man tall as a tree and had a voice that could be
heard from one end of the Academy to the other, and we had a wholesome
respect for him.

"But Little L neither heard nor saw, but kept on belaboring Long K
in the face still more, and with it came again and again that fearful
uncanny shriek that thrilled through us all, marrow and bone.

"When the officer saw that he-took hold himself, gripped the little
fellow by both shoulders, and by main force tore him away from Long K.

"As soon as he stood upon his feet, however, Little L rolled up the
whites of his eyes, fell his full length to the earth, and writhed on
the ground in a convulsion.

"We had never yet seen anything like it, and were shocked and, stared at
it in absolute terror.

"But the officer, who had been bending down over him, now straightened
himself: 'The lad certainly has a most serious convulsion,' said he.
'Forward, two take hold of his feet'--he himself lifted him under the
arms--'over to the infirmary!'

"And so they bore Little L over to the infirmary.

"While they were carrying him there we went up to Big L to learn just
what had happened, and from Big L and the other two who had been with
Long K we then heard the whole story.

"Long K was standing there like a whipped dog and wiping the blood from
his nose, and had it not been for this nothing would have saved him from
receiving another murderous thrashing. But now all turned silently
away from him, no one ever spoke another word to him; he made himself a
social outcast."

The top of the table resounded as the old colonel struck it with his
fist.

"How long the others kept him in Coventry," said he, "I know not. I sat
in class with him for a whole year longer and spoke never a single word
more to him. We entered the army at the same time as ensigns; I did
not give him my hand at parting; do not know whether he has become an
officer; have never looked for his name in the army register; don't know
whether he has fallen in one of the wars, whether he still lives or is
dead--for me he was no more, is no more--the only thing I regret is that
the person ever came into my life at all and that I can not root out the
remembrance of him forever, like a weed one flings into the oven!

"The next morning came bad news from the infirmary: Little L was lying
unconscious in a burning, nervous fever. In the afternoon his older
brother was called in, but the little fellow no longer recognized him.

"And in the evening, as we all sat at supper in the big common
dining-hall, a rumor came--like a great black bird with muffled beat of
wings it passed through the hall--that Little L was dead.

"As we came back from the dining-hall into company quarters, our captain
was standing at the door of the company hall; we were made to go in, and
there the captain announced to us that our little comrade, L No. II, had
fallen asleep that night, never to wake again.

"The captain was a very good man--he fell in 1866, a brave hero--he
loved his cadets, and as he gave us the news, he had to wipe the tears
from his beard. Then he ordered us all to fold our hands; one of us had
to step forward and before all say 'Our Father' out loud--"

The colonel bowed his head.

"Then for the first time," said he, "I felt how really beautiful is the
Lord's Prayer.

"And so, the next afternoon, the door that led from the infirmary to the
outdoor gymnasium opened, the hateful, ominous door.

"We were made to step down into the court of the infirmary; we were to
see once more our dead comrade.

"Our steps shuffled with a dull and heavy sound as we were marched over
there; no one spoke a word; one heard only a heavy breathing.

"And there lay little L, poor little L!

"In his white little shirt he lay there, his hands folded on his breast,
his golden locks curled about his forehead, which was white like wax;
the cheeks so sunken that the beautiful, delicate little nose projected
quite far--and in his face--the expression--"

The old colonel was silent, the breath came choking from his bosom.

"I have grown to be an old man," he went on falteringly--"I have seen
men lying on the field of battle--men on whose faces stood written
distress and despair--such heart sorrow as I saw in the face of this
child I have never seen before or since--never--never--"

A deep stillness took possession of the wine-room where we were sitting.
As the old colonel became silent and spoke no word more, the waiter rose
softly from his corner and lit the gas-jet that hung over our heads; it
had grown quite dark.

I took up the wine bottle once more, but it was now almost empty--just
one tear still crept slowly out--one last drop of the good blood.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Good Blood, by Ernst Von Wildenbruch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOOD BLOOD ***

***** This file should be named 23223.txt or 23223.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/2/2/23223/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
