The Project Gutenberg EBook of Marianson, by Mary Hartwell Catherwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Marianson
       From "Mackinac And Lake Stories", 1899

Author: Mary Hartwell Catherwood

Release Date: October 30, 2007 [EBook #23251]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARIANSON ***




Produced by David Widger





MARIANSON

From "Mackinac And Lake Stories", 1899

By Mary Hartwell Catherwood


When the British landed on the west side of Mackinac Island at three
o'clock in the morning of July 17,1812, Canadians were ordered to
transport the cannon. They had only a pair of six-pounders, but these
had to be dragged across the long alluvial stretch to heights which
would command the fortress, and sand, rock, bushes, trees, and fallen
logs made it a dreadful portage. Voyageurs, however, were men to
accomplish what regulars and Indians shirked.

All but one of the hundred and sixty Canadians hauled with a good
will on the cannon ropes. The dawn was glimmering. Paradise hid in the
untamed island, breathing dew and spice. The spell worked instantly upon
that one young voyageur whose mind was set against the secret
attack. All night his rage had been swelling. He despised the British
regulars-forty-two lords of them only being in this expedition-as they
in turn despised his class. They were his conquerors. He had no desire
to be used as means of pushing their conquest further. These islanders
he knew to be of his own race, perhaps crossed with Chippewa blood.

Seven hundred Indians, painted and horned for war, skulked along as
allies in the dim morning twilight. He thought of sleeping children
roused by tomahawk and scalping-knife in case the surprised fort did not
immediately surrender. Even then, how were a few hundred white men to
restrain nearly a thousand savages?

The young Canadian, as a rush was made with the ropes, stumbled over a
log and dropped behind a bush. His nearest companions scarcely noticed
the desertion in their strain, but the officer instantly detailed an
Indian.

"One of you Sioux bring that fellow back or bring his scalp."

A Sioux stretched forward and leaped eagerly into the woods. All the
boy's years of wilderness training were concentrated on an escape. The
English officer meant to make him a lesson to the other voyageurs. And
he smiled as he thought of the race he could give the Sioux. All his
arms except his knife were left behind the bush; for fleet-ness was to
count in this venture. The game of life or death was a pretty one, to
be enjoyed as he shot from tree to tree, or like a noiseless-hoofed deer
made a long stretch of covert. He was alive through every blood drop.
The dewy glory of dawn had never seemed so great. Cool as the Sioux
whom he dodged, his woodsman's eye gathered all aspects of the strange
forest. A detached rock, tall as a tree, raised its colossal altar,
surprising the eye like a single remaining temple pillar.

Old logs, scaled as in a coat of mail, testified to the humidity of this
lush place. The boy trod on sweet white violets smelling of incense.

The wooded deeps unfolded in thinning dusk and revealed a line of high
verdant cliffs walling his course. He dashed through hollows where
millions of ferns bathed him to the knees. As daylight grew--though it
never was quite daylight there-so did his danger. He expected to hear
the humming of an arrow, and perhaps to feel a shock and sting and
cleaving of the bolt, and turned in recklessly to climb for the uplands,
where after miles of jutting spurs the ridge stooped and pushed out in
front of itself a round-topped rock. As the Canadian passed this rock a
yellow flare like candle-light came through a crack at its base.

He dropped on all-fours. The Indian was not in sight. He squirmed within
a low battlement of serrated stone guarding the crack, and let himself
down into what appeared to be the mouth of a cave. The opening was so
low as to be invisible just outside the serrated breastwork. He found
himself in a room of rock, irregularly hollow above, with a candle
burning on the stone floor. As he sat upright and stretched forth a hand
to pinch off the flame, the image of a sleeping woman was printed on his
eyeballs so that he saw every careless ring of fair hair around her head
and every curve of her body for hours afterwards in the dusk.

His first thought was to place himself where his person would intercept
any attack at the mouth of the cave. Knife in hand, he waited for a
horned, glittering-eyed face to stoop or an arrow or hatchet to glance
under that low rim, the horizon of his darkness. His chagrin at having
taken to a trap and drawn danger on a woman was poignant; the candle
had caught him like a moth, and a Sioux would keenly follow. Still, no
lightest step betrayed the Sioux's knowledge of his whereabouts. A
long time passed before he relaxed to an easy posture and turned to the
interior of the cave.

The drip of a veiled water-vein at the rear made him conscious of
thirst, but the sleeping woman was in the way of his creeping to take
a drink. Wrapped in a fur robe, she lay breathing like an infant,
white-skinned, full-throated, and vigorous, a woman older than himself.

[Illustration: She lay breathing like an infant 026]

The consequences of her waking did not threaten him as perilous. Without
reasoning, he was convinced that a woman who lay down to sleep beside
a burning candle in this wild place would make no outcry when she
awoke and found the light had drawn instead of kept away possible
cave-inhabitants. Day grew beyond the low sill and thinned obscurity
around him, showing the swerve of the roof to a sloping shelf.
Perspiration cooled upon him and he shivered. A fire and a breakfast
would have been good things, which he had often enjoyed in danger.
Rowing all night, and landing cannon at the end of it, and running a
league or more for life, exhausted a man.

The woman stirred, and the young voyageur thought of dropping his knife
back into its sheath. At the slight click she sat up, drawing in her
breath.

He whispered: "Do not be afraid. I have not come in here to hurt you."

She was staring at him, probably taking him for some monster of the
dark.

"Have you anything here to eat?"

The woman resumed her suspended breath, and answered in the same guarded
way, and in French like his: "Yes. I come to this part of the island so
of ten that I have put bread and meat and candles in the cave. How did
you find it? No one but myself knew about it."

"I saw the candle-light."

"The candle was to keep off evil spirits. It has been blown out. Where
did you come from?"

"From St. Joseph Island last night with the English. They have taken the
island by surprise."

She unexpectedly laughed in a repressed gurgle, as a faun or other woods
creature might have laughed at the predicaments of men.

"I am thinking of the stupid American soldiers--to lie asleep and let
the British creep in upon them. But have you seen my cow? I searched
everywhere, until the moon went down and I was tired to death, for my
cow."

"No, I saw no cow. I had the Sioux to watch."

"What Sioux?"

"The Indian our commandant sent after me. Speak low. He may be listening
outside."

They themselves listened.

"If Indians have come on the island they will kill all the cattle."

"There are the women and children and men--even poor voyageurs--for them
to kill first."

She gasped, "Is it war?"

"Yes, it is war."

"I never have seen war. Why did you come here?"

"I did not want to, mademoiselle, and I deserted. That is why the Indian
was sent after me."

"Do not call me mademoiselle. I am Marianson Bruelle, the widow of Andre
Chenier. Our houses will be burned, and our gardens trampled, and our
boats stolen."

"Not if the fort surrenders."

Again they harkened to the outside world in suspense. The deserter had
expected to hear cannon before sunlight so slowly crept under the cave's
lip. It was as if they sat within a colossal skull, broad between the
ears but narrowing towards the top, with light coming through the parted
mouth. Accustomed to the soft twilight, the two could see each other,
and the woman covertly put her dress in order while she talked.

More than fearlessness, even a kind of maternal passion, moved her. She
searched in the back of the cave and handed her strange guest food, and
gathered him a birch cup of water from the dripping rock. The touch of
his fingers sent a new vital thrill through her. Two may talk together
under the same roof for many years, yet never really meet; and two
others at first speech are old friends. She did not know this young
voyageur, yet she began to claim him.

He was so tired that the tan of his cheek turned leaden in the cave
gloom. She rose from her bearskin and spread it for him, when he
finished eating.

"You cannot go out now," he whispered, when he saw her intention. "The
Sioux is somewhere in the woods watching for me. The Indians came on
this island for scalps. You will not be safe, even in the fort, until
the fight is over, or until night comes again."

Marianson, standing convinced by what he said, was unable to take her
eyes off him. Mass seemed always irksome to her in spite of the frequent
changes of posture and her conviction that it was good for her soul. She
was at her happiest plunging through woods or panting up cliffs which
squaws dared not scale. Yet enforced hiding with a stranger all day in
the cave was assented to by this active sylvan creature. She had not
a word to say against it, and the danger of going out was her last
thought. The cavern's mouth was a very awkward opening to crawl through,
especially if an Indian should catch one in the act. There was nothing
to do but to sit down and wait.

A sigh of pleasure, as at inhaling the spirit of a flower, escaped her
lips. This lad, whose presence she knew she would feel without seeing
if he came into church behind her, innocent of the spell he was casting,
still sat guarding the entrance, though the droop of utter weariness
relaxed every posture. Marianson bade him lie down on the fur robe, and
imperiously arranged her lap to hold his head.

"I am maman to you. I say to you sleep, and you shall sleep."

The appealing and thankful eyes of the boy were closed almost as soon
as he crept upon the robe and his head sunk in its comfortable pillow.
Marianson braced her back against the wall and dropped her hands at her
sides. Occasionally she glanced at the low rim of light. No Indian could
enter without lying flat. She had little dread of the Sioux.

Every globule which fell in darkness from the rock recorded, like the
sand grain of an hour-glass, some change in Marianson.

"I not care for anybody, me," had been her boast when she tantalized
soldiers on the village street. Her gurgle of laughter, and the hair
blowing on her temples from under the blanket she drew around her face,
worked havoc in Mackinac. To her men were merely useful objects, like
cows, or houses, or gardens, or boats. She hugged the social liberty of
a woman who had safely passed through matrimony and widowhood. Married
to old Andre Chenier by her parents, that he might guard her after their
death, she loathed the thought of another wearisome tie, and called it
veneration of his departed spirit. He left her a house, a cow, and a
boat. Accustomed to work for him, she found it much easier to work for
herself when he was gone, and resented having young men hang around
desiring to settle in her house. She laughed at every proposal a father
or mother made her. No family on the island could get her, and all
united in pointing her out as a bad pattern for young women.

A bloom like the rose flushing of early maidenhood came over Marianson
with her freedom. Isolated and daring and passionless, she had no
conception of the scandal she caused in the minds of those who carried
the burdens of the community, but lived like a bird of the air. Wives
who bore children and kept the pot boiling found it hard to see her
tiptoeing over cares which swallowed them. She did not realize that
maids desired to marry and she took their lovers from them.

But knowledge grew in her as she sat holding the stranger's head in
her lap, though it was not a day on which to trouble one's self with
knowledge. There was only the forest's voice outside, that ceaseless
majestic hymn of the trees, accompanied by the shore ripple, which was
such a little way off. Languors like the sweet languors of spring came
over her. She was happier than she had ever been before in her life.

"It is delicious," she thought. "I have been in the cave many times, but
it will never be like this again."

And it was a strange joy to find the touch of a human being something
to delight in. There was sweet wickedness in it; penance might have to
follow. What would the cure say if he saw her? To amuse one's self with
soldiers and islanders was one thing; to sit tranced all day in a cave
with a stranger must be another.

There was a rough innocence in his relaxed body--beautiful as the virgin
softness of a girl. Under the spell of his unconscious domination, she
did not care about his past. Her own past was nothing. She had arrived
in the present. Time stood still. His face was turned towards her, and
she studied all its curves, yet knew if he had other features he would
still be the one person in the world who could so draw her. What was the
power? Had women elsewhere felt it? At that thought she had a pang of
anguish and rage altogether new to her. Marianson was tender even in her
amusements; her benevolence extended to dumb cattle; but in the hidden
darkness of her consciousness she found herself choosing the Sioux for
him, rather than a woman.

Once he half raised his head, but again let it sink to its rest.
Marianson grew faint; and as the light waned at the cave mouth she
remembered she had not eaten anything that day. The fast made her seem
fit to say prayers, and she said all she knew over his head, like a
mother brooding.

He startled her by sitting up, without warning, fully roused and alert.

"What time is it?" inquired the boy.

"Look at the door. The sun has long been behind the trees."

"Have I slept all day?"

"Perhaps."

"And have you heard no sound of battle?"

"It has been still as the village street during mass."

"What, then, have they done, those English? They must have taken the
fort without firing a gun. And the Sioux-you have not seen him?"

"Nothing has passed the cave door, not even a chipmunk."

He stretched his arms upward into the hollow, standing tall and well
made, his buckskin shirt turned back from his neck.

"I am again hungry."

"I also," said Marianson. "I have not eaten anything to-day."

Her companion dropped on his knees before her and took out of her hands
the food she had ready. His face expressed shame and compunction as he
fed her himself, offering bites to her mouth with gentle persistence.
She laughed the laugh peculiar to herself, and pushed his hand back to
his own lips. So they ate together, and afterwards drank from the same
cup. Marianson showed him where the drops came down, and he gathered
them, smiling at her from the depths of the cave. They heard the evening
cawing of crows, and the waters rushing with a wilder wash on the beach.

"I will bring more bread and meat when I come back," promised
Marianson--"unless the English have burned the house."

"No. When it is dark I will leave the cave myself," said the voyageur.
"Is there any boat near by that I can take to escape in from the
island?"

"There is my boat. But it is at the post."

"How far are we from the post?"

"It is not so far if one might cross the island; but to go by the west
shore, which would be safest, perhaps, in time of war, that is the
greater part of the island's girth."

They drew near together as they murmured, and at intervals he held the
cup to her lips, making up for his forgetfulness when benumbed with
sleep.

"One has but to follow the shore, however," said the boy. "And where can
I find the boat?"

"You cannot find it at all."

"But," he added, with sudden recollection, "I could never return it
again."

Marianson saw on the cave's rough wall a vision of her boat carrying him
away. Her own little craft, the sail of which she knew how to trim--her
bird, her flier, her food-winner--was to become her robber.

"When the war is over," she ventured, "then you might come back."

He began to explain difficulties like an honest lad, and she stopped
him. "I do not want to know anything. I want you to take my boat."

He put the cup down and seized her hands and kissed them. She crouched
against the cave's side, her eyes closed. If he was only grateful to
her for bread and shelter and means of escape, it was little enough she
received, but his warm touch and his lips on her palms--for he kissed
her palms--made her none the less dizzy.

"Listen to me," said Marianson. "If I give you my boat, you must do
exactly as I bid you."

"I promise."

"You must stay here until I bring it to you. I am going at once."

"But you cannot go alone in the dark. You are a woman--you will be
afraid."

"Never in my life have I been afraid."

"But there are Indians on the war-path now."

"They will be in camp or drunk at the post. Your Sioux has left this
part of the island. He may come back by morning, but he would not camp
away from so much plunder. Sioux cannot be unlike our Chippewas. Do you
think," demanded Marianson, "that you will be quite, quite safe in the
cave?"

Her companion laughed.

"If I find the cave unsafe I can leave it; but you in the dark
alone--you must let me go with you."

"No; the risk is too great. It is better for me to go alone. I know
every rock, every bend of the shore. The pull back around the island
will be hardest, if there is not enough wind."

"I go with you," decided the boy.

"But you gave me your promise to do exactly as I bade you. I am older
than you," said Marianson.

"I know what is best, and that is that you remain here until I come.
Swear to me that you will."

He was silent, beseeching her with his eyes to relent. Then, owning her
right to dominate, he pledged her by the name of his saint to do as she
required.

Their forced companionship, begun at daylight, was ending as darkness
crept through the cavern's mouth. They waited, and those last moments of
silence, while they leaned to look closely at each other with the night
growing between them, were a benediction on the day.

Marianson stooped to creep through the cavern's mouth, but once more she
turned and looked at him, and it was she herself who stretched appealing
arms. The boy's shyness and the woman's aversion to men vanished as in
fire. They stood together in the hollow of the cave in one long embrace.
He sought her mouth and kissed her, and, suffocating with joy, she
escaped through the low door.

Indifferent to the Indian who might be dogging her, she drew her strip
of home-spun around her face and ran, moccasined and deft-footed, over
the stones, warm, palpitating, and laughing, full of physical hardihood.
In the woods, on her left, she knew there were rocks splashed with stain
black as ink and crusted with old lichens. On her right white-caps were
running before the west wind and diving like ducks on the strait. She
crossed the threads of a brook ravelling themselves from density.
For the forest was a mask. But Marianson knew well the tricks of that
brook--its pellucid shining on pebbles, its cascades, its hidings
underground of all but a voice and a crystal pool. Wet to her knees, she
had more than once followed it to its source amid such greenery of moss
and logs as seemed a conflagration of verdure.

The many points and bays of the island sped behind her, and cliffs
crowded her to the water's edge or left her a dim moving object on a
lonesome beach. Sometimes she heard sounds in the woods and listened; on
the other hand, she had the companionship of stars and moving water. On
that glorified journey Marianson's natural fearlessness carried her past
the Devil's Kitchen and quite near the post before she began to consider
how it was best to approach a place which might be in the hands of an
enemy. Her boat was tied at the dock. She had the half-ruined distillery
yet to pass. It had stood under the cliff her lifetime. As she drew
nearer, cracks of light and a hum like the droning of a beehive
magically turned the old distillery into a caravansary of spirits.

Nothing in her long tramp had startled her like this. It was a relief to
hear the click of metal and a strange-spoken word, and to find herself
face to face with an English soldier. He made no parley, but marched
her before him; and the grateful noise of squalling babies and maternal
protests and Maman Pelott's night lullaby also met her as they proceeded
towards the distillery.

The long dark shed had a chimney-stack and its many-coiled still in one
end. Beside that great bottle-shaped thing, at the base of the chimney,
was an open fireplace piled with flaming sticks, and this had made the
luminous crevices. All Mackinac village was gathered within the walls,
and Marian-son beheld a camp supping, putting children to bed on
blankets in corners, sitting and shaking fingers at one another in
wrathful council, or running about in search of lost articles. The cure
was there, keeping a restraint on his people. Clothes hung on spikes
like rows of suicides in the weird light. Even fiddlers and jollity
were not lacking. A heavier race would have come to blows in that strait
enclosure, but these French and half-breeds, in danger of scalping if
the Indians proved turbulent, dried their eyes after losses, and shook
their legs ready for a dance at the scraping of a violin.

Little Ignace Pelott was directly pulling at Mari-anson's petticoat to
get attention.

"De Ingins kill our 'effer," he lamented, in the mongrel speech of the
quarter-breed. "Dey didn't need him; dey have plenty to eat. But dey
kill our 'effer and laugh."

"My cow, is it also killed, Ignace?"

Marianson's neighbors closed around her, unsurprised at her late
arrival, filled only with the general calamity. Old men's pipe smoke
mingled with odors of food; and when the English soldier had satisfied
himself that she belonged to this caldron of humanity, he lifted the
corners of his nose and returned to open air and guard duty.

The fort had been surrendered without a shot, to save the lives of the
villagers, and they were all hurried to the distillery and put under
guard. They would be obliged to take the oath of allegiance to England,
or leave the island. Michael Dousman, yet held in the enemy's camp, was
fiercely accused of bringing the English upon them. No, Marianson could
not go to the village, or even to the dock.

Everybody offered her food. A boat she did not ask for. The high
cobwebby openings of the distillery looked on a blank night sky.
Marianson felt her happiness jarred as the wonderful day came to such
limits. The English had the island. It might be searched for that young
deserter waiting for her help, and if she failed to get a boat, what
must be his fate?

She had entered the west door of the distillery. She found opportunity
to slip out on the east side, for it was necessary to reach the dock
and get a boat. She might risk being scalped, but a boat at any cost she
would have, and one was sent her--as to the fearless and determined
all their desires are sent. She heard the thump of oars in rowlocks,
bringing the relief guard, and with a swish, out of the void of the lake
a keel ran upon pebbles.

So easy had been the conquest of the island, the British regular found
his amusement in his duty, and a boat was taken from the dock to save
half a mile of easy marching. It stood empty and waiting during a lax
minute, while the responsibility of guarding was shifted; but perhaps
being carelessly beached, though there was no tide on the strait, it
drifted away.

Marianson, who had helped it drift, lay flat on the bottom and heard the
rueful oaths of her enemies, forced to march back to the post. There
was no sail. She steered by a trailing oar until lighted distillery and
black cliff receded and it was safe for her to fix her sculls and row
with all her might.

She was so tired her heart physically ached when she slipped through
dawn to a landing opposite the cave. There would be no more yesterdays,
and there would be no time for farewells. The wash which drove her
roughly to mooring drove with her the fact that she did not know even
the name of the man she was about to give up.

Marianson turned and looked at the water he must venture upon, without
a sail to help him. It was not all uncovered from the night, but a long
purple current ran out, as if God had made a sudden amethyst bridge
across the blue strait.

Reluctant as she was to call him from the cave, she dared not delay. The
breath of the virgin woods was overpoweringly sweet. Her hair clung to
her forehead in moist rings, and her cheeks were pallid and wet with
mist which rose and rose on all sides like clouds in a holy picture.

He was asleep.

She crouched down on cold hands and saw that. He had waited in the cave
as he promised, and had fallen asleep. His back was towards her. Instead
of lying at ease, his body was flexed. Her enlarging pupils caught a
stain of red on the bear-skin, then the scarlet tonsure on his crown. He
was asleep, but the Sioux had been there.

The low song of wind along that wooded ridge, and the roar of dashing
lake water, repeated their monotone hour after hour. It proved as fair a
day as the island had ever seen, and when it was nearly spent, Marianson
Bruelle still sat on the cave floor holding the dead boy in her arms.
Heart-uprooting was a numbness, like rapture. At least he could not
leave her. She had his kiss, his love. She had his body, to hide in a
grave as secret as a flower's. The cure could some time bless it, but
the English who had slain him should never know it. As she held him to
her breast, so the sweet processes of the woods should hold him, and
make him part of the island.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Marianson, by Mary Hartwell Catherwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARIANSON ***

***** This file should be named 23251.txt or 23251.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/2/5/23251/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
