Project Gutenberg's The Skeleton On Round Island, by Mary Hartwell Catherwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Skeleton On Round Island
       From "Mackinac And Lake Stories", 1899

Author: Mary Hartwell Catherwood

Release Date: October 30, 2007 [EBook #23250]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SKELETON ON ROUND ISLAND ***




Produced by David Widger






THE SKELETON ON ROUND ISLAND

From "Mackinac And Lake Stories", 1899

By Mary Hartwell Catherwood



_On the 15th day of March, 1897, Ignace Pelott died at Mackinac Island,
aged ninety-three years._

_The old quarter-breed, son of a half breed Chippewa mother and
French father, took with him into silence much wilderness lore of the
Northwest. He was full of stories when warmed to recital, though at the
beginning of a talk his gentle eyes dwelt on the listener with anxiety,
and he tapped his forehead--"So many things gone from there!" His
habit of saying "Oh God, yes," or "Oh God, no," was not in the least
irreverent, but simply his mild way of using island English._

_While water lapped the beach before his door and the sun smote sparkles
on the strait, he told about this adventure across the ice, and his
hearer has taken but few liberties with the recital._




THE SKELETON ON ROUND ISLAND


I am to carry Mamselle Rosalin of Green Bay from Mackinac to Cheboygan
that time, and it is the end of March, and the wind have turn from east
to west in the morning. A man will go out with the wind in the east, to
haul wood from Boblo, or cut a hole to fish, and by night he cannot get
home--ice, it is rotten; it goes to pieces quick when the March wind
turns.

I am not afraid for me--long, tall fellow then; eye that can see to
Point aux Pins; I can lift more than any other man that goes in the
boats to Green Bay or the Soo; can swim, run on snow-shoes, go without
eating two, three days, and draw my belt in. Sometimes the ice-floes
carry me miles, for they all go east down the lakes when they start, and
I have landed the other side of Drummond. But when you have a woman with
you--Oh God, yes, that is different.

The way of it is this: I have brought the mail from St. Ignace with my
traino--you know the train-au-galise--the birch sledge with dogs. It
is flat, and turn up at the front like a toboggan. And I have take the
traino because it is not safe for a horse; the wind is in the west, and
the strait bends and looks too sleek. Ice a couple of inches thick will
bear up a man and dogs. But this old ice a foot thick, it is turning
rotten. I have come from St. Ignace early in the afternoon, and the
people crowd about to get their letters, and there is Mamselle Rosalin
crying to go to Cheboygan, because her lady has arrive there sick, and
has sent the letter a week ago. Her friends say:

"It is too late to go to-day, and the strait is dangerous."

She say: "I make a bundle and walk. I must go when my lady is sick and
her husband the lieutenant is away, and she has need of me."

Mamselle's friends talk and she cry. She runs and makes a little bundle
in the house and comes out ready to walk to Cheboygan. There is nobody
can prevent her. Some island people are descend from noblesse of France.
But none of them have travel like Mamselle Rosalin with the officer's
wife to Indiana, to Chicago, to Detroit. She is like me, French.* The
girls use to turn their heads to see me walk in to mass; but I never
look grand as Mamselle Rosalin when she step out to that ice.

     * The old fellow would not own the Chippewa.

I have not a bit of sense; I forget maman and my brothers and sisters
that depend on me. I run to Mamselle Rosalin, take off my cap, and bow
from my head to my heel, like you do in the dance. I will take her to
Cheboygan with my traino--Oh God, yes! And I laugh at the wet track the
sledge make, and pat my dogs and tell them they are not tired. I wrap
her up in the fur, and she thank me and tremble, and look me through
with her big black eyes so that I am ready to go down in the strait.

The people on the shore hurrah, though some of them cry out to warn us.

"The ice is cracked from Mission Point to the hook of Round Island,
Ignace Pelott!"

"I know that," I say. "Good-day, messieurs!"

The crack from Mission Point--under what you call Robinson's Folly--to
the hook of Round Island always comes first in a breaking up; and I hold
my breath in my teeth as I skurry the dogs across it. The ice grinds,
the water follows the sledge. But the sun is so far down in the
southwest, I think "The wind will grow colder. The real thaw will not
come before to-morrow."

[Illustration: The Train au Galise 080]

I am to steer betwixt the east side of Round Island and Boblo. When we
come into the shadow of Boblo we are chill with damp, far worse than the
clear sharp air that blows from Canada. I lope beside the traino, and
not take my eyes off the course to Cheboygan, except that I see the
islands look blue, and darkness stretching before its time. The sweat
drop off my face, yet I feel that wind through my wool clothes, and
am glad of the shelter between Boblo and Round Island, for the strait
outside will be the worst.

There is an Indian burying-ground on open land above the beach on that
side of Round Island. I look up when the thick woods are pass, for the
sunset ought to show there. But what I see is a skeleton like it is
sliding down hill from the graveyard to the beach. It does not move. The
earth is wash from it, and it hangs staring at me.

I cannot tell how that make me feel! I laugh, for it is funny; but I am
ashame, like my father is expose and Mamselle Rosalin can see him. If
I do not cover him again I am disgrace. I think I will wait till some
other day when I can get back from Cheboygan; for what will she say if
I stop the traino when we have such a long journey, and it is so near
night, and the strait almost ready to move? So I crack the whip, but
something pull, pull! I cannot go on! I say to myself, "The ground is
froze; how can I cover up that skeleton without any shovel, or even a
hatchet to break the earth?"

But something pull, pull, so I am oblige to stop, and the dogs turn in
without one word and drag the sledge up the beach of Bound Island.

"What is the matter?" says Mamselle Eosalin. She is out of the sledge as
soon as it stops.

I not know what to answer, but tell her I have to cut a stick to mend
my whip-handle. I think I will cut a stick and rake some earth over the
skeleton to cover it, and come another day with a shovel and dig a new
grave. The dogs lie down and pant, and she looks through me with her big
eyes like she beg me to hurry.

But there is no danger she will see the skeleton. We both look back to
Mackinac. The island have its hump up against the north, and the village
in its lap around the bay, and the Mission eastward near the cliff; but
all seem to be moving! We run along the beach of Bound Island, and then
we see the channel between that and Boblo is moving too, and the ice is
like wet loaf-sugar, grinding as it floats.

We hear some roars away off, like cannon when the Americans come to the
island. My head swims. I cross myself and know why something pull,
pull, to make me bring the traino to the beach, and I am oblige to that
skeleton who slide down hill to warn me.

When we have seen Mackinac, we walk to the other side and look south and
southeast towards Cheboygan.. All is the same. The ice is moving out of
the strait.

"We are strand on this island!" says Mamselle Rosalin. "Oh, what shall
we do?"

I tell her it is better to be prisoners on Bound Island than on a cake
of ice in the strait, for I have tried the cake of ice and know.

"We will camp and build a fire in the cove opposite Mackinac," I say.
"Maman and the children will see the light and feel sure we are safe."

"I have done wrong," says she. "If you lose your life on this journey,
it is my fault."

Oh God, no! I tell her. She is not to blame for anything, and there is
no danger. I have float many a time when the strait breaks up, and not
save my hide so dry as it is now. We only have to stay on Round Island
till we can get off.

"And how long will that be?" she ask.

I shrug my shoulders. There is no telling. Sometimes the strait clears
very soon, sometimes not. Maybe two, three days.

Rosalin sit down on a stone.

I tell her we can make camp, and show signals to Mackinac, and when the
ice permit, a boat will be sent.

She is crying, and I say her lady will be well. No use to go to
Cheboygan anyhow, for it is a week since her lady sent for her. But
she cry on, and I think she wish I leave her alone, so I say I will get
wood. And I unharness the dogs, and run along the beach to cover that
skeleton before dark. I look and cannot find him at all. Then I go up to
the graveyard and look down. There is no skeleton anywhere. I have seen
his skull and his ribs and his arms and legs, all sliding down hill. But
he is gone!

The dusk close in upon the islands, and I not know what to think--cross
myself, two, three times; and wish we had land on Boblo instead of Round
Island, though there are wild beasts on both.

But there is no time to be scare at skeletons that slide down and
disappear, for Mamselle Rosalin must have her camp and her place to
sleep. Every man use to the bateaux have always his tinder-box, his
knife, his tobacco, but I have more than that; I have leave Mackinac so
quick I forget to take out the storekeeper's bacon that line the bottom
of the sledge, and Mamselle Eosalin sit on it in the furs! We have
plenty meat, and I sing like a voyageur while I build the fire. Drift,
so dry in summer you can light it with a coal from your pipe, lay on the
beach, but is now winter-soaked, and I make a fireplace of logs, and cut
pine branches to help it.

It is all thick woods on Round Island, so close it tear you to pieces if
you try to break through; only four-footed things can crawl there. When
the fire is blazing up I take my knife and cut a tunnel like a little
room, and pile plenty evergreen branches. This is to shelter Mamselle
Rosalin, for the night is so raw she shiver. Our tent is the sky,
darkness, and clouds. But I am happy. I unload the sledge. The bacon is
wet. On long sticks the slices sizzle and sing while I toast them, and
the dogs come close and blink by the fire, and lick their chops. Rosalin
laugh and I laugh, for it smell like a good kitchen; and we sit and eat
nothing but toasted meat--better than lye corn and tallow that you have
when you go out with the boats. Then I feed the dogs, and she walk with
me to the water edge, and we drink with our hands.

It is my house, when we sit on the fur by the fire. I am so light I want
my fiddle. I wish it last like a dream that Mamselle Rosalin and me keep
house together on Round Island. You not want to go to heaven when the
one you think about all the time stays close by you.

But pretty soon I want to go to heaven quick. I think I jump in the lake
if maman and the children had anybody but me. When I light my pipe she
smile. Then her great big eyes look off towards Mackinac, and I turn and
see the little far-away lights.

"They know we are on Round Island together," I say to cheer her, and she
move to the edge of the fur. Then she say "Good-night," and get up and
go to her tunnel-house in the bushes, and I jump up too, and spread the
fur there for her. And I not get back to the fire before she make a
door of all the branches I have cut, and is hid like a squirrel I feel
I dance for joy because she is in my camp for me to guard. But what is
that? It is a woman that cry out loud by herself! I understand now why
she sit down so hopeless when we first land. I have not know much about
women, but I understand how she feel. It is not her lady, or the dark,
or the ice break up, or the cold. It is not Ignace Pelott. It is the
name of being prison on Round Island with a man till the ice is out
of the straits. She is so shame she want to die. I think I will kill
myself. If Mamselle Rosalin cry out loud once more, I plunge in the
lake--and then what become of maman and the children?

She is quieter; and I sit down and cannot smoke, and the dogs pity me.
Old Sauvage lay his nose on my knee. I do not say a word to him, but I
pat him, and we talk with our eyes, and the bright camp-fire shows each
what the other is say.

"Old Sauvage," I tell him, "I am not good man like the priest. I have
been out with the boats, and in Indian camps, and I not had in my life a
chance to marry, because there are maman and the children. But you know,
old Sauvage, how I have feel about Mamselle Rosalin, it is three years."

Old Sauvage hit his tail on the ground and answer he know.

"I have love her like a dog that not dare to lick her hand. And now she
hate me because I am shut on Round Island with her while the ice goes
out. I not good man, but it pretty tough to stand that." Old Sauvage
hit his tail on the ground and say, "That so." I hear the water on the
gravel like it sound when we find a place to drink; then it is plenty
company, but now it is lonesome. The water say to people on Mackinac,
"Rosalin and Ignace Pelott, they are on Round Island." What make you
proud, maybe, when you turn it and look at it the other way, make you
sick. But I cannot walk the broken ice, and if I could, she would be lef
alone with the dogs. I think I will build another camp.

But soon there is a shaking in the bushes, and Sauvage and his
bledgemates bristle and stand up and show their teeth. Out comes
Mamselle Eosalin with a scream to the other side of the fire.

I have nothing except my knife, and I take a chunk of burning wood and
go into her house. Maybe I see some green eyes. I have handle vild-cat
skin too much not to know that smell in the dark.

I take all the branches from Rosalin's house and pile them by the fire,
and spread the fur robe on them. And I pull out red coals and put more
logs on before I sit down away off between her and the spot where she
hear that noise. If the graveyard was over us, I would expect to see
that skeleton once more.

"What was it?" she whisper.

I tell her maybe a stray wolf.

"Wolves not eat people, mamselle, unless they hunt in a pack; and they
run from fire. You know what M'sieu' Cable tell about wolves that chase
him on the ice when he skate to Cheboygan? He come to great wide crack
in ice, he so scare he jump it and skate right on! Then he look back,
and see the wolves go in, head down, every wolf caught and drown in the
crack. It is two days before he come home, and the east wind have blow
to freeze that crack over--and there are all the wolf tails, stick up,
froze stiff in a row! He bring them home with him--but los them on the
way, though he show the knife that cut them off!"

"I have hear that," says Rosalin. "I think he lie."

"He say he take his out on a book," I tell her, but we both laugh,
and she is curl down so close to the fire her cheeks turn rosy. For a
camp-fire will heat the air all around until the world is like a big
dark room; and we are shelter from the wind. I am glad she is begin to
enjoy herself. And all the time I have a hand on my knife, and the cold
chills down my back where that hungry vild-cat will set his claws if he
jump on me; and I cannot turn around to face him because Rosalin thinks
it is nothing but a cowardly wolf that sneak away. Old Sauvage is uneasy
and come to me, his fangs all expose, but I drive him back and listen to
the bushes behind me.

"Sing, M'sieu' Pelott," says Rosalin.

Oh God, yes I it is easy to sing with a vild-cat watch you on one side
and a woman on the other!

"But I not know anything except boat songs."

"Sing boat songs."

So I sing like a bateau full of voyageurs, and the dark echo, and that
vild-cat must be astonish. When you not care what become of you, and
your head is light and your heart like a stone on the beach, you not
mind vild-cats, but sing and laugh.

I cast my eye behin sometimes, and feel my knife. It make me smile to
think what kind of creature come to my house in the wilderness, and I
say to myself: "Hear my cat purr! This is the only time I will ever
have a home of my own, and the only time the woman I want sit beside my
fire."

Then I ask Rosalin to sing to me, and she sing "Malbrouck," like her
father learn it in Kebec. She watch me, and I know her eyes have more
danger for me than the vild-cat's. It ought to tear me to pieces if I
forget maman and the children. It ought to be scare out the bushes to
jump on a poor fool like me. But I not stop entertain it--Oh God, no!
I say things that I never intend to say, like they are pull out of my
mouth. When your heart has ache, sometimes it break up quick like the
ice.

"There is Paul Pepin," I tell her. "He is a happy man; he not trouble
himself with anybody at all. His father die; he let his mother take care
of herself. He marry a wife, and get tired of her and turn her off with
two children. The priest not able to scare him; he smoke and take his
dram and enjoy life. If I was Paul Pepin I would not be torment."

"But you are not torment," says Rosalin. "Everybody speak well of you."

"Oh God, yes," I tell her; "but a man not live on the breath of his
neighbors. I am thirty years old, and I have take care of my mother and
brothers and sisters since I am fifteen. I not made so I can leave them,
like Paul Pepin. He marry when he please. I not able to marry at all. It
is not far I can go from the island. I cannot get rich. My work must be
always the same."

"But why you want to marry?" says Rosalin, as if that surprise her.
And I tell her it is because I have seen Rosalin of Green Bay; and she
laugh. Then I think it is time for the vild-cat to jump. I am thirty
years old, and have nothing but what I can make with the boats or my
traino; the children are not grown; my mother depend on me; and I have
propose to a woman, and she laugh at me!

But I not see, while we sing and talk, that the fire is burn lower, and
old Sauvage has crept around the camp into the bushes.

That end all my courtship. I not use to it, and not have any business
to court, anyhow. I drop my head on my breast, and it is like when I am
little and the measle go in. Paul Pepin he take a woman by the chin and
smack her on the lips. The women not laugh at him, he is so rough. I am
as strong as he is, but I am afraid to hurt; I am oblige to take care of
what need me. And I am tie to things I love--even the island--so that I
cannot get away.

"I not want to marry," says Rosalin, and I see her shake her head at me.
"I not think about it at all."

"Mamselle," I say to her, "you have not any inducement like I have, that
torment you three years."

"How you know that?" she ask me. And then her face change from laughter,
and she spring up from the blanket couch, and I think the camp go around
and around me--all fur and eyes and claws and teeth--and I not know what
I am doing, for the dogs are all over me--yell--yell--yell; and then
I am stop stabbing, because the vild-cat has let go of Sauvage, and
Sauvage has let go of the vild-cat, and I am looking at them and know
they are both dead, and I cannot help him any more.

[Illustration: The camp go round and round 086]

You are confuse by such things where there is noise, and howling
creatures sit up and put their noses in the air, like they call their
mate back out of the dark. I am sick for my old dog. Then I am proud he
has kill it, and wipe my knife on its fur, but feel ashame that I have
not check him driving it into camp. And then Rosalin throw her arms
around my neck and kiss me.

It is many years I have tell Rosalin she did that. But a woman will deny
what she know to be the trut. I have tell her the courtship had end, and
she begin it again herself, and keep it up till the boats take us off
Round Island. The ice not run out so quick any more now like it did
then. My wife say it is a long time we waited, but when I look back it
seem the shortest time I ever live--only two days.

Oh God, yes, it is three years before I marry the woman that not want to
marry at all; then my brothers and sisters can take care of themselves,
and she help me take care of maman.

It is when my boy Gabriel come home from the war to die that I see the
skeleton on Round Island again. I am again sure it is wash out, and I go
ashore to bury it, and it disappear. Nobody but me see it. Then before
Rosalin die I am out on the ice-boat, and it give me warning. I know
what it mean; but you cannot always escape misfortune. I cross myself
when I see it; but I find good luck that first time I land; and maybe I
find good luck every time, after I have land.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Skeleton On Round Island, by 
Mary Hartwell Catherwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SKELETON ON ROUND ISLAND ***

***** This file should be named 23250.txt or 23250.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/2/5/23250/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
