Project Gutenberg's A British Islander, by Mary Hartwell Catherwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A British Islander
       From "Mackinac And Lake Stories", 1899

Author: Mary Hartwell Catherwood

Release Date: October 30, 2007 [EBook #23255]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BRITISH ISLANDER ***




Produced by David Widger






A BRITISH ISLANDER

From "Mackinac And Lake Stories", 1899

By Mary Hartwell Catherwood


     * This story is set down exactly as it was told by the
     Island Chronicler.

Well, I wish you could have been here in Mrs. Gunning's day. She was
the oddest woman on Mackinac. Not that she exerted herself to attract
attention. But she was such a character, and her manners were so
astonishing, that she furnished perennial entertainment to the few
families of us constituting island society.

She was an English woman, born in South Africa, and married to an
American army surgeon, and had lived over a large part of the world
before coming to this fort. She had no children. But her sister had
married Dr. Gunning's brother. And the good-for-nothing pair set out to
follow the English drum-beat around the world, and left a child for the
two more responsible ones to rear. Juliana Gunning was so deaf she
could not hear thunder. But she was quits with nature, for all that; a
wonderfully alluring kind of girl, with big brown eyes that were better
than ears, and that could catch the meaning of moving lips. It seemed
to strangers that she merely evaded conversation; for she had a sweet
voice, a little drawling, and was witty when she wanted to speak.
Juliana couldn't step out of the surgeon's quarters to walk across the
parade-ground without making every soldier in the fort conscious of
her. She was well-shaped and tall, and a slight pitting of the skin
only enhanced the charm of her large features. She used to dress unlike
anybody else, in foreign things that her aunt gave her, and was always
carrying different kinds of thin scarfs to throw over her face and
tantalize the men.

Everybody knew that Captain Markley would marry her if he could. But
along comes Dr. Mc-Curdy, a wealthy widower from the East, and nothing
will do but he must hang about Mackinac week after week, pretending to
need the climate--and he weighing nearly two hundred--to court Juliana
Gunning. The lieutenant's wife said of Juliana that she would flirt with
a half-breed if nothing better offered. But the lieutenant's wife was
a homely, jealous little thing, and could never have had all the men
hanging after her. And if she had had the chance she might have been as
aggravating about making up her mind between two as Juliana was.

We used to think the girl very good-natured. But those three people made
a queer family. Dr. Gunning was the remnant of a magnificent man, and he
always had a courtly air. He paid little attention to the small affairs
of life, and rated money as nothing. Dr. Gunning had his peculiarities;
but I am not telling you about him. He was a kind man, and would cross
the strait in any weather to attend a sick half-breed or any other
ailing creature, who probably never paid him a cent. He was fond of the
island, and quite satisfied to spend his life here.

The day I am telling you about, Mrs. Gunning had driven with me into the
village to make some calls. She was very punctilious about calling upon
strangers. If she intended to recognize a newcomer she called at
once. We drove around to the rear of the fort and entered at the back
sallyport, where carriages always enter; but instead of letting me put
her down at the surgeon's quarters, she ordered the driver to stop in
the middle of the parade-ground. Then she got out and, with never a
word, marched down the steps to Captain Markley, where he was leaning
against the front sally-port, looking below into the town. I didn't know
what to do, so I sat and waited. It was the loveliest autumn morning
you ever saw. I remember the beeches and oaks and maples were spread out
like banners to the very height of the island, all crimson and yellow
splashes in the midst of evergreens. There had been an awful storm the
night before, and you could see down the sally-port how drenched the
fort garden was at the foot of the hill.

Captain Markley had a fearfully depressed look. He was so down in the
mouth that the sentinels noticed it. I saw the one in front of the
western block-house stick his tongue in his cheek and wink at one pacing
below. We heard afterwards that Captain Markley had been out alone to
inspect target-ranges in the pine woods, and almost ran against Juliana
Gunning and Dr. McCurdy sitting on a log. Before he could get out of the
way he overheard the loudest proposal ever made on Mackinac. It used to
be told about in mess, though how it got out Captain Markley said he did
not know, unless they heard it at the fort.

"I have brought you out here," the doctor shouted to Juliana, as loud as
a cow lowing, "to tell you that I love you! I want you to be my wife!"

She behaved as if she didn't hear--I think that minx often had fun with
her deafness--and inclined her head to one side.

So he said it all over again.

"I have brought you to this secluded spot to tell you that I love you! I
want you to be my wife!"

It was like a steamer bellowing on the strait. Then Juliana threw her
scarf over her face, and Captain Markley broke away through the bushes.

Mrs. Gunning never said a word to me about either of the suitors. It
wasn't because she didn't talk, for she was a great talker. We had to
postpone a card-party one evening, on account of the continuous flow of
Mrs. Gunning's conversation, which never ceased until it was time for
refreshments, there being not a moment's pause for the tables to be set
out.

[Illustration: Startled to see her rush down at Captain Markley 176]

I was startled to see her rush down at Captain Markley, brandishing her
parasol as if she were going to knock him down. I thought if she had
any preference it would be for an army man; for you know an army woman's
contempt of civilian money and position. Army women continually want to
be moving on; and they hate bothering with household stuff, such as we
prize.

Captain Markley did look poor-spirited, drooping against the sally-port,
for a man who in his uniform was the most conspicuous figure to Mackinac
girls in a ball-room. Maybe if he had been courting anything but a
statue he might have made a better figure at it. Juliana was worse than
a statue, though; for she could float through a thousand graceful poses,
and drive a man crazy with her eyes. He wasn't the lover to go out in
the woods and shoot a proposal as loud as a cannon at a girl; and it
seems he couldn't get any satisfaction from her by writing notes.

Mrs. Gunning was drawing off her gloves as she marched at him with her
parasol, and I remember how her emeralds and diamonds flashed in the
sun--old heirlooms. I never saw another woman who had so many precious
stones. She was tall, with that robust English quality that sometimes
goes with slenderness. She and Juliana were not a bit alike. When she
walked, her feet came down pat. I pitied Captain Markley. By leaning
over the carriage I could see him give a start as Mrs. Gunning pounced
at him.

"It's a fine day after the storm, Captain Markley," says she; and he
lifted his cap and said it was.

Then she made a rush that I thought would drive him down the cliff, and
whirled her parasol around his head like sword-play, talking about the
havoc of the storm. She rippled him from head to foot and poked at his
eyes, and jabbed him, to show how lightning struck the rocks, Captain
Markley all the time moving back and dodging; and to save my life I
couldn't help laughing, though the sentinels above him saw it. They were
pretty well used to her, and rolled their quids in their cheeks, and
winked at one another.

When she had all but thrown him down-hill, she stuck the ferrule right
under his nose and shook it, and says she: "Yet it is now as fine a day
as if no such convulsion had ever threatened the island. It is often so
in this world."

He couldn't deny that, miserable as he looked. And I thought she would
let him alone and come and say good-day to me. But no, indeed! She took
him by the arm. Soldiers off duty were lounging on the benches, and
Captain Markley wouldn't let them see him haled like a prisoner. He
marched square-shouldered and erect; and Mrs. Gunning says to me as they
reached the carriage:

"The captain will help you down if you will come with us. I am going to
show him my Shanghai rooster."

I thanked her, and gladly let him help me down. I wasn't going to desert
the poor fellow when Mrs.

Gunning was dealing with him; and, besides, I wanted to see that rooster
myself. We heard such stories of the way she kept her chickens and
labored over all the domestic animals she gathered around herself at the
fort.

[Illustration: The Quarters 182]

By ascending a steep bank on which the western block-house stands, you
know you can look down into the drill-ground--that wide meadow behind
the fort, with quarters at the back. Mrs. Gunning had an enclosure built
outside the wall for her chickens; and there they were, walking about,
scratching the ground, and diverting themselves as well as they could in
their clothes. She had a shed at one end of the enclosure, and all the
hens, walking about or sitting on nests, wore hoods! Holes were made for
their eyes but none for their beaks, and the eyelets seemed to magnify
so that they looked wrathy as they stretched their necks and quavered
in those bags. Captain Markley and I both burst out laughing, but Mrs.
Gunning explained it all seriously.

"They eat their eggs," says she; "so I tie hoods on them until I have
collected the eggs for the day."

I remember some were clawing their head-gear, trying alternate feet, and
two determined hens were trying to peck each other free. But they wore
generally resigned, and we might have grown so after the first minute,
if it hadn't been for the rooster.

Captain Markley roared, and I leaned against the lower part of the
block-house and held my sides. That long-legged, awkward, high-stepping
Shanghai cock was dressed like a man in a suit of clothes--all but a
hat. His coat-sleeves extended over his wings, and when he flapped them
to crow, and stuck his claws out of his trousers-legs, I wept tears on
my handkerchief. Mrs. Gunning talked straight ahead without paying
any attention to our laughter. If it ever had been funny to her it had
ceased to be so. She had not brought Captain Markley there to amuse him.

"Look at that Shanghai rooster now," says she. "I brought him up from
the South. I put him among the hens and they picked all his feathers
off. He was as bare, captain, as your hand. He was literally hen-pecked.
First one would step up to him and pull out a feather; then another; and
he, poor fool, did nothing but cower against the fence. It never seemed
to enter his brain-pan he could put a stop to the torture. There he
was, without a feather to cover himself with, and the cool autumn nights
coming on. So I took some gray cloth and made him these clothes. He
would have been picked to the bone if I hadn't. But they put spunk
into him. That Shanghai rooster has found out he has to assert himself,
captain, and he does assert himself."

I saw Captain Markley turn red, and I knew he wished the sentinel wasn't
standing guard a few feet away in front of that block-house.

She might have let him alone after she had given him that thrust, and
gone on to her house, and said good-bye in the usual way. But just as he
was helping me down it happened that Juliana and Dr. Mc-Curdy appeared
through the rear sally-port, which they must have reached by skirting
the wall instead of crossing the drill-field. As soon as Mrs. Gunning
saw them she stiffened, and clubbed her umbrella at Captain Markley
again. He couldn't get away, so he stood his ground.

"See that creature begin to curvet and roll her eyes!" says Mrs.
Gunning. "If the parade-ground were full of men I think she would prance
over the parapet. At my age she may have some sense and feeling. But I
would be glad to see her in the hands of a man who knew how to assert
himself."

"May I ask," says Captain Markley, "what you mean by a man's asserting
himself, Mrs. Gunning?"

She made such a pounce at him with the parasol that her waist began to
rip in the back.

"My dear boy, I am a full-blooded Briton, and Juliana is what you
may call an English half-breed. In the bottom of our hearts we have a
hankering for monarchy. The lion, who permits nobody else to poach on
his preserves, is our symbol. While the vexatious child and I are not at
all alike in other things, I know she admires as much as I do a man who
asserts himself."

Though it was said Juliana Gunning could not hear thunder, she generally
understood her aunt's voice, and could tell when she was being talked
about. She came straight to her own rescue, as you might say, and Dr.
McCurdy, poor man, was very polite, but not cheerful. If we had known
then what he had been yelling in the woods, we should have understood
better why Captain Markley seemed to pluck up and strut at the sight of
him.

I think Mrs. Gunning determined to finish the business that very hour.
She met Dr. McCurdy with all the sweetness she could put into her manner
just before she intended to pounce the hardest.

"I have been showing the captain my chickens," she says, "and now I want
to show you my cows."

Dr. McCurdy thanked her, and said he would be delighted to see the cows,
but he stuck to Juliana like a shadow. Maybe he expected the cows would
give him a further excuse for being with her. But Mrs. Gunning cut him
off there. She gave her keys to her niece, and says she:

"Go in the house, my dear, and set out the decanter and glasses, and
give Captain Markley a glass of wine to keep him until we come back. I
want to tell him something more about that Shanghai rooster."

Juliana understood, and took the keys, and rolled her eyes tantalizingly
at Dr. McCurdy. The poor fellow made a stand, and said the cows would do
some other time, and mightn't he beg for a glass of wine too, after his
walk?

"Certainly, doctor, certainly," says Mrs. Gunning, leading the way to
the front sally-port. "We expect you to take a glass with us. But while
Juliana sets out the decanter, let us look at the cows."

She hadn't mentioned me, but I didn't care for that, knowing Mrs.
Gunning as I did. I should have followed if she Hadn't beckoned to me,
for I was as determined to see the affair through as she was to finish
it.

We had to go down that long path from the front sally-port to the
street, and then turn into the field at the foot of the hill, where
the fort stables are. Mrs. Gunning talked all the time about cattle,
flourishing her parasol and flashing her diamonds and emeralds in the
sun, and telling Dr. McCurdy she had intended to ask his opinion about
them ever since his arrival on the island. He answered yes, and no, and
seemed to be thinking of anything but cattle.

Mackinac cows tinkled their bells in every thicket. But Mrs. Gunning's
pets were brought in morning and afternoon to clean, well-lighted
stalls. There they stood in a row, sleek as if they had been
curried--and I have heard that she did curry them herself--all switching
natural tails except one. And, as sure as you live, that cow had a false
tail that Mrs. Gunning had made for her!

She took hold of it and showed it to us. It did not seem very funny to
Dr. McCurdy, but he had to listen to what she said.

"Spotty was a fine cow, but by some accident she had lost her tail, and
I got her cheaper on that account," says Mrs. Gunning. "You don't know
how distressing it was to see her switching a stump. So I made her a
tail of whalebone and India-rubber and yarn. I knit it myself."

The poor fellow looked up at the fort and said: "Yes. It is very
interesting/ Mrs. Gunning."

"I am aware," says she, "that the expedient was never hit upon before.
But Spotty's brush is a great success. It used to make me unhappy to
think of leaving this post. All the other cows might find good homes
with new owners; but who would care for Spotty? Since I have supplied
her deficiency, however, and know that the supply can constantly be
renewed, my mind is easy about her. If you ever have to knit a cow's
tail, doctor, remember the foundations are whalebone and India-rubber;
and I would advise you to use the coarsest yarn you can find for the
brush."

"I will, Mrs. Gunning," he says, like a man who wanted to lie down in
the straw and die. And I couldn't laugh and relieve myself, because it
was like laughing at him.

"Now that shows," says Mrs. Gunning, and she pounced at him and shook
her parasol in his face so vigorously that she ripped in the back the
same as a chrysalis, "how easy it is to remedy a seemingly incurable
injury."

If he didn't understand her then, he did afterwards. But he looked as if
he couldn't endure it any longer, and made for the door.

"Stop, Dr. McCurdy," says she. "You haven't heard these cows'
pedigrees."

He stopped, and said: "How long are the pedigrees?"

"Here are four generations," says Mrs. Gunning--"grandmother, mother,
daughter, and grandchild." And on she went, tracing their lineage
through blooded stock for more than half an hour. She was enthusiastic,
too, and got between the doctor and the door, and emphasized all her
points with the parasol. Her back kept ripping until I ought to have
told her, but I knew the man was too mad to look at her, and she was so
happy herself, I said, "I will let her alone."

I had forgotten all about my half-breed driver, sitting on the
parade-ground in the waiting carriage. But he was enjoying himself too,
when we climbed to the fort again, with a soldier lounging on the front
wheel.

Well, as soon as I entered the little parlor that Mrs. Gunning called
her drawing-room--ornamented with the movable knickknacks that an army
woman carries around with her, you know--I saw that Captain Markley had
asserted himself. If he hadn't asserted himself on that occasion, I do
believe Mrs. Gunning would have been done with him forever. I never saw
a man so anxious to show that he was accepted. Of course he couldn't
announce the engagement until it had been sanctioned by the girl's
foster-parents. But he put Juliana through the engaged drill like a
veteran, and she was wonderfully meek.

I suppose one British woman knows another better than an American can.
But I felt sorry for Dr. McCurdy when he saw the state of things and
took his leave, and Mrs. Gunning rubbed his defeat on the raw.

"Ah, my dear friend," says she, shaking his hand, "we see that buds will
match with buds. I could never find it in my heart to wed a bud to a
full-blown rose."

I don't doubt that the full-blown rose, as he went down the fort hill,
cursed Mrs. Gunning's cow's tail and all her cows' pedigrees. But she
looked as serene as if he had pledged the young couple's health (instead
of going off and leaving his wine half tasted), and took me to see her
chickens' cupboard.

There were shelves with rows of cans and bottles, each can or bottle
labelled "Molly," or "Lucy," or "Speckie," and so on.

"I have discovered," Mrs. Gunning says to me, "that one hen's food may
be another hen's poison, so I mix and prepare for each fowl what that
fowl seems to need. For instance, Lucy can bear more meal than Speckie,
and the Shanghai cock had to be strongly encouraged. Though it sometimes
happens," says she, casting her eye back towards the drawing-room, "that
such a fellow gets pampered, and has to have his diet reduced and his
spirit cooled down again."






End of Project Gutenberg's A British Islander, by Mary Hartwell Catherwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BRITISH ISLANDER ***

***** This file should be named 23255.txt or 23255.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/2/5/23255/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
