Project Gutenberg's The Princess And The Jewel Doctor, by Robert Hichens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Princess And The Jewel Doctor
       1905

Author: Robert Hichens

Release Date: November 8, 2007 [EBook #23413]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCESS AND THE JEWEL DOCTOR ***




Produced by David Widger






THE PRINCESS AND THE JEWEL DOCTOR

By Robert Hichens

Frederick A. Stokes Company Publishers

Copyright, 1905


In St. Petersburg society there may be met at the present time a certain
Russian Princess, who is noted for her beauty, for an ugly defect--she
has lost the forefinger of her left hand--and for her extraordinary
attachment to the city of Tunis, where she has spent at least three
months of each year since 1890--the year in which she suffered the
accident that deprived her of a finger. What that accident was, and
why she is so passionately attached to Tunis, nobody in Russia seems to
know, not even her doting husband, who bows to all her caprices. But two
persons could explain the matter--a Tunisian guide named Abdul, and a
rather mysterious individual who follows a humble calling in the Rue
Ben-Ziad, close to the Tunis bazaars. This latter is the Princess's
personal attendant during her yearly visit to Tunis. He accompanies her
everywhere, may be seen in the hall of her hotel when she is at home, on
the box of her carriage when she drives out, close behind her when
she is walking. He is her shadow in Africa. Only when she goes back to
Russia does he return to his profession in the Rue Ben-Ziad.

This is the exact history of the accident which befell the Princess in
1890. In the spring of that year she arrived one night at Tunis. She
had not long been married to an honourable man whom she adored. She was
rich, pretty, and popular. Yet her life was clouded by a great fear
that sometimes made the darkness of night almost intolerable to her. She
dreaded lest the darkness of blindness should come upon her. Both her
mother, now dead, and her grandfather had laboured under this defect.
They had been born with sight, and had become totally blind ere they
reached the age of forty. Princess Danischeff--as we may call her for
the purpose of this story--trembled when she thought of their fate,
and that it might be hers. Certain books that she read, certain
conversations on the subject of heredity that she heard in Petersburg
society fed her terror. Occasionally, too, when she stood under a strong
light she felt a slight pain in her eyes. She never spoke of her fear,
but she fell into a condition of nervous exhaustion that alarmed her
husband and her physician. The latter recommended foreign travel as a
tonic. The former, who was detained in the capital by political affairs,
reluctantly agreed to a separation from his wife. And thus it came
about, that, late one night of spring, the Princess and her companion,
the elderly Countess de Rosnikoff, arrived in Tunis at the close of a
tour in Algeria, and put up at the Hotel Royal.

The bazaars of Tunis are among the best that exist in the world of
bazaars, and, on the morning after her arrival, the Princess was anxious
to explore them with her companion. But Madame de Rosnikoff was fatigued
by her journey from Constantine. She begged the Princess to go without
her, desiring earnestly to be left in her bedroom with a cup of weak
tea and a French novel. The Princess, therefore, ordered a guide and set
forth to the bazaars.

The guide's name was Abdul. He was a talkative young Eastern, and as he
turned with the Princess into the network of tiny alleys that spreads
from the Bab-el-bahar to the bazaars, he poured forth a flood of
information about the marvels of his native city. The Princess listened
idly. That morning she was cruelly pre-occupied. As she stepped out
of the hotel into the bright sunshine she had felt a sharp pain in her
eyes, and now, though she held over her head a large green parasol, the
pain continued. She looked at the light and thought of the darkness that
might be coming upon her, and the chatter of Abdul sounded vague in her
ears. Presently, however, she was forced to attend to him, for he asked
her a direct question.

"To-day they sell jewels by auction near the Mosquee Djama-ez-Zitouna,"
he said. "Would the gracious Princess like to see the market of the
jewels?"

The Princess put her hand to her eyes and assented in a low voice. Abdul
turned out of the sunshine into a narrow alley covered with a wooden
roof. It was full of shadows and of squatting men, who held out brown
hands to the Princess as she passed. But she was staring at the shadows
and did not see the merchants of Goblin Market. Leaving this alley Abdul
led her abruptly into a dense crowd of Arabs, who were all talking,
gesticulating, and moving hither and thither, apparently under the
influence of extreme excitement. Many of them held rings, bracelets, or
brooches between their fingers, and some extended palms upon which lay
quantities of uncut jewels--turquoises, sapphires, and emeralds. At a
little distance a grave man was noting down something in a book. But
the Princess scarcely observed the progress of the jewel auction. Her
attention had been attracted by an extraordinary figure that stood near
her. This was an immensely tall Arab, dressed in a dingy brown robe, and
wearing upon his shaven head, which narrowed almost to a point at the
back, a red fez with a large black tassel. His claw-like hands were
covered with rings and his bony wrists with bracelets. But the attention
of the Princess was riveted by his eyes. They were small and bright, and
squinted horribly--so horribly, that it was impossible to tell at what
he was looking. These eyes gave to his face an expression of diabolic
and ruthless vigilance and cunning. He seemed at the same time to be
seeing everything and to be gazing definitely at nothing.

"That is Safti, the jewel doctor," murmured Abdul in the ear of the
Princess.

"A jewel doctor! What is that?" asked the Princess.

"When you are sick he cures you with jewels."

"And what can he cure?" said the Princess, still looking at Safti,
who was now bargaining vociferously with a fat Arab for a piece of
milk-white jade.

"All things. I was sick of a fever that comes with the summer. He gave
me a stone crushed to a powder, and I was well. He saved from death one
of the Bey's sons, who was dying from hijada. And then, too, he has a
stone in a ring which can preserve sight to him who is going blind."

The Princess started violently.

"Impossible!" she cried.

"It is true," said Abdul. "It is a green stone--like that."

He pointed to an emerald which an Arab was holding up to the light.

The Princess put her hand to her eyes. They still ached, and her temples
were throbbing furiously.

"I cannot stay here," she said. "It is too hot. But---- tell the jewel
doctor that I wish to visit him. Where does he live?"

"In a little street, Rue Ben-Ziad, in a little house. But he is rich."
Abdul spread his arms abroad. "When will the gracious Princess----?"

"This afternoon. At--at four o'clock you will take me."

Abdul spoke to Safti, who turned, squinted horribly at the Princess, and
salaamed to her with a curious and contradictory dignity, turning his
fingers, covered with jewels, towards the earth.

That afternoon, at four, when the venerable Madame de Rosnikoff was
still drinking her weak tea and reading her French novel, the Princess
and Abdul stood before the low wooden door of the jewel doctor's house.
Abdul struck upon it, and the terrible physician appeared in the dark
aperture, looking all ways with his deformed eyes, which fascinated the
Princess. Having ascertained that he could speak a little broken French,
like many of the Tunisian Arabs, she bade Abdul wait outside, and
entered the hovel of the jewel doctor, who shut close the door behind
her.

The room in which she found herself was dark and scented. Faint light
from the street filtered in through an aperture in the wall, across
which was partially drawn a wooden shutter. Round the room ran a
divan covered with straw matting, and Safti now conducted the Princess
ceremoniously to this, and handed her a cup of thick coffee, which he
took from a brass tray that was placed upon a stand. As she sipped the
coffee and looked at the pointed head and twisted gaze of Safti, the
Princess heard some distant Arab at a street corner singing monotonously
a tuneless song, and the scent, the darkness, the reiterated song, and
the tall, strange creature standing silently before her gave to her, in
their combination, the atmosphere of a dream. She found it difficult to
speak, to explain her errand.

At length she said: "You are a doctor? You can cure the sick?"

Safti salaamed.

"With jewels? Is that possible?"

"Jewels are the only medicine," Safti replied, speaking with sudden
volubility. "With the ruby I cure madness, with the white jade the
disease of the hijada, and with the bloodstone haemorrhage. I have
made a man who was ill of fever wear a topaz, and he arose from bed and
walked happily in the street."

"And with an emerald," interrupted the Princess; "have you not preserved
sight with an emerald? They told me so."

Safti's expression suddenly became grim and suspicious.

"Who said that?" he asked sharply.

"Abdul. Is it true? Can it be true?"

Her cheeks were flushed. She spoke almost with violence, laying her hand
upon his arm. Safti seemed to stare hard into the corners of the little
room. Perhaps he was really looking at the Princess. At length he said:
"It is true."

"I will give any price you ask for it," said the Princess.

"You!" said Safti. "But you--"

Suddenly he lifted his lean hands, took the face of the Princess between
them quite gently, and turned it towards the small window. She had
begun to tremble. Holding her soft cheeks with his brown fingers, Safti
remained motionless for a long time, during which it seemed to the
Princess that he was looking away from her at some distant object. She
watched his frightful and surreptitious eyes, that never told the truth,
she heard the distant Arab's everlasting song, and her dream became a
nightmare. At last Safti dropped his hands and said:

"It may be that some day you will need my emerald."

The Princess felt as if at that moment a bullet entered her heart.

"Give it me--give it me!" she cried. "I am rich. I------"

"I do not sell my medicines," Safti answered. "Those who use them must
live near me, here in Tunis. When they are healed they give back to me
the jewel that has saved them. But you--you live far off."

With the swiftness of a woman the Princess saw that persuasion would be
useless. Safti's face looked hard as brown wood. She seemed to recover
from her emotion, and said quietly:

"At least you will let me see the emerald?"

Safti went to a small bureau that stood at the back of the room, opened
one of its drawers with a key which he drew from beneath his dingy robe,
lifted a small silver box carefully out, returned to the Princess, and
put the box into her hand.

"Open it," he said.

She obeyed, and took out a very small and antique gold ring, in which
was set a rather dull emerald. Safti drew it gently from her, and put it
upon the forefinger of her left hand. It was so tiny that it would not
pass beyond the joint of the finger, and it looked ugly and odd upon the
Princess, who wore many beautiful rings. Now that she saw it she felt
the superstition that had sprung from her terror dying within her.
Safti, with his crooked eyes, must have read her thought in her face,
for he said:

"The Princess is wrong. That medicine could cure her. The one who wears
it for three months in each year can never be blind."

Taking the emerald from her finger, he touched her two eyes with it, and
it seemed to the Princess that, as he did so, the pain she felt in them
withdrew. Her desire for the jewel instantly returned.

"Let me wear it," she said, putting forth all her charm to soften the
jewel doctor. "Let me take it with me to Russia. I will make you rich."

Safti shook his head.

"The Princess may wear it here, in Tunis," he replied. "Not elsewhere."

She began to temporise, hoping to conquer his resistance later.

"I may take it with me now?" she asked.

"At a fee."

"I will pay it."

The jewel doctor went to the door, and called in Abdul. Five minutes
later the Princess passed the singing Arab at the corner of the street,
Rue Ben-Ziad. She had signed a paper pledging herself to return the
emerald to Safti at the end of forty-eight hours, and to pay 125 francs
for her possession of it during that time. And she wore the emerald on
the forefinger of her left hand.

On the following morning Madame de Rosnikoff said to the Princess:

"I hate Tunis. It has an evil climate. The tea here is too strong, and
I feel sure the drains are bad. Last night I was feverish. I am always
feverish when I am near bad drains."

The Princess, who had slept well, and had waked with no pain in her
eyes, answered these complaints cheerily, made the Countess some tea
that was really weak, and drove her out in the sunshine to see Carthage.
The Countess did not see it, because there is no longer a Carthage. She
went to bed that night in a bad humour, and again complained of drains
the next morning. This time the Princess did not heed her, for she was
thinking of the hour when she must return the emerald to Safti.

"What an ugly ring that is," said the old Countess. "Where did you get
it? It is too small. Why do you wear it?"

"I--I bought it in the bazaars," answered the Princess.

"My dear, you wasted your money," said the companion; and she went to
bed with another French novel.

That afternoon the Princess implored Safti to sell her the emerald,
and as he persistently declined she renewed her lease of it for another
forty-eight hours. As she left the jewel doctor's home she did not
notice that he spoke some words in a low and eager voice to Abdul,
pointing towards her as he did so. Nor did she see the strange bustle of
varied life in the street as she walked slowly under the great Moorish
arch of the Porte de France. She was deeply thoughtful.

Since she had worn the ugly ring of Safti she had suffered no pain from
her eyes, and a strange certainty had gradually come upon her that,
while the emerald was in her possession, she would be safe from the
terrible disease of which she had so long lived in terror. Yet Safti
would not let her have the ring. And she could not live for ever in
Tunis. Already she had prolonged her stay abroad, and was due in Russia,
where her anxious husband awaited her. She knew not what to do. Suddenly
an idea occurred to her. It made her flush red and tingle with shame.
She glanced up, and saw the lustrous eyes of Abdul fixed intently upon
her. As he left her at the door of the hotel he said,

"The Princess will stay long in Tunis?"

"Another week at least, Abdul," she answered carelessly. "You can go
home now. I shall not want you any more to-day."

And she walked into the hotel without looking at him again. When she was
in her room she sent for a list of the steamers sailing daily from Tunis
for the different ports of Africa and Europe. Presently she came to the
bedside of Madame de Rosnikoff.

"Countess," she said, "you are no better?"

"How can I be? The drains are bad, and the tea here is too strong."

"There is a boat that leaves for Sicily at midnight--for Marsala. Shall
we go in her?"

The old lady bounded on her pillow.

"Straight on by Italy to Russia?" she cried joyfully.

The Princess nodded. A fierce excitement shone in her pretty eyes, and
her little hands were trembling as she looked down at the dull emerald
of Safti.

*****

At eleven o'clock that night the Princess and the Countess got into a
carriage, drove to the edge of the huge salt lake by which Tunis lies
and went on board the Stella d'Italia.

The sky was starless. The winds were still, and it was very dark. As the
ship glided out from the shore the old Countess hurried below. But the
Princess remained on deck, leaning upon the bulwark, and gazing at the
fading lights of the city where Safti dwelt. Two flames seemed burning
in her heart, a fierce flame of joy, a fierce flame of contempt--of
contempt for herself. For was she not a common thief? She looked at
Safti's ring on her finger, and flushed scarlet in the darkness. Yet she
was joyful, triumphant, as she heard the beating of the ship's heart,
and saw the lights of Tunis growing fainter in the distance, and felt
the onward movement of the _Stella d'Italia_ through the night. She
felt herself nearer to Russia with each throb of the machinery. And from
Russia she would expiate her sin. From Russia she would compensate Safti
for his loss. The lights of Tunis grew fainter. She thought of the open
sea.

But suddenly she felt that the ship was slowing down. The engines beat
more feebly, then ceased to beat. The ship glided on for a moment in
silence, and stopped. A cold fear ran over the Princess. She called to a
sailor.

"Why," she said, "why do we stop? Is anything wrong?"

He pointed to some lights on the port side.

"We are off Hammam-Lif, madame," he said. "We are going to lie to for
half-an-hour to take in cargo."

To the Princess that half-hour seemed all eternity. She remained upon
deck, and whenever she heard the splash of oars as a boat drew near, or
the guttural sound of an Arab voice, she trembled, and, staring into the
blackness, fancied that she saw the tall figure, the pointed head, and
the deformed eyes of the jewel doctor. But the minutes passed. The
cargo was all got on board. The boats drew off. And once again the ship
shuddered as the heart of her began to beat, and the ebon water ran
backward from her prow.

Then the Princess was glad. She laid the hand on which shone Safti's
emerald upon the bulwark, and gazed towards the sea, turning her back
upon the lights of Hammam-Lif. She thought of safety, of Russia. She did
not hear a soft step drawing near upon the deck behind her. She did not
see the flash of steel descending to the bulwark on which her hand was
laid.

But suddenly the horrible cry of a woman in agony rang through the
night. It was instantly succeeded by a splash in the water, as a tall
figure dived over the vessel's side.

When the sun rose on the following day over the minarets of Tunis the
_Stella d'ltalia_, with the Princess on board, was far out at sea.

The emerald of Safti was once more in the little house in the Rue
Ben-Ziad.

It was still upon the Princess's finger.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Princess And The Jewel Doctor, by
Robert Hichens

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCESS AND THE JEWEL DOCTOR ***

***** This file should be named 23413.txt or 23413.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/1/23413/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
