The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Old Man's Bag, by T. W. H. Crosland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Old Man's Bag

Author: T. W. H. Crosland

Illustrator: J. R. Monsell

Release Date: November 15, 2007 [EBook #23485]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD MAN'S BAG ***




Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






Transcriber's Note: Minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note.


THE OLD MAN'S BAG

T. W. H. CROSLAND AND J. R. MONSELL

The Dumpy Books for Children

NO. 22. THE OLD MAN'S BAG.


THE DUMPY BOOKS FOR CHILDREN.

_Cloth, Royal 32 mo, 1/6 each._

    I. The Flamp, the Ameliorator, and the Schoolboy's Apprentice. By
       E. V. LUCAS.

   II. Mrs. Turner's Cautionary Stories. Edited by E. V. LUCAS.

  III. The Bad Family. By MRS. FENWICK. Edited by E. V. LUCAS.

   IV. The Story of Little Black Sambo. Illustrated in Colours. By
       HELEN BANNERMAN.

    V. The Bountiful Lady. By THOMAS COBB.

   VI. A Cat Book. Portraits by H. OFFICER SMITH. Text by E. V. LUCAS.

  VII. A Flower Book. Illustrated in Colours by NELLIE BENSON. Text by
       EDEN COYBEE.

 VIII. The Pink Knight. Illustrated in Colours by J. R. MONSELL.

   IX. The Little Clown. By THOMAS COBB.

    X. A Horse Book. Illustrated in Colours. By MARY TOURTEL.

   XI. Little People: An Alphabet. Illustrated in Colours by HENRY
       MAYER. Verses by T. W. H. CROSLAND.

  XII. A Dog Book. Illustrated in Colours by CARTON MOORE PARK. Text by
       ETHEL BICKNELL.

 XIII. The Adventures of Samuel and Selina. Illustrated in Colours by
       JEAN C. ARCHER.

  XIV. The Little Girl Lost. By ELEANOR RAPER.

   XV. Dollies. Illustrated in Colours by RUTH COBB. Verses by RICHARD
       HUNTER.

  XVI. The Bad Mrs. Ginger. Illustrated in Colours by HONOR C. APPLETON.

 XVII. Peter Piper's Practical Principles. Illustrated in Colours.

XVIII. Little White Barbara. Illustrated in Colours by ELEANOR S. MARCH.

  XIX. The Japanese Dumpy Book. Illustrated in Colours by YOSHIO MARKINO.

   XX. Towlocks and His Wooden Horse. Illustrated in Colours by HONOR
       C. APPLETON. Text by ALICE M. APPLETON.

  XXI. The Three Little Foxes. By MARY TOURTEL. Illustrated in Colours.

 XXII. The Old Man's Bag. By T. W. H. CROSLAND. Illustrated in Colours
       by J. R. MONSELL.

XXIII. The Three Goblins. By M. E. TAGGART. Illustrated in Colours.

_A Cloth Case to contain Twelve Volumes can be had, price 2s. net; or
the First Twelve Volumes in Case, price L1 net._

LONDON: GRANT RICHARDS,
48 Leicester Square.




[Illustration: The old man went for a walk and took the bag with him.]



THE OLD MAN'S BAG



By

T. W. H. CROSLAND



PICTURES BY

J. R. MONSELL



LONDON:
GRANT RICHARDS
1903




ILLUSTRATIONS.


THE OLD MAN WENT FOR A WALK            _Frontispiece_

                                                 PAGE

THE OLD MAN SAID "CHUCK, CHUCK!"                    2

THE RED POLICEMAN RAN AFTER HIM                     7

"WHATEVER ARE YOU LAUGHING AT?"                    10

SHE TOOK THE BAG DOWN                              15

"BUTTER IS CHEAP TO-DAY"                           18

"YOU ARE A VERY FOOLISH OLD WOMAN"                 23

WHO SHOULD STEP IN BUT THE RED POLICEMAN           26

"PLEASE MEASURE ME FOR A SOLDIER'S SUIT"           31

HE BEGAN TO STRUT ABOUT                            42

THE OLD WOMAN WAS KNOCKING APPLES OFF A TREE       47

BURNT THE PIECES ON THE FIRE                       58




THE OLD MAN'S BAG.




CHAPTER I.


The old man lived in a wood. He had a wife and a bag. The bag was quite
a large bag. One day the old man went out for a walk. He took the bag
with him. By and by he saw a hen in a field. Now when you see a hen in
a field you say "Chuck, chuck!" The old man said "Chuck, chuck!" And
the hen came to him. So that he caught her by the neck and put her in
his bag. She made a great to-do, but he put her in.

[Illustration: The old man said "Chuck, chuck!" and the hen came to
him.]

On his way home, just as he turned a corner, the old man saw a
policeman. The policeman had a red suit. He was one of those policemen
who wear red suits because they are tired of wearing blue. The red
policeman looked very hard at the old man and very hard at his bag. In
fact he looked so very very hard that the old man got frightened and
turned round and ran away.

Of course the red policeman ran after him. When they had run about five
miles the old man dropped his bag in order that he might run quicker.
The red policeman had made up his mind to catch him; so that he did not
stop to pick up the bag but kept on running after the old man. At
length when they had run about ten miles he caught him.

[Illustration: The red policeman ran after him.]

"Now, sir," said the red policeman, "what have you got in that bag?"

"Nothing," said the old man.

"Oh, you wicked old person," said the red policeman. "You know
perfectly well that you have a hen in it. But you must come back with
me, and we will soon find out."

So the red policeman took the old man back to the place where he had
dropped the bag. The bag was there, and the red policeman picked it up
and opened it with great care. But the hen had got away. There was a
big hole in the corner of the bag, and through this the hen had
squeezed herself and run home as fast as ever she could. When the
policeman found that the bag was empty he looked much puzzled. The old
man for his part smiled a great deal. "I told you there was nothing in
it," he said.

The red policeman said, "Well, I expect I shall have to let you go this
time. BUT MIND YOU DON'T DO IT AGAIN."

And the old man went home quite cheerfully with his bag under his arm.




CHAPTER II.


When the old man got home to his house in the wood he hung the bag up
tidily on a nail. Then he sat down in a chair and began to laugh. He
laughed for nearly a quarter of an hour by the clock. At length his
wife came in to him from the garden and said,

"Whatever are you laughing at?"

[Illustration: "Whatever are you laughing at?"]

"Oh," replied the old man, holding his sides, "I am so amused!" Then he
went on laughing. He laughed so much indeed that the tears came into
his eyes and he nearly choked. His wife had to pat his back and give
him a drink of water to put him right.

Then he told her what had happened. How he had put a hen in his bag,
how the red policeman had run after him, how he dropped the bag and let
the policeman catch him, and how when the policeman took him back to
the bag, the hen was gone.

"Did she open the bag and fly away?" said the old woman.

"No," said the old man. "She got out through that hole in the corner."

"Ah," said the old woman, "I must sew up that hole."

And she took the bag down from its nail and sewed up the hole. For she
was a very neat woman and she did not like to see holes in bags.

[Illustration: She took the bag down and sewed up the hole.]




CHAPTER III.


The next day was market day. On market day people who have butter or
cheese to sell take it into the market to sell it. And people who have
money and happen to want butter or cheese go into the market to buy it.
The old man's wife had nothing to sell. Neither had she any money. But
she wanted some butter very badly. So she took the old man's bag off
the nail and carried it to market. She walked round the market with the
bag under her arm and looked at all the stalls and enquired how much
the strawberries were a pound; but she did not buy anything because she
had no money. In a little while she came to a stall on which there were
six rolls of fine fresh butter, and in front of them was a card on
which the man who brought the butter to market had written--

    BUTTER IS CHEAP TO-DAY.

[Illustration: "Butter is cheap to-day!"]

"I am glad butter is cheap to-day," said the old woman to herself, and
when the man who had brought the butter to market was not looking she
picked up a roll and dropped it into her bag. Then she ran away as fast
as she could.

When she got round the corner the red policeman saw her. He shouted
out, "What have you got in that bag?"

"Nothing," said the old woman, still running.

But the policeman kept running after her. When they had run about five
miles the old woman dropped the bag, so that she might run quicker. The
policeman, however, had made up his mind to catch her, and when they
had run about ten miles he caught her.

"Now," he said, "you must come back with me to your bag, and we will
see if there is anything in it." The old man's wife said that she was
sure there was nothing in it. "All right," said the policeman, "but if
you don't mind we will go back and see." So they went back to the bag,
and the policeman opened it with great care. Inside he found the roll
of butter.

The old man's wife began to cry. "Oh dear, oh dear," she said, "what a
pity it is that I sewed up that hole."

"Why?" asked the red policeman.

"Because if I had not sewn up the hole the butter might have got out,
like my husband's hen."

"You are a very foolish old woman," said the policeman. "Do you not
know that a roll of butter cannot walk like a hen?"

[Illustration: "You are a very foolish old woman."]

"Is that really so?" said the old woman. "Well, well. But I have seen
butter run when it was melted."

"Never mind that," said the red policeman, "you will have to come with
me to prison."

"I am too busy to go with you just now," said the old woman, "and my
husband wants the butter for his tea. But if you like to call for me in
the morning and the weather is fine I will come with you with
pleasure."

"You are very polite," said the red policeman. "If you had been rude I
should have made you go with me now. As it is I will call for you in
the morning providing it doesn't rain."

"Thank you so much," said the old woman.

And she shook the red policeman warmly by the hand and went off to her
husband.




CHAPTER IV.


When she got home the old man was sat in his chair by the fire. She
could see by his face that he was in a bad temper. But she went up to
him and kissed him and said, "Please don't be grumpy, for I have
brought you something very nice for your tea."

"What is it?" said the old man, "a hen?"

"No," she said, "people don't have hens for tea, do they?"

"Perhaps not," said the old man. "But if you had brought a hen she
might have laid an egg, and I could have had that. You know very well
that I am fond of new laid eggs."

"New laid eggs are all very fine," said the old woman, "but butter is
cheap to-day. I have brought you a beautiful fresh roll."

The old man smacked his lips.

While they were having tea the old woman began to laugh very much.

"What are you laughing at?" said the old man. "Did you meet the red
policeman?"

"Yes, I did," said the old woman.

"And did he catch you?"

"Yes, he did," said the old woman.

"And he let you go?"

"Yes, he did," said the old woman.

"Why?"

"Because I was polite to him," said the old woman.

"Well I never," said the old man.

"But he is coming for me in the morning, providing the weather is
fine," said the old woman.

The old man sat still in his chair and thought a great deal.

And by and by he said, "If you had asked the red policeman to tea like
a sensible woman he might have let you off altogether."

"I shall know better next time," said the old woman.




CHAPTER V.


When the old man and his wife woke up next morning they looked out of
the window and saw that the weather was quite fine. The old man began
to whistle and sing. He always did this when the weather was fine
because he said fine weather always made him feel in such good spirits.
In a little while the old woman began to sing too. Then the old man
stopped.

"What are you singing for?" he said to the old woman.

"I feel in such good spirits," the old woman replied.

"Oh, you do, do you?" said the old man. "You appear to forget that the
red policeman is coming for you."

"Oh dear, oh dear," said the old woman. "What a bad memory I have to be
sure. Whatever shall I do?" And she burst into tears.

"There, there," said the old man, "don't cry. We will give him sixpence
when he calls, and ask him to have a piece of bread and butter with jam
on it. Then perhaps he will go away."

They went downstairs and had breakfast. They had just finished when
there came an awfully loud knock at the door. The old woman went very
pale.

"It is the red policeman," she said.

The old man went to open the door. But the old woman pulled him back.

"You are forgetting the sixpence," she said, "and the piece of bread
and butter with jam on it."

"Of course, of course," said the old man, and he felt in his pocket for
sixpence while the old woman cut a nice large thick slice of bread and
covered it with butter and jam.

"Perhaps after all," said the old man, "we had better not open the
door, but hand the policeman the sixpence and the bread and butter with
jam on it through the window."

So he opened the window a little way and held out the sixpence and the
bread and butter with jam on it to the person outside.

"Thanks very much," said the person outside. And he put the sixpence in
his pocket and began to eat the bread and butter with jam on it. And
when he had finished eating he knocked again very loudly at the door.

"Go away," said the old man. "My wife is not coming out with you
to-day."

"I don't want your wife to come out with me," said the person at the
door; "I have called to look at the gas meter."

"We haven't got a gas meter now," said the old man, "we burn nothing
but electric light."

"Many, many thanks," said the person at the door, and he went away.

"I feel all of a flutter," said the old woman, sinking into a chair.

"So do I," said the old man. "And he has got my sixpence too."




CHAPTER VI.


In a little while the old woman began to put the breakfast things away.
Afterwards she took up the table-cover and went out into the garden
with it to shake off the bread crumbs. As she stepped out of the door
who should step in but the red policeman. The old woman trembled very
much when she saw him go in, and she shook the table-cover several
times over in order that she might think what to say to the red
policeman. Just then it began to rain. The old woman ran into the house
at once.

[Illustration: Who should step in but the red policeman.]

"Good morning, madam," said the red policeman, and he made a nice bow.

"Good morning, sir," said the old woman. "What, might I ask, brings you
here?"

"I have called, madam," replied the red policeman, making another bow,
"for the purpose of taking you with me to prison for stealing a roll of
butter."

"Where is the roll of butter?" said the old woman.

The policeman looked very hard at the butter dish, but there was no
butter on it. The old man and his wife and the gas-man had eaten it
all.

"I beg your pardon, I am sure," said the policeman.

"The idea!" said the old woman. "Besides you said you would not call
this morning unless the weather were fine, and you see for yourself
that it is now raining cats and dogs."

"I am truly sorry, madam," said the policeman, bowing once more. "When
I come to think of it, I did say that I would not call if it rained.
Pray forgive me. We all make mistakes sometimes, you know."

"I don't like such mistakes," said the old woman. "Now kindly leave the
house."

"Oh, please don't turn me out," said the red policeman, "it is raining
very hard indeed, and I might get my feet wet."

"We should always be kind," said the old woman, "even to policemen, and
as it is raining and I left my umbrella in an omnibus the other day, I
will lend you my sunshade. But please go."

The old woman put the sunshade into the policeman's hand. He looked at
it very hard.

"It is a blue one," he said. "It is not fashionable to wear a blue
sunshade with a red suit. Thank you all the same, but I think I will go
without it."

He went.

The old man, who had been quietly laughing to himself, danced about
with joy when he saw the policeman leave. Then he ran to the window and
put his head out, and called out after the policeman, "I say. When your
clothes are quite wet enough be sure you come back and have them
dried."

But the red policeman took no notice of him.




CHAPTER VII.


The red policeman got so wet that by the time he reached his house all
the dye had come out of his suit. He felt very angry indeed.

"I must try not to make mistakes," he said, "sometimes they bring one
into fearful trouble. As my suit is spoilt I think I will give up being
a policeman. A policeman without a suit is no good at all."

So he went to bed and had hot bricks to his feet and a mustard plaster
on his chest, and sent for the tailor to measure him for a new suit of
clothes.

When the tailor came the policeman said to him, "I am quite tired of
being a policeman, and I think I should now like to be a soldier.
Please measure me for a soldier's suit. The coat you will make of green
cloth and the trousers must be yellow."

[Illustration: "Please measure me for a soldier's suit."]

"But," said the tailor, "soldiers wear scarlet coats and blue
trousers."

"That is just the point," said the policeman. "I don't want to be like
all the others. If I did I should go in for khaki. Just you do what I
tell you, and make me a green coat and yellow trousers at once."

The tailor said, "Yes, sir," and went away.

In a few days he called again, bringing with him a yellow coat and
green trousers. The policeman could have cried with disappointment.

"Didn't I tell you quite plainly that I wanted a green coat and yellow
trousers?"

"I am truly sorry, sir," said the tailor, "but as you no doubt know,
the best of us make mistakes sometimes."

"There is something in that," said the policeman, "and if the suit fits
me I will forgive you."

Then he went into his dressing-room and put on the yellow coat and the
green trousers. They fitted him beautifully. So that he forgave the
tailor, and sent round to him to say that he would try to pay his bill
when he got some money.

[Illustration: He began to strut about in his new clothes.]

After looking at himself a good deal in the mirror the policeman went
out into the street and began to strut about in his new clothes. "This
is much better than being a policeman," he said, "a policeman has
little to do, but a soldier has nothing to do till he is sent for to
fight. By the way I must go and buy a sword, and then I will go up to
the old man's house and let him see me in my new clothes. Perhaps he
will give me two halfpennies to put in the pockets."

He bought his sword at the toy shop and went straight to the old man's
house. When he got there the old woman was in the garden knocking
apples off a tree with a clothes prop. No sooner did she see the
policeman in his yellow coat and green trousers than she ran screaming
into the house, and hid herself under the bed.

[Illustration: The old woman was knocking apples off a tree.]

But when the old man saw him he shouted, "Hurrah, hurrah, the red
policeman has turned soldier. Now we needn't be afraid of him any
more."

And he called upstairs to his wife, "Come down at once and get me my
bag."

The old woman came downstairs quickly. She took down the bag from its
nail and handed it to her husband. "Run," she said, "as hard as you
can, and bring me a hen and anything else nice that takes your fancy.
Bags were made to put things in. And the red policeman--the soldier,
that is to say--will stay to dinner."

The soldier sat down in the chair and lit his pipe, and the old man
went out with the bag. Very soon he returned with two hens, a fat duck,
several rolls of butter, a large piece of bacon, some cabbages, some
ice cream, and two pots of marmalade.

The old woman cooked everything but the ice cream and the marmalade,
and they had a very good dinner indeed.

"This is much better than being a policeman," said the soldier when
they had finished.

"I should just think it was," said the old man.

"And so should I," said the old woman.

"Now I must wish you both good evening," said the soldier, "for I hear
the bugle calling."




CHAPTER VIII.


When a soldier hears the bugle calling he is bound to go even if he
would like to have stayed for supper. That is why the soldier went.

"I am glad I am not a soldier," said the old man, "because I do not
have to go when the bugle calls."

"No," said the old woman, "but you have to go when I tell you, which is
pretty much the same thing."

"Perhaps it is," said the old man.

"And I think," said the old woman, "that it might be just as well for
you to go out this evening with the bag and get a few nice little
things for breakfast and dinner to-morrow. For when you come to think
of it there is no reason why the soldier should not take it into his
head to be a red policeman again, and if he did he would run after us
when he saw us with the bag. So that we had better get what we want
before he changes his mind."

"A very good idea, my dear," said the old man, "give me the bag and I
will go out at once."

The old woman gave him the bag and off he went.

He was away a very long time. Indeed he did not get back till nearly
midnight. When he set the bag down on the table the old woman could see
that he had got a good many things, because the bag bulged so.

"How good of you," she said. "Now show me what you have got."

Then the old man opened the bag. First he pulled out a pretty little
kitten with her mother, an old grey cat.

"Very nice," said the old woman, "but we can't cook them."

"You cooked the hens," said the old man.

Then he pulled out a pillow case full of hay.

"Quite nice," said the old woman, "but we can't cook it."

"You cooked the cabbages," said the old man.

Then he pulled out a box full of pieces of broken glass.

"Beautiful!" said the old woman, "but we can't eat it."

"You ate the marmalade fast enough," said the old man.

Then the old woman said, "If you go on talking so foolishly I shall be
very cross. Turn that cat and her kitten out at once, burn the hay, and
throw the broken glass out of the window."

"And what shall I do with the bag?" said the old man.

"You can do just as you please with the bag," said the old woman; "I am
going to bed."

And off she went.

The old man opened the door and turned out the cat and her kitten. Then
he burnt the hay a little bit at a time on the fire, and threw the
broken glass out of the window.

After doing this he sat down in his chair to think. "What shall I do
with the bag?" he said to himself. "My wife said I might do what I
pleased with it. Perhaps I had better burn it."

So he cut it in pieces with a knife, and burnt the pieces on the fire.

[Illustration: Burnt the pieces on the fire.]

In the morning when the old woman came downstairs to breakfast she
looked on the nail for the bag, but of course it was not there.

"What have you done with the bag?" she called to the old man.

"I have burnt it," said the old man.

"Why did you burn it?" said the old woman.

"Guess," said the old man.

The old woman guessed and guessed and guessed and guessed and guessed.

But she could not guess right, and the old man had to keep on saying,
"Guess again, guess again, guess again."

Now why did the old man burn his bag?

You must get your Mamma to tell you.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Old Man's Bag, by T. W. H. Crosland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD MAN'S BAG ***

***** This file should be named 23485.txt or 23485.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/8/23485/

Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
