The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Christmas Peace, by Thomas Nelson Page

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Christmas Peace
       1908

Author: Thomas Nelson Page

Release Date: November 16, 2007 [EBook #23511]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRISTMAS PEACE ***




Produced by David Widger






THE CHRISTMAS PEACE

By Thomas Nelson Page

Charles Scribner's Sons New York, 1908

Copyright, 1891, 1904, 1906




I

They had lived within a mile of each other for fifty-odd years, old
Judge Hampden and old Colonel Drayton; that is, all their lives, for
they had been born on adjoining plantations within a month of each
other. But though they had thus lived and were accounted generally good
men and good neighbors, to each other they had never been neighbors any
more than the Levite was neighbor to him who went down to Jericho.

Kindly to everyone else and ready to do their part by all other men, the
Draytons and the Hampdens, whenever they met each other, always passed
by on the other side.

It was an old story--the feud between the families--and, perhaps, no
one now knew just how the trouble started. They had certainly been on
opposite sides ever since they established themselves in early Colonial
days on opposite hills in the old county from which the two mansions
looked at each other across the stream like hostile forts. The earliest
records of the county were those of a dispute between one Colonel
Drayton and one Captain Hampden, growing out of some claim to land; but
in which the chief bitterness appeared to have been injected by Captain
Hampden's having claimed precedence over Colonel Drayton on the ground
that his title of "Captain" was superior to Colonel Drayton's title,
because he had held a real commission and had fought for it, whereas
the Colonel's title was simply honorary and "Ye sayd Collonel had never
smelled enough powder to kill a tom-cat."

However this might be and there was nothing in the records to show how
this contention was adjudicated--in the time of Major Wil-mer Drayton
and Judge Oliver Hampden, the breach between the two families had been
transmitted from father to son for several generations and showed no
signs of abatement. Other neighborhood families intermarried, but not
the Drayton-Hall and the Hampden-Hill families, and in time it came to
be an accepted tradition that a Drayton and a Hampden would not mingle
any more than would fire and water.

The Hampdens were dark and stout, hot-blooded, fierce, and impetuous.
They were apparently vigorous; but many of them died young. The
Draytons, on the other hand, were slender and fair, and usually lived
to a round old age; a fact of which they were wont to boast in contrast
with the briefer span of the Hampdens.

"Their tempers burn them out," the Major used to say of the Hampdens.

Moreover, the Draytons were generally cool-headed, deliberate, and
self-contained. Thus, the Draytons had mainly prospered throughout the
years.

Even the winding creek which ran down through the strip of meadow was a
fruitful cause of dissension and litigation between the families. "It is
as ungovernable as a Hampden's temper, sir," once said Major Drayton,
On the mere pretext of a thunder-storm, it would burst forth from its
banks, tear the fences to pieces and even change its course, cutting a
new channel, now to one side and now to the other through the soft and
loamy soil. A lawsuit arose over the matter, in which the costs alone
amounted to far more than the value of the whole land involved; but no
one doubted that old Major Drayton spoke the truth when he declared that
his father would rather have lost his entire estate with all its rolling
hills and extensive forests than the acre or two which was finally
awarded to Judge Hampden.

As neither owner would join the other even in keeping up a partition
fence, there were two fences run within three feet of each other along
the entire boundary line between the two places. With these double
fences, there could hardly be peace between the two families; for
neither owner ever saw the two lines running side by side without at
once being reminded of his neighbor's obstinacy and--of his own.

Thus, in my time the quarrel between the Drayton-Hall people and
the Hampden-Hill folks was a factor in every neighborhood problem or
proposition from a "church dressing" or a "sewing society meeting" to a
political campaign. It had to be considered in every invitation and in
every discussion.

It is not meant that there was no intercourse between the two families.
Major Drayton and Judge Hampden regularly paid each other a visit every
year--and oftener when there was serious illness in one house or the
other--but even on such occasions their differences were liable to crop
out. One of them held an opinion that when one gentleman was spending
the night in another gentleman's house, it was the part of the host
to indicate when bedtime had arrived; whilst the other maintained with
equal firmness the doctrine that no gentleman could inform his guest
that he was fatigued: that this duty devolved upon the guest himself.
This difference of opinion worked comfortably enough on both sides until
an occasion when Judge Hampden, who held the former view, was spending
the night at Colonel Drayton's. When bedtime arrived, the rest of the
household retired quietly, leaving the two gentlemen conversing, and
when the servants appeared in the morning to open the blinds and light
the fires, the two gentlemen were still found seated opposite each other
conversing together quite as if it were the ordinary thing to sit up and
talk all night long.

On another occasion, it is said that Major Drayton, hearing of his
neighbor's serious illness, rode over to make inquiry about him, and
owing to a slip of the tongue, asked in a voice of deepest sympathy,
"Any hopes of the old gentleman dying!"




II

Yet, they had once been friends.

Before Wilmer Drayton and Oliver Hampden were old enough to understand
that by all the laws of heredity and custom they should be enemies, they
had learned to like each other. When they were only a few years old, the
little creek winding between the two plantations afforded in its strip
of meadow a delightful neutral territory where the two boys could enjoy
themselves together, safe from the interference of their grave seniors;
wading, sailing mimic fleets upon its uncertain currents, fishing
together, or bathing in the deepest pools it offered in its winding
course.

It looked, indeed, for a time as if in the fellowship of these two lads
the long-standing feud of the Hampdens and Draytons might be ended,
at last. They went to school together at the academy, where their only
contests were a generous rivalry. At college they were known as Damon
and Pythias, and though a natural rivalry, which might in any event
have existed between them, developed over the highest prize of the
institution--the debater's medal--the generosity of youth saved them. It
was even said that young Drayton, who for some time had apparently been
certain of winning, had generously retired in order to defeat a third
candidate and throw the prize to Oliver Hampden.

They came home and both went to the Bar, but with different results.
Young Drayton was learned and unpractical. Oliver Hampden was clever,
able, and successful, and soon had a thriving practice; while his
neighbor's learning was hardly known outside the circle of the Bar.

Disappointed in his ambition, Drayton shortly retired from the Bar and
lived the life of a country gentleman, while his former friend rapidly
rose to be the head of the Bar.

The old friendship might have disappeared in any event, but a new cause
arose which was certain to end it.

Lucy Fielding was, perhaps, the prettiest girl in all that region.
Oliver Hampden had always been in love with her. However, Fortune, ever
capricious, favored Wilmer Drayton, who entered the lists when it looked
as if Miss Lucy were almost certain to marry her old lover. It appeared
that Mr. Drayton's indifference had counted for more than the other's
devotion. He carried off the prize with a dash.

If Oliver Hampden, however, was severely stricken by his disappointment,
he masked it well; for he married not long afterward, and though some
said it was from pique, there was no more happily married pair in all
the county.

A year later a new Oliver came to keep up the name and tenets of the
Hampdens. Oliver Hampden, now the head of the Bar, would not have envied
any man on earth had not his wife died a few years later and left him
alone with his boy in his big house.

Lucy Drayton was born two years after young Oliver Hampden.

The mammies of the two children, as the mammies of their parents had
done before them, used to talk them over on the edge of the shaded
meadow which divided the places, and thus young Oliver Hampden, a lusty
boy of five, came to know little Lucy Drayton fully three years before
his father ever laid eyes on her.

Mr. Hampden was riding around his fences one summer afternoon, and was
making his way along the double division line with a cloud on his brow
as the double rows recalled the wide breach with his neighbor and former
friend, and many memories came trooping at the recollection. Passing
through a small grove which had been allowed to grow up to shut off a
part of his view of the Drayton place, as he came out into the meadow
his eye fell on a scene which made him forget the present with all its
wrongs. On the green turf before him where butter-cups speckled the
ground with golden blossoms, was a little group of four persons busily
engaged and wholly oblivious of the differences which divided the
masters of the two estates. The two mammies were seated side by side on
a bank, sewing and talking busily--their large aprons and caps making a
splotch of white against the green willows beyond--and in front of them
at a little distance a brown-haired boy of five and a yellow-ringleted
girl of three were at play on the turf, rolling over and over, shouting
and laughing in their glee.

As the father rested his eyes on the group, the frown which had for a
second lowered on his brow passed away and he pulled in his horse so as
not to disturb them. He was about to turn back and leave them in their
happiness when his black-eyed boy caught sight of him and ran toward
him, shouting for a ride and calling over his shoulder for "Luthy" to
"come on too." As there was no escape, Mr. Hampden went forward and,
ignoring the confusion of the mammies at being caught together, took
the boy up before him and gave him a ride up and down the meadow. Then
nothing else would do for Master Oliver but he "must take Luthy up,
too."

"Perhaps 'Luthy' may be afraid of the horse!" suggested Mr. Hampden with
a smile.

But far from it. Led by the little boy who had run to fetch her, she
came to Mr. Hampden as readily as his own son had done, and, though she
gave him one of those quick searching glances with which childhood reads
character, having made sure that he was friendly, she was no more afraid
of his horse than the boy was.

Oliver tried to lift her, and as he tugged at her, the father sat and
watched with a smile, then leant down and picked her up while the two
mammies gasped with mingled astonishment and fear.

"I tell you, she's pretty heavy," said the little boy.

"Indeed, she is," said the father, gaily.

Mr. Hampden would have taken his son home with him, but the latter
declined the invitation. He wished to "stay with Luthy." So, Mr.
Hampden, having first set the nurses' minds at ease by complimenting the
little girl in warm terms to her mammy, rode home alone with his face
set in deep reflection.

The breach between the Hampdens and the Draytons was nearer being
closed that evening than it had been in three generations, for as Oliver
Hampden rode up the bridle path across his fields, he heard behind him
the merry laughter of the two children in the quiet meadow below, and
old memories of his childhood and college life softened his heart. He
forgot the double-line fences and determined to go on the morrow to
Drayton Hall and make up the quarrel. He would offer the first overture
and a full declaration of regret, and this, he was quite sure, would
make it up. Once he actually turned his horse around to go straight
across the fields as he used to do in his boyhood, but there below him
were the double-line fences stretching brown and clear. No horse could
get over them, and around the road it was a good five miles, so he
turned back again and rode home and the chance was lost.

On his arrival he found a summons in a suit which had been instituted
that day by Wilmer Drayton for damages to his land by reason of his
turning the water of the creek upon him.

Mr. Hampden did not forbid old Lydia to take his boy down there again,
but he went to the meadow no more himself, and when he and Wilmer
Drayton met next, which was not for some time, they barely spoke.




III

Young Oliver Hampden grew up clear eyed, strong, and good to look at,
and became shy where girls were concerned, and most of all appeared to
be shy with Lucy Drayton. He went to college and as he got his broad
shoulders and manly stride he got over his shyness with most girls, but
not with Lucy Drayton. With her, he appeared to have become yet more
reserved. She had inherited her mother's eyes and beauty, with the
fairness of a lily; a slim, willowy figure; a straight back and a small
head set on her shoulders in a way that showed both blood and pride.
Moreover, she had character enough, as her friends knew: those gray eyes
that smiled could grow haughty with disdain or flash with indignation,
and she had taught many an uppish young man to feel her keen irony.

"She gets only her intellect from the Dray-tons; her beauty and her
sweetness come from her mother," said a lady of the neighborhood to
Judge Hampden, thinking to please him.

"She gets both her brains and beauty from her mother and only her name
from her father," snapped the Judge, who had often seen her at church,
and never without recalling Lucy Fielding as he knew her.

That she and young Oliver Hampden fought goes without saying. But no
one knew why she was cruelly bitter to a young man who once spoke
slightingly of Oliver, or why Oliver, who rarely saw her except at
church, took up a quarrel of hers so furiously.

*****

The outbreak of the war, or rather the conditions preceding that
outbreak, finally fixed forever the gulf between the two families. Judge
Hampden was an ardent follower of Calhoun and "stumped" the State in
behalf of Secession, whereas Major Drayton, as the cloud that had been
gathering so long rolled nearer, emerged from his seclusion and became
one of the sternest opponents of a step which he declared was not merely
revolution, but actual rebellion. So earnest was he, that believing that
slavery was the ultimate bone of contention, he emancipated his slaves
on a system which he thought would secure their welfare. Nothing could
have more deeply stirred Judge Hampden's wrath. He declared that such a
measure at such a crisis was a blow at every Southern man. He denounced
Major Drayton as "worse than Garrison, Phillips, and Greeley all put
together."

They at last met in debate at the Court House. Major Drayton exasperated
the Judge by his coolness, until the latter lost his temper and the
crowd laughed.

"I do not get as hot as you do," said the Major, blandly. He looked as
cool as a cucumber, but his voice betrayed him.

"Oh, yes, you do," snorted the Judge. "A mule gets as hot as a horse,
but he does not sweat."

This saved him.

There came near being a duel. Everyone expected it. Only the
interposition of friends prevented their meeting on the field. Only this
and one other thing.

Though no one in the neighborhood knew it until long afterward--and then
only in a conjectural way by piecing together fragments of rumors that
floated about--young Oliver Hampden really prevented the duel. He told
his father that he loved Lucy Drayton. There was a fierce outbreak on
the Judge's part.

"Marry that girl!--the daughter of Wilmer Drayton! I will disinherit you
if you but so much as----"

"Stop!" The younger man faced him and held up his hand with an imperious
gesture. "Stop! Do not say a word against her or I may never forget it."

The father paused with his sentence unfinished, for his son stood before
him suddenly revealed in a strength for which the Judge had never given
him credit, and he recognized in his level eyes, tense features, and the
sudden set of the square jaw, the Hampden firmness at its best or worst.

"I have nothing to say against her," said the Judge, with a sudden rush
of recollection of Lucy Fielding. "I have no doubt she is in one way all
you think her; but she is Wilmer Drayton 's daughter. You will never win
her."

"I will win her," said the young man.

That night Judge Hampden thought deeply over the matter, and before
daylight he had despatched a note to Major Drayton making an apology for
the words he had used.

Both Judge Hampden and his son went into the army immediately on
the outbreak of hostilities. Major Drayton, who to the last opposed
Secession bitterly, did not volunteer until after the State had seceded;
but then he, also, went in, and later was desperately wounded.

A few nights before they went off to the war, Judge Hampden and his son
rode over together to Major Drayton's to offer the olive-branch of peace
in shape of young Oliver and all that he possessed.

Judge Hampden did not go all the way, for he had sworn never to put foot
again in Major Drayton's house so long as he lived, and, moreover, he
felt that his son would be the better ambassador alone. Accordingly, he
waited in the darkness at the front gate while his son presented himself
and laid at Lucy Drayton's feet what the Judge truly believed was more
than had ever been offered to any other woman. He, however, sent the
most conciliatory messages to Major Drayton.

"Tell him," he said, "that I will take down my fence and he shall run
the line to suit himself." He could not have gone further.

The time that passed appeared unending to the Judge waiting in the
darkness; but in truth it was not long, for the interview was brief. It
was with Major Drayton and not with his daughter.

Major Drayton declined, both on his daughter's part and on his own, the
honor which had been proposed.

At this moment the door opened and Lucy herself appeared. She was a
vision of loveliness. Her face was white, but her eyes were steady. If
she knew what had occurred, she gave no sign of it in words. She walked
straight to her father's side and took his hand.

"Lucy," he said, "Mr. Hampden has done us the honor to ask your hand and
I have declined it."

"Yes, papa." Her eyelids fluttered and her bosom heaved, but she did not
move, and Lucy was too much a Drayton to unsay what her father had said,
or to undo what he had done.

Oliver Hampden's eyes did not leave her face. For him the Major had
disappeared, and he saw only the girl who stood before him with a face
as white as the dress she wore.

"Lucy, I love you. Will you ever care for me? I am going--going away
to-morrow, and I shall not see you any more; but I would like to know if
there is any hope." The young man's voice was strangely calm.

The girl held out her hand to him.

"I will never marry anyone else."

"I will wait for you all my life," said the young man.

Bending low, he kissed her hand in the palm, and with a bow to her
father, strode from the room.

The Judge, waiting at the gate in the darkness, heard the far-off,
monotonous galloping of Oliver's horse on the hard plantation road. He
rode forward to meet him.

"Well!"

It was only a word.

"They declined."

The father scarcely knew his son's voice, it was so wretched.

"What! Who declined? Did you see--"

"Both!"

Out in the darkness Judge Hampden broke forth into such a torrent of
rage that his son was afraid for his life and had to devote all his
attention to soothing him. He threatened to ride straight to Drayton's
house and horsewhip him on the spot. This, however, the young man
prevented, and the two rode home together in a silence which was
unbroken until they had dismounted at their own gate and given their
horses to the waiting servants. As they entered the house, Judge Hampden
spoke.

"I hope you are satisfied," he said, sternly. "I make but one request
of you--that from this time forth, you will never mention the name of
Drayton to me again as long as you live."

"I suppose I should hate her," said the son, bitterly, "but I do not. I
love her and I believe she cares for me."

His father turned in the door-way and faced him.

"Cares for you! Not so much as she cares for the smallest negro on that
place. If you ever marry her, I will disinherit you."

"Disinherit me!" burst from the young man. "Do you think I care for this
place? What has it ever brought to us but unhappiness? I have seen your
life embittered by a feud with your nearest neighbor, and now it wrecks
my happiness and robs me of what I would give all the rest of the world
for."

Judge Hampden looked at him curiously. He started to say, "Before I
would let her enter this house, I would burn it with my own hands"; but
as he met his son's steadfast gaze there was that in it which made him
pause. The Hampden look was in his eyes. The father knew that another
word might sever them forever.

*****

If ever a man tried to court death, young Oliver Hampden did. But Death,
that struck many a happier man, passed him by, and he secured instead
only a reputation for reckless courage and was promoted on the field.

His father rose to the command of a brigade, and Oliver himself became a
captain.

At last the bullet Oliver had sought found him; but it spared his life
and only incapacitated him for service.

There were no trained nurses during the war, and Lucy Drayton, like so
many girls, when the war grew fiercer, went into the hospitals, and by
devotion supplied their place.

Believing that life was ended for her, she had devoted herself wholly to
the cause, and self-repression had given to her face the gentleness and
consecration of a nun.

It was said that once as she bent over a wounded common soldier, he
returned to consciousness, and after gazing up at her a moment, asked
vaguely, "Who are you, Miss?"

"I am one of the sisters whom our Father has sent to nurse you and help
you to get well. But you must not talk."

The wounded man closed his eyes and then opened them with a faint smile.

"All right; just one word. Will you please ask your pa if I may be his
son-in-law?"

Into the hospital was brought one day a soldier so broken and bandaged
that no one but Lucy Drayton might have recognized Oliver Hampden.

For a long time his life was despaired of; but he survived.

When consciousness returned to him, the first sound he heard was a
voice which had often haunted him in his dreams, but which he had never
expected to hear again.

"Who is that!" he asked, feebly.

"It is I, Oliver--it is Lucy."

The wounded man moved slightly and the girl bending over him caught the
words, whispered brokenly to himself:

"I am dreaming."

But he was not dreaming.

Lucy Drayton's devotion probably brought him back from death and saved
his life.

In the hell of that hospital one man at least found the balm for his
wounds. When he knew how broken he was he offered Lucy her release. Her
reply was in the words of the English girl to the wounded Napier, "If
there is enough of you left to hold your soul, I will marry you."

As soon as he was sufficiently convalescent, they were married.

Lucy insisted that General Hampden should be informed, but the young
man knew his father's bitterness, and refused. He relied on securing
his consent later, and Lucy, fearing for her patient's life, and having
secured her own father's consent, yielded.

It was a mistake.

Oliver Hampden misjudged the depth of his father's feeling, and General
Hampden was mortally offended by his having married without informing
him.

Oliver adored his father and he sent him a present in token of his
desire for forgiveness; but the General had been struck deeply. The
present was returned. He wrote: "I want obedience; not sacrifice."

Confident of his wife's ability to overcome any obstacle, the young
man bided his time. His wounds, however, and his breach with his father
affected his health so much that he went with his wife to the far South,
where Major Drayton, now a colonel, had a remnant of what had once been
a fine property. Here, for a time, amid the live-oaks and magnolias he
appeared to improve. But his father's obdurate refusal to forgive his
disobedience preyed on his health, and just after the war closed, he
died a few months before his son was born.

In his last days he dwelt much on his father. He made excuses for him,
over which his wife simply tightened her lips, while her gray eyes
burned with deep resentment.

"He was brought up that way. He cannot help it. He never had anyone to
gainsay him. Do not be hard on him. And if he ever sues for pardon, be
merciful to him for my sake."

His end came too suddenly for his wife to notify his father in advance,
even if she would have done so; for he had been fading gradually and at
the last the flame had flared up a little.

Lucy Hampden was too upright a woman not to do what she believed her
duty, however contrary to her feelings it might be. So, although it was
a bitter thing to her, she wrote to inform General Hampden of his son's
death.

It happened by one of the malign chances of fortune that this letter
never reached its destination, General Hampden did not learn of Oliver's
death until some weeks later, when he heard of it by accident. It was a
terrible blow to him, for time was softening the asperity of his temper,
and he had just made up his mind to make friends with his son. He
attributed the failure to inform him of Oliver's illness and death to
the malignity of his wife.

Thus it happened that when her son was born, Lucy Hampden made no
announcement of his birth to the General, and he remained in ignorance
of it.




IV

The war closed, and about the only thing that appeared to remain
unchanged was the relation between General Hampden and Colonel Drayton.
Everything else underwent a change, for war eats up a land.

General Hampden, soured and embittered by his domestic troubles, but
stern in his resolve and vigorous in his intellect, was driven by
his loneliness to adapt himself to the new conditions. He applied his
unabated energies to building up a new fortune. His decision, his force,
and his ability soon placed him at the head of one of the earliest new
enterprises in the State--a broken-down railway--which he re-organized
and brought to a full measure of success.

Colonel Drayton, on the other hand, broken in body and in fortunes,
found it impossible to adapt himself to the new conditions. He possessed
none of the practical qualities of General Hampden. With a mind richly
stored with the wisdom of others, he had the temperament of a dreamer
and poet and was unable to apply it to any practical end. As shy and
reserved as his neighbor was bold and aggressive, he lived in his books
and had never been what is known as a successful man. Even before the
war he had not been able to hold his own. The exactions of hospitality
and of what he deemed his obligations to others had consumed a
considerable part of the handsome estate he had inherited, and his
plantation was mortgaged. What had been thus begun, the war had
completed.

When his plantation was sold, his old neighbor and enemy bought it, and
the Colonel had the mortification of knowing that Drayton Hall was at
last in the hands of a Hampden. What he did not know was that General
Hampden, true to his vow, never put his foot on the plantation except
to ride down the road and see that all his orders for its proper
cultivation were carried out.

Colonel Drayton tried teaching school, but it appeared that everyone
else was teaching at that time, and after attempting it for a year
or two, he gave it up and confined himself to writing philosophical
treatises for the press, which were as much out of date as the Latin and
Greek names which he signed to them. As these contributions were usually
returned, he finally devoted himself to writing agricultural essays for
an agricultural paper, in which he met with more success than he had
done when he was applying his principles himself.

"If farms were made of paper he 'd beat Cincinnatus," said the General.

Lucy Hampden, thrown on her own resources, in the town in the South in
which her husband had died, had for some time been supporting herself
and her child by teaching. She had long urged her father to come to
them, but he had always declined, maintaining that a man was himself
only in the country, and in town was merely a unit. When, however, the
plantation was sold and his daughter wrote for him, he went to her, and
the first time that the little boy was put in his arms, both he and
she knew that he would never go away again. That evening as they sat
together in the fading light on the veranda of the little house which
Lucy had taken, amid the clambering roses and jasmine, the old fellow
said, "I used to think that I ought to have been killed in battle at the
head of my men when I was shot, but perhaps, I may have been saved to
bring up this young man."

His daughter's smile, as she leant over and kissed him, showed very
clearly what she thought of it, and before a week was out, the Colonel
felt that he was not only still of use, but was, perhaps, the most
necessary, and, with one exception, the most important member of the
family.

Nevertheless, there were hard times before them. The Colonel was too
old-fashioned; too slow for the new movement of life, and just enough
behind the times to be always expecting to succeed and always failing.

But where the father failed the daughter succeeded. She soon came to be
known as one of the efficient women of the community, as her father, who
was now spoken of as "the old Colonel," came to be recognized as one
of the picturesque figures of that period. He was always thought of in
connection with the boy. The two were hardly ever apart, and they were
soon known throughout the town--the tall, thin old gentleman who looked
out on the world with his mild blue eyes and kindly face, and the
chubby, red-cheeked, black-eyed boy, whose tongue was always prattling,
and who looked out with his bright eyes on all the curious things which,
common-place to the world, are so wonderful to a boy.

The friendship between an old man and a little child is always touching;
they grow nearer together day by day, and the old Colonel and little
Oliver soon appeared to understand each other, and to be as dependent on
each other as if they had both been of the same age. The child, somewhat
reserved with others, was bold enough with his grandfather. They held
long discussions together over things that interested the boy; went
sight-seeing in company to where the water ran over an old mill-wheel,
or where a hen and her chickens lived in a neighbor's yard, or a litter
of puppies gamboled under an outhouse, or a bird had her nest and little
ones in a jasmine in an old garden, and Colonel Drayton told the boy
wonderful stories of the world which was as unknown to him as the
present world was to the Colonel.

So matters went, until the Christmas when the boy was seven years old.




V

Meantime, General Hampden was facing a new foe. His health had suddenly
given way, and he was in danger of becoming blind. His doctor had given
him his orders--orders which possibly he might not have taken had not
the spectre of a lonely old man in total darkness begun to haunt him. He
had been "working too hard," the doctor told him.

"Working hard! Of course, I have been working hard!" snapped the
General, fiercely, with his black eyes glowering. "What else have I to
do but work? I shall always work hard."

The doctor knew something of the General 's trouble. He had been a
surgeon in the hospital where young Oliver Hampden had been when Lucy
Drayton found him.

"You must stop," he said, quietly. "You will not last long unless you
do."

"How long!" demanded the General, quite calmly.

"Oh! I cannot say that. Perhaps, a year--perhaps, less. You have burned
your candle too fast." He glanced at the other's unmoved face. "You need
change. You ought to go South this winter."

"I should only change my skies and not my thoughts," said the General,
his memory swinging back to the past.

The doctor gazed at him curiously. "What is the use of putting out your
eyes and working yourself to death when you have everything that money
can give?"

"I have nothing! I work to forget that," snarled the General, fiercely.

The doctor remained silent.

The General thought over the doctor's advice and finally followed it,
though not for the reason the physician supposed.

Something led him to select the place where his son had gone and where
his body lay amid the magnolias. If he was going to die, he would carry
out a plan which he had formed in the lonely hours when he lay awake
between the strokes of the clock. He would go and see that his son's
grave was cared for, and if he could, would bring him back home at last.
Doubtless, "that woman's" consent could be bought. She had possibly
married again. He hoped she had.




VI

Christmas is always the saddest of seasons to a lonely man, and General
Hampden, when he landed in that old Southern town on the afternoon of
Christmas Eve, would not have been lonelier in a desert. The signs of
Christmas preparation and the sounds of Christmas cheer but made him
lonelier. For years, flying from the Furies, he had immersed himself
in work and so, in part, had forgotten his troubles; but the removal of
this prop let him fall flat to the earth.

As soon as the old fellow had gotten settled in his room at the hotel he
paid a visit to his son's grave, piloted to the cemetery by a friendly
and garrulous old negro hackman, who talked much about Christmas and
"the holidays."

"Yes, suh, dat he had known Cap'n Ham'n. He used to drive him out long
as he could drive out. He had been at his funeral. He knew Mrs. Ham'n,
too. She sutney is a fine lady," he wound up in sincere eulogy.

The General gave a grunt.

He was nearer to his son than he had ever been since the day he last saw
him in all the pride and beauty of a gallant young soldier.

The grave, at least, was not neglected. It was marked by a modest cross,
on which was the Hampden coat-of-arms and the motto, "_Loyal_," and it
was banked in fresh evergreens, and some flowers had been placed on it
only that afternoon. It set the General to thinking.

When he returned to his hotel, he found the loneliness unbearable. His
visit to his son's grave had opened the old wound and awakened all
his memories. He knew now that he had ruined his life. The sooner the
doctor's forecast came true, the better. He had no care to live longer.
He would return to work and die in harness.

He sent his servant to the office and arranged for his car to be put on
the first train next morning.

Then, to escape from his thoughts, he strolled out in the street where
the shopping crowds streamed along, old and young, poor and well-to-do,
their arms full of bundles, their faces eager, and their eyes alight.

General Hampden seemed to himself to be walking among ghosts.

As he stalked on, bitter and lonely, he was suddenly run into by a
very little boy, in whose small arms was so big a bundle that he could
scarcely see over it. The shock of the collision knocked the little
fellow down, sitting flat on the pavement, still clutching his bundle.
But his face after the first shadow of surprise lit up again.

"I beg your pardon, sir--that was my fault," he said, with so quaint an
imitation of an old person that the General could not help smiling. With
a cheery laugh, he tried to rise to his feet, but the bundle was too
heavy, and he would not let it go.

The General bent over him and, with an apology, set him on his feet.

"I beg _your_ pardon, sir. That was _my_ fault. That is a pretty big
bundle you have."

"Yes, sir; and I tell you, it is pretty heavy, too," the manikin said,
proudly. "It 's a Christmas gift." He started on, and the General turned
with him.

"A Christmas gift! It must be a fine one. Who gave it to you?" demanded
the General, with a smile at the little fellow's confidence.

"It is a fine one! Did n't anybody give it to me. We 're giving it to
somebody."

"Oh! You are? To whom?"

"I 'll tell you; but you must promise not to tell."

"I promise I will not tell a soul. I cross my heart."

He made a sign as he remembered he used to do in his boyhood.

The boy looked up at him doubtfully with a shade of disapproval.

"My grandfather says that you must not cross your heart--'t a
gentleman's word is enough," he said, quaintly.

"Oh, he does? Well, I give my word."

"Well--" He glanced around to see that no one was listening, and
sidling a little nearer, lowered his voice: "It 's a great-coat for
grandfather!"

"A great-coat! That's famous!" exclaimed the General.

"Yes, is n't it? You see--he 's mighty old and he 's got a bad cough--he
caught it in the army, and I have to take care of him. Don't you think
that's right?"

"Of course, I do," said the General, envying one grandfather.

"That's what I tell him. So mamma and I have bought this for him."

"He must be a proud grandfather," said the General, with envy biting
deeper at his heart.

"I have another grandfather; but I don't like _him_," continued the
little fellow.

"I am sorry for that," said the General, sincerely. "Why is that?"

"He was mean to my father, and he is mean to my mother." His voice
conveyed a sudden bitterness.

"Oh!"

"Mamma says I must like him; but I do not. I just can't. You would not
like a man who was mean to your mother, would you!"

"I would not," declared the General, truthfully.

"And I am not going to like him," asserted the boy, with firmness.

The General suddenly pitied one grandfather.

They had come to a well-lighted corner, and as the boy lifted his face,
the light fell on it. Something about the bright, sturdy countenance
with its frank, dark eyes and brown hair suddenly sent the General back
thirty years to a strip of meadow on which two children were playing:
one a dark-eyed boy as sturdy as this one. It was like an arrow in his
heart. "With a gasp he came back to the present. His thoughts pursued
him even here.

"What is your name?" he asked as he was feeling in his pocket for a
coin.

"Oliver Drayton Hampden, sir."

The words were perfectly clear.

The General's heart stopped beating and then gave a bound. The skies
suddenly opened for him and then shut up again.

His exclamation brought the child to a stop and he glanced up at him in
vague wonder. The General stooped and gazed at him searchingly, almost
fiercely. The next second he had pounced upon him and lifted him in his
arms while the bundle fell to the pavement.

"My boy! I am your grandfather," he cried, kissing him violently. "I am
your grandfather Hampden."

The child was lost in amazement for a moment, and then, putting his
hands against the General's face, he pushed him slowly away.

"Put me down, please," he said, with that gravity which in a child means
so much.

General Hampden set him down on the pavement. The boy looked at him
searchingly for a second, and then turned in silence and lifted his
bundle. The General's face wore a puzzled look--he had solved many
problems, but he had never had one more difficult than this. His heart
yearned toward the child, and he knew that on his own wisdom at that
moment might depend his future happiness. On his next words might hang
for him life or death. The expression on the boy's face, and the very
set of his little back as he sturdily tugged at his burden, recalled his
father, and with it the General recognized the obstinacy which he knew
lurked in the Hampden blood, which had once been his pride.

"Oliver," he said, gravely, leaning down over the boy and putting his
hand on him gently, "there has been a great mistake. I am going home
with you to your mother and tell her so. I want to see her and your
grandfather, and I think I can explain everything."

The child turned and gazed at him seriously, and then his face relaxed.
He recognized his deep sincerity.

"All right." He turned and walked down the street, bending under his
burden. The General offered to carry it for him, but he declined.

"I can carry it," was the only answer he made except once when, as the
General rather insisted, he said firmly, "I want to carry it myself,"
and tottered on.

A silence fell on them for a moment. A young man passing them spoke to
the child cheerily.

"Hullo, Oliver! A Christmas present?--That 's a great boy," he said, in
sheer friendliness to the General, and passed on. The boy was evidently
well known.

Oliver nodded; then feeling that some civility was due on his part to
his companion, he said briefly, "That 's a friend of mine."

"Evidently."

The General, even in his perplexity, smiled at the quaint way the child
imitated the manners of older men.

Just then they came to a little gate and the boy's manner changed.

"If you will wait, I will run around and put my bundle down. I am afraid
my grandfather might see it." He lowered his voice for the first time
since the General had introduced himself. Then he disappeared around the
house.

Oliver, having slipped in at the back door and carefully reconnoitred
the premises, tripped up stairs with his bundle to his mother's room. He
was so excited over his present that he failed to observe her confusion
at his sudden entrance, or her hasty hiding away of something on
which she was working. Colonel Drayton was not the only member of that
household that Christmas who was to receive a great-coat.

When Oliver had untied his bundle, nothing would serve but he must put
on the coat to show his mother how his grandfather would look in it. As
even with the sleeves rolled up and with his arms held out to keep it
from falling off him, the tails dragged for some distance on the
floor and only the top of his head was visible above the collar, the
resemblance was possibly not wholly exact. But it appeared to satisfy
the boy. He was showing how his grandfather walked, when he suddenly
recalled his new acquaintance.

"I met my other grandfather, on the street, mamma, and he came home with
me." He spoke quite naturally.

"Met your other grandfather!" Mrs. Hampden looked mystified.

"He says he is my grandfather, and he looks like papa. I reckon he 's my
other grandfather. He ran against me in the street and knocked me down,
and then came home with me."

"Came home with you!" repeated Mrs. Hampden, still in a maze, and with a
vague trouble dawning in her face.

"Yes 'm."

Oliver went over the meeting again.

His mother's face meantime showed the tumult of emotion that was
sweeping over her. Why had General Hampden come? What had he come for?
To try and take her boy from her?

At the thought her face and form took on something of the lioness that
guards her whelp. Then as the little boy repeated what his grandfather
had said of his reason for coming home with him, her face softened
again. She heard a voice saying, "If he ever sues for pardon, be
merciful to him for my sake." She remembered what day it was: the Eve
of the day of Peace and Good-will toward all men. He must have come for
Peace, and Peace it should be. She would not bring up her boy under the
shadow of that feud which had blighted both sides of his race so long.

"Oliver," she said, "you must go down and let him in. Say I will come
down."

"I will not like him," said the child, his eyes on her face.

"Oh, yes, you must; he is your grandfather."

"You do not love him, and I will not." The sturdy little figure and
the serious face with the chin already firm for such a child, the dark,
grave eyes and the determined speech, were so like his father that the
widow gave half a cry.

"You must, my son, and I will try. Your father would wish it."

The little boy pondered for a second.

"Very well, mamma; but he must be good to you."

As the little fellow left the room, the widow threw herself on her
knees.




VII

As General Hampden stood and waited in the dusk, he felt that his
whole life and future depended on the issue of the next few moments.
He determined to take matters in his own hand. Every moment might tell
against him and might decide his fate. So, without waiting longer, he
rang the bell. A minute later he heard steps within, and the door was
opened by one who he knew must be Colonel Drayton, though had he met
him elsewhere he should not have recognized the white hair and the
thin, bent form as that of his old friend and enemy. Colonel Drayton had
evidently not seen his grandson yet, for he spoke as to a stranger.

"Will you not walk in, sir!" he said cordially. "I was expecting my
little grandson who went out a short while ago." He peered up the
street. "Did you wish to see my daughter? You will find us in a little
confusion--Christinas time is always a busy season with us on account of
our young man: my grandson." He lingered with pride over the words.

The General stepped into the light.

"Wilmer Drayton! Don't you know me? I am Oliver Hampden, and I have come
to apologize to you for all I have done which has offended you, and to
ask you to be friends with me." He held out his hand.

The old Colonel stepped back, and under the shock of surprise paused for
a moment.

"Oliver Hampden!" The next moment he stepped forward and took his hand.

"Come in, Oliver," he said, gently, and putting his other arm around the
General's shoulder, he handed him into the little cosey, fire-lighted
room as though nothing had happened since he had done the same the last
time fifty years before.

At this moment the door opened and the little boy entered with mingled
mysteriousness and importance. Seeing the two gentlemen standing
together, he paused with a mystified look in his wide-open eyes, trying
to comprehend the situation.

"Oliver, come here," said the Colonel, quietly. "This is your other
grandfather."

The boy came forward, and, wheeling, stood close beside the Colonel,
facing General Hampden, like a soldier dressing by his file-closer.

"_You_ are my grandfather," he said, glancing up at the Colonel.

The Colonel's eyes glowed with a soft light.

"Yes, my boy; and so is he. We are friends again, and you must love
him--just as you do me."

"I will not love him as much," was the sturdy answer.

It was the General who spoke next.

"That is right, my boy. All I ask is that you will love me some." He was
pleading with this young commissioner.

"I will, if you are good to my mother." His eyes were fastened on him
without a tremor, and the General's deep-set eyes began to glow with
hope.

"That 's a bargain," he said holding out his hand. The boy took it
gravely.

Just then the door opened and Lucy Hampden entered. Her face was calm
and her form was straight. Her eyes, deep and burning, showed that she
was prepared either for peace or war. It was well for the General that
he had chosen peace. Better otherwise had he charged once more the
deadliest battle line he had ever faced. For a moment the General saw
only Lucy Fielding.

With a woman's instinct the young widow comprehended at the first glance
what had taken place, and although her face was white, her eyes softened
as she advanced. The General had turned and faced her. He could not
utter a word, but the boy sprang towards her and, wheeling, stood by her
side.

Taking his hand, she led him forward.

"Oliver," she said, gently, "this is your father's father." Then to the
General, in a dead silence--"Father, this is your son's son."

The General clasped them both in his arms.

"Forgive me. Forgive me. I have prayed for _his_ forgiveness, for I can
never forgive myself."

"He forgave you," said the widow, simply.




VIII

No young king was ever put to bed with more ceremony or more devotion
than was that little boy that night. Two old gentlemen were his grooms
of the bedchamber and saw him to bed together.

The talk was all of Christmas, and the General envied the ease with
which the other grandfather carried on the conversation. But when the
boy, having kissed his grandfather, said of his own accord, "Now, I must
kiss my _other_ grandfather," he envied no man on earth.

The next morning when Oliver Hampden, before the first peep of light,
waked in his little bed, which stood at the foot of his grandfather's
bed in the tiny room which they occupied together, and standing up,
peeped over the footboard to catch his grandfather's "Christmas gift,"
he was surprised to find that the bed was empty and undisturbed. Then
having tiptoed in and caught his mother, he stole down the stairs and
softly opened the sitting-room door where he heard the murmur of voices.
The fire was burning dim, and on either side sat the two old gentlemen
in their easy chairs, talking amicably and earnestly as they had been
talking when he kissed them "good-night." Neither one had made the
suggestion that it was bedtime; but when at the first break of day
the rosy boy in his night-clothes burst in upon them with his shout of
"Christmas gift," and his ringing laughter, they both knew that the long
feud was at last ended, and peace was established forever.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Christmas Peace, by Thomas Nelson Page

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRISTMAS PEACE ***

***** This file should be named 23511.txt or 23511.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/5/1/23511/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
