The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sam Lambert and the New Way Store, by Unknown


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Sam Lambert and the New Way Store
       A Book for Clothiers and Their Clerks


Author: Unknown



Release Date: November 19, 2007  [eBook #23547]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAM LAMBERT AND THE NEW WAY
STORE***


E-text prepared by Barbara and Bill Tozier



SAM LAMBERT AND THE NEW WAY STORE

A Book for Clothiers and Their Clerks







Published by
Grand Rapids Show Case Co.
Grand Rapids: Michigan

Copyright, 1912,
Grand Rapids Show Case Co.
Grand Rapids, Mich.




CHAPTER I.


Sam Lambert had the best clothing store in Medeena County--a corner
store on the main street of Medeena opposite the Court House Square.

Medeena had four clothing stores, not counting The Blue Front, down by
the Depot, with its collection of cheap watches in the window, a
yellow guitar, two large accordions and a fiddle with a broken E
string.

Everybody in the County knew Sam Lambert.

As a merchant and a citizen he was a whole bunch of live wires. A
big-boned, free-hearted fellow--lucky enough to just escape being run
for sheriff, as some thought he was too good natured, the "gang" was
afraid he was not pliant enough, and Sam didn't want to be away from
the store.

Sam took great pride in his clothing business and kept pace with the
most advanced ideas in the trade.

He was awake to the marvelous development of the ready-to-wear
business. He carried the best and took a positive delight in each
season's new models.

He recalled the old days of "hand-me-downs," and he had lived to see
the two best tailors in Medeena take to bushelling "ready" garments,
with less and less of that to be done--principally changing a button
or shortening a trouser's length.

Sam was broad-gauge in everything he did. He sold his goods at the
marked price, for cash only--got a decent profit and told you so.

Why shouldn't he? He had a sense of style. He was keenly alive to the
artistry of clothes and his enthusiasm was contagious.

Sam was firmly convinced that a man has to spend money to make money
in the clothing business.

He said that a part of the value you deliver to a customer consists in
giving him a better opinion of himself: making him feel like a king
for a day and that the best is none too good for him.

"A store," he would tell the boys, "cannot be run on the low gear. You
must keep her keyed up. Relax when the store is empty, but when you go
to meet a customer put on the tension--take a brace--get spring into
your step--learn to bunch your vitality and get it across. But keep
your energy inside.

"Don't bounce and don't talk too much. Keep yourself in hand. Be quiet
but alert.

"Concentrate! For the time being there is but one person in the world
and that is the customer, and the most interesting thing in life is
the thing he came in to see.

"You can size up your man while you are going forward to meet him. But
by all means take him easy. Undue interest might embarrass him.
Suppose he only wants a pair of 15c. socks; if he does, there is a
test of your ability that you may not realize.

"Many a clerk who can close a Twenty dollar transaction with tact and
dispatch never seems able to handle a Ten cent sale so that the
customer goes out feeling pleased with himself.

"Nine men out of ten who come into the store are self-conscious. The
thing to do is to make your man feel that his requirement is important
simply because it is his requirement.

"A good salesman keeps his own personality in the background: he keeps
the store and the sale in the background. He puts all the emphasis on
service to the customer, and to do this he must mentally put himself
in the customer's place.

"Try to be as interested in the customer's finding what he wants as if
the article was for yourself; but don't insist on his taking only the
thing that appeals to you.

"Quietly dominate the sale, but leave him plenty of room for the
exercise of his own taste and ideas.

"Most men, though they may not show it, are slightly on the defensive
when they come into a clothing store. That is why it is so very
important that there be no talking or laughing among the clerks.

"You may find it hard to realize the effect of a whisper or a titter
on the part of the store's help when a customer is present. In nearly
every case the man becomes sensitive or resentful and thinks he is
being ridiculed.

"Try it yourself sometime by going into a strange store in another
line of business in a distant city: when you hear a laugh or a remark
passed among the clerks, see if you don't wonder if there isn't
something wrong with your clothes or feel sure that comment is being
made on your appearance or behavior.

"There is another form of impatience or self-consciousness on the part
of a customer who is more or less acquainted with the store. He
hurries past everyone in front, headed for the part of the store where
he thinks the goods he wants are kept.

"It is bad policy to step in front of him or otherwise impede his
progress. If there is no one to wait on him follow quietly and be on
hand when he lands at his destination.

"A clerk often wonders why customers persist in doing this.

"It is because they have an idea of the location of what they want and
blindly strike out for it with a certain nervous desire to cover the
intermediate ground as quickly as possible.

"Remember that while you feel perfectly at home in the store, few
customers do. It is your business to put them at ease and certainly to
do nothing to make them uncomfortable.

"When a man comes in for a suit of clothes he usually has some sort of
a mental picture of the thing he desires. An idea, clearly defined or
hazy, is in his mind as to the general color and effect of the suit he
wants.

"It is something he has noticed worn by someone else--looked at in a
show window, or seen in an illustration.

"In most cases it will not be the thing he finally buys. It may be a
chalk-line stripe or a Shepherd's Plaid worn by a drummer who boarded
the 6.30 Lightning Express. In the glow of the lamps and the bustle
and excitement of the Station platform the thing looked possible: but
confronted in the store with the very style and pattern he backs away
from it, though 'it looked good on the other man.'

"Find out what he has in mind; meet it as nearly as you can and get it
out of the way. Otherwise he will not concentrate on other goods. He
will hold to this mental picture and measure everything you show him
by it--much to your disadvantage.

"One of the worst possible things is to ask a man about what price
suit he wants.

"Keep price in the background. Time enough to feel him out on that
subject. No man likes to have you take the measure of his pocket-book.

"You must use your judgment in gauging him as to what to show him.

"The important thing is to get at the picture he has in mind, and the
price too, if you can do so without asking him to name the figure.

"Never ask a customer how he liked the last suit you sold him. Let
by-gones be by-gones. This is a new deal. Whether he was entirely
satisfied is not the point now. Don't raise dangerous questions.

"There are a dozen reasons why his last purchase may not be remembered
with pleasure--reasons that have nothing to do with the value he
received or the actual merit of the clothes.

"If he voluntarily mentions the last suit with praise take it as a
natural occurrence and pass it over; you will try to do even better by
him this time.

"If he complains of his last purchase don't argue. Leave the subject
as soon as possible and get down to the question in hand.

"Have confidence in your goods, in your prices and in yourself as a
salesman.

"There are more sales lost for lack of firmness and decision at the
right time than for any other cause.

"Among the clerks in the best and biggest of stores there are ten good
openers of a sale to one good closer.

"Be a closer.

"It requires judgment and decision of character, but you can learn to
do it.

"When a woman goes into a cloak and suit department, she is not
satisfied to buy until she has been made to feel that she has pretty
well canvassed the assortment, seen practically everything in the
stock at the range and along the line she is seeking.

"She has merchandise imagination and thinks of the possible garments
back there in the stock that she might have liked better.

"In this regard a man is somewhat easier to handle.

"It is a fact often demonstrated that clerks can close a sale more
quickly where the stock is kept on hangers instead of piled on tables.

"The preliminaries are more quickly covered. Having walked down the
line the customer is better satisfied that the whole selection is
placed at his disposal.

"There is no secret about it. Nothing held back. No mysterious pile of
garments on a table that he cannot see.

"Note the tendency of the customer to investigate a pile of
coats--lifting up the corners and looking at the patterns.

"A coat in plain view, taken off the hanger, is more obviously a
thoughtful selection of a garment definitely suited for him and he is
the more ready to make it his own.

"The important thing in closing a sale is to narrow down the choice as
soon as you can to one or two strong possibilities, flanked by a bad
one--that is, a style or a pattern that you know the customer doesn't
want.

"When this point is reached it is well to move the customer away from
the rest of the stock, say to some distant corner where he can stand
on a rug and look in the mirror--

"Where his whole attention can be given to one suit, or at most a
choice between two.

"A sale must be opened easily. The customer should never be made to
feel that he is being restricted in his selection. But the moment you
can form an idea of what he wants you can probably think of just the
thing for him.

"If you handle him right he accepts your knowledge of the assortment,
instead of demanding a complete canvass of the stock.

"It is then you may know that you have established his confidence.

"In a comparatively short time you can narrow him down to a choice
where by a tactful show of firmness you can help him decide.

"In the handling of almost every sale there is a point beyond which
the customer begins to flounder and show indecision.

"The weak salesman leads him on and on with no stopping point--no
place to close--and the prospective sale fades to a 'just looking
today' excuse.

"This is a universal fault among retail clerks.

"The test of salesmanship is in closing a sale.

"Be a closer!

"Never guy a customer or 'kid him along' for the amusement of a
by-stander or a fellow clerk. This is a common practice in some
clothing stores. The offender is usually a self-satisfied clerk who
has had just enough success as a salesman to make him egotistical.

"He thinks he is a regular dare-devil and that by making sport of his
customer he may win a reputation as the village cut-up. His favorite
victim is some half-witted fellow--tho' a customer who is partly deaf
may do and he is always ready for a yokel or a foreigner.

"There is no doubt," said Sam Lambert, "that the medal for the longest
ears and the loudest bray in the clothing business belongs to this
Smart Aleck type of clerk known as a 'kidder'.

"To say nothing of the respect he owes the customer, it is astonishing
how he can presume to work his cheap little side-play on any human
being, when even a dog is sensitive to ridicule and knows when he is
being laughed at."




CHAPTER II.


No one questioned Sam Lambert's power as a business getter, nor the
alertness of his store-keeping methods.

He was prodigal of his own energy--never spared himself. He looked
after the important things and left details to others.

As with every man who is a constructive force in the world of affairs,
Sam's friends and relatives shook their heads--said that he needed a
balance-wheel.

This was dinned into his ears so often that he finally came to believe
it. So after many Sunday afternoon business discussions, it was
arranged that he was to take into the business his wife's cousin, one
Lemuel Stucker, who had spent twenty years saving $9000 as general
manager for a flour and feed concern.

Stucker had worked out elaborate sets of figures to prove the needed
economies of management.

He was so tireless and sincere, so careful and exact, that it was with
a great sense of relief that Sam turned the store over to him.

Here, at last, was a man who could lift from his shoulders the daily
burden of management.

Sam's real interest in the change, as those who knew him might have
guessed, was a desire for new enterprise. He had long had an eye on a
fine opening for a clothing store in the neighboring town of
Bridgeville, twenty miles away, and he lost no time in carrying out
this project.

During the ensuing year he was so engrossed with the Bridgeville
branch that Medeena rarely saw him, and Lemuel Stucker's rather
discouraging reports on the state of business were attributed to Lem's
conservatism and natural depression of mind.

Lem was Sam's opposite in almost every particular. A small, sallow man
with a black shoe-string necktie and a look of general regret.

He spent most of his time untying knots in pieces of string, picking
up bits of wrapping paper and sharpening short lead-pencils, and he
was great on buying brooms.

His effect on the store was one of immediate and prevalent blight.

You may wonder why the boys did not complain of conditions to Sam, but
Lem was manager--and there is something so virtuous and convincing
about a first-class retrencher. His wise saws and thrifty sayings are
infectious and he makes everybody so low-spirited that they are ready
to catch anything.

No more good window displays--tacks, colored cheesecloth and other
accessories cost money, and the sun was bad for the goods.

No more trim on the counters and shelves.

Stop the high-power electric light in front of the store and reduce
the lamps inside.

These things did not all occur at once, but so gradually that it was
hard to realize just what had happened to the store.

The windows got streaky and the inside of the store looked dingy and
cold.

Then the conservative spirit got into the buying. Nothing but black
cheviots with a few drab and gray worsteds.

Perhaps it was just as well, for when a customer came into the store
and saw Stucker he thought it was raining outside.

Sam Lambert had always prided himself on keeping alive what he called
the "buying spirit" in the store.

Nowadays a customer got a sense of caution. The feeling was one of
disapproval of all extravagance.

Instead of purchasing a suit, the man wondered where his next month's
rent was coming from, bought a pair of cottonade pants and hurried
home.

Trade fell off steadily. Affairs went on this way for a twelvemonth
and then something happened.

Two of Sam's principal competitors were reported to be remodeling
their stores--and what was more, they were going to put in wardrobe
systems and carry all their garments on hangers.

This aroused Sam and he made an immediate investigation.

He found that one of the stores had contracted for the old type of
wooden wall cabinets where the clothes hung behind panelled doors.

But the other was installing glass wardrobes, where the stock would be
on view.

This discovery cut Sam like a knife.

He investigated further, and was delighted to find that his wardrobe
competitor, with the temptation to save a few dollars, had ordered a
second-rate type of glass wardrobe, with pull-out rods that swing
inside the case, without a locking device to prevent them from
breaking the glass.

Without saying anything to Stucker he telegraphed the best wardrobe
concern in the country to send their representative at once.




CHAPTER III.


At eleven o'clock the following day a quiet man wearing double-lens
spectacles and a pre-occupied air came into the store, asked for Mr.
Lambert and was directed to the rear where Stucker was showing Sam the
wisdom of leaving the night covers over the black goods during the day
to protect the stock from dust.

Sam was so keyed up on the wardrobe question that he heard only about
half that Stucker was saying.

When the man with the spectacles arrived Sam guessed his mission
without waiting for a word of greeting.

"You," said Sam, "are here to talk wardrobes; let's see what you've
got."

"Before I talk wardrobes, or, if you please, the New Way system,"
began the salesman, "I would prefer to get a fair idea of the amount
and kind of stock you carry and how you care for it now."

"Just as I thought," interrupted Stucker. "You're afraid our stock is
too big for your wardrobe capacity.

"Well, I don't want to discourage you, but when you count the suits on
the table, don't forget to add about 50 dozen pair of knee pants and
odd trousers stored in case-goods boxes under the tables.

"Remember too, that when you take the tables out, you must find
another place for our last years sweaters, mufflers, caps, gloves and
underwear, as well as all our advance stock of shirts, hosiery and
ties which we keep under the tables because we have no room for them
on our side shelving. You can see it is piled to the ceiling now; and
all that on top is active stock."

"That reminds me, Mr. Stucker, of a joke your friend Jones, over at
Dennisville, played on Sakes, his partner.

"Before we remodelled their store, they had a lot of money tied up in
stock piled under the tables like you have. Most of it was odds and
ends--left overs of many seasons that Jones knew even a clearance sale
would not clean up.

"He inventoried the lot and shipped 72 dozen pair of knee pants to New
York, and wrote the auctioneer to send a check for whatever amount
they brought.

"The funny part of it, Sakes never discovered that the stock was gone
until about three weeks later, when he noticed a check in the mail and
asked Jones what it was for.

"You can do the same thing, Mr. Stucker, with your stock under the
tables, and the check you will get will help buy New Way sectional
shelving that will give you about three times the capacity your
furnishing department has now; so it will not be necessary to climb to
the ceiling for your active stock or dig under the tables for your out
of season goods.

"Before we discuss detail, Mr. Lambert," continued the salesman, "I
have something to say about the practical arrangement of the inside of
the store.

"The business of a store is to sell goods. A customer may come in for
one item. You want him to buy two or three or a half a dozen. The
easier you make it for him, the less he has to cross and recross the
store to complete his purchases--the more goods you will sell him.

"What you want--what every merchant wants--and what few have--is a
practical, natural selling arrangement of the goods.

"The invention of a practical wardrobe merely made the right plan
possible.

"Our business is to suggest the plan and fit the wardrobe arrangement
to the needs of a store.

"Every clothing store has its own individuality. Each problem must be
worked out on the ground with a full knowledge of the stock and the
business, the history of the store, the nature of its trade and the
personality of its proprietor."

Sam's interest was excited. This point of view was new to him, but he
could see the truth of it and he was impatient to get at the heart of
the matter as far as his own store was concerned.

"You're right," he said, "about the personality and individuality of a
store; and for that reason don't tell me to put the furnishing goods
shelving down the middle of the store. This is a clothing store and
not a haberdashery."

"Mr. Lambert," said the salesman, "you have hit the nail squarely on
the head. This is a double room, a very different problem from that of
a single store. I looked over the place of one of your competitors
this morning. He also has a double store with much the same
arrangement as yours and I find that he is making a mistake--adopting
a plan that is about five years behind the times.

"You see, in the earlier days of the wardrobe, there was no such thing
as a center wardrobe. Therefore the clothing had to be hung against
the wall in pull-out cabinets. When the clothing went to the side
walls the furnishings had to move to the center floor space.

"Such an arrangement is not practical for a double store and the
effect is bad. It kills the first impression of a big store. The
shelving will look bare if it is not trimmed, and if it is trimmed
your big double room looks like two small stores divided by a wall.

"The center shelving will always have stock boxes piled on top and
that will throw one side of the store always in shadow. Besides, this
arrangement divides the trade and screens half of it from view.

"The stock is cut in two and looks small.

"One salesman can not wait on the furnishing goods trade without
neglecting half of it all the time. If you have two clerks, a customer
must be taken from one side to the other for his ties or underwear,
and there you are again, both on one side at the same time.

"If another customer came along they'd have to stop in the middle of a
sale and refer him to a clerk around in the other aisle.

"A furnishing goods department should be continuous. The sale of a
shirt will lead to the purchase of a tie or a collar or hosiery. The
goods should be in sight so that they automatically suggest
themselves.

"You enter this store and the first impression you get is a big
clothing store. That is what you want. Clothing dominates the store.
Furnishing goods and hats are important and necessary side lines. No
one would mistake it for a haberdasher's. You have been known from the
beginning as the leading clothier. That's the reputation you want to
keep.

"Mr. Lambert, one of the important problems of this store is to house
your stock in new fixtures and at the same time widen your aisles.

"You can not see how that is possible. It is really the only problem I
have to solve for you, and it is easy."

The little man with the big spectacles had things moving. He was not
much of a salesman but he knew all about merchandising in a retail
store.

And he certainly was familiar with every store fixture and selling
device that had ever been invented, its good and bad points, where it
was practical and where it was not.

"Before a merchant puts money into store equipment," said the wardrobe
man, "he ought to be sure that he is getting the very latest and most
improved models. He owes this to himself as a protection for his
investment.

"There is always a temptation to save a few dollars by adopting a poor
imitation or some out-of-date device.

"The latest and best is the cheapest in the end, especially when you
consider convenience and durability.

"A pretty safe guide is to see what the biggest and best stores
everywhere are installing today.

"You will find such merchants as John Wanamaker in his Philadelphia
and New York stores equipping his clothing departments solely with New
Way Crystal Wardrobes;

"Browning, King & Company in seventeen cities;

"Schuman, Kennedy, Posner, Talbot Company, Jordan-Marsh & Company,
Leopold Morse Company, McCullough & Parker in Boston;

"George Muse Company in Atlanta;

"Mullen & Bluett of Los Angeles;

"Becker of San Francisco;

"Burkhardt of Cincinnati;

"Lazarus, and Meyer Israel of New Orleans;

"And more than a thousand others--all the representative stores of
their localities.

"These men have selected the New Way Crystal Wardrobes after careful
comparison with every other device on the market.

"They have found the New Way Crystal Wardrobe the most sightly and
compact--having the largest capacity with the greatest ease of
operation.

"They find that they show the goods better; that the clerks can work
faster from them; that half a dozen clerks can sell from one wardrobe
at the same time; that one boy can keep the stock in good shape where
four were inadequate under any other plan.

"They find that the New Way people have basic patents on special
features, such as the New Way disappearing doors that divide in the
center, and slide into the ends of the wardrobe and do not project
into the aisle.

"The New Way revolving rack with the patent locking device, which
works loaded or unloaded with equal ease--no friction, no leverage, no
noise.

"They find the New Way low center wardrobes give an unobstructed view
all over the store and are the only wardrobes made that are entirely
practical for grouping in front of a furnishing or hat department.

"Likewise the high double deck wall wardrobes have more than double
the capacity of tables."

The wardrobe man illustrated his talk with photographs and backed his
arguments with figures.

The upshot of it was that he made a complete ground plan of the
Lambert store with a modern selling arrangement and New Way fixtures
in their proper places.

But before Stucker would admit the wisdom of the improvement, he
argued it from every point of view.

"The farmer trade," he said, "would imagine that they would have to
pay higher prices for clothing to make up the cost of new fixtures."

This, mind you, today when the farmer is the most enlightened member
of the community--when he is using progressive methods in marketing
his own product, to reduce his costs and increase his profits!

Lem acknowledged that the clothiers who are handling the finest
merchandise are fitting up their stores with New Way Crystal
Wardrobes, and he didn't like to admit that the Lambert Store didn't
sell high grade merchandise.

He conceded that fine goods in every other line of trade are treated
with the care and respect they deserve, otherwise they would suffer in
the handling and cease to be fine merchandise.

Finally, Lem admitted that the discerning public does judge a
merchant's stock by the way he treats it, so that the store with New
Way Wardrobes as a feature is not only the most progressive store, but
in practically every instance the most prosperous in the clothing
trade of its locality.

After Sam had given the order his one thought was impatience for the
completion of the job.

"I must have that stuff all installed so that I can have my opening a
week ahead of the other people.

"Here, Stucker," called Sam to that gloomy soul, who had gone behind a
stock of work-shirts, while the order was being signed, "we'll let you
dispose of the old fixtures. That's a job that's just about your size.

"I tell you, Stucker, a natural-born retrencher has his virtues. But
if you give him rope enough he will retrench you out of business. He
never builds anything. If it wasn't for the creative man there would
be nothing to retrench.

"The retrencher is all right if you don't pay him too much. He is
worth about $10 a month, because you can find fifty of them in any old
man's home that you can hire for less money than that.

"No, Lem, I won't be unfair. You're not as bad as all that. It takes
all kinds of people to make a world and there is plenty of room for
both of us in this business--there always will be leaks to stop and
work to do for an earnest man who has the interest of the store at
heart.

"The fault has been in the division of our labor. I'll show you the
way we can get the best out of ourselves."

"Sam," said Lem, "I reckon I've been looking at the world through a
crack in the fence and I'll have to widen out my view a little. You
give me the books and the sales slips to look after. In the meantime
I'm going to make the most exact inventory this store ever had and be
ready to check in the fresh stock that is to go in these New Way
wardrobes.

"My talents are all right if I don't try to cover too much territory."

The two men shook hands.

All was in readiness on the day set. Everybody in Medeena County came
to the Grand Opening, and Sam Lambert's New Way Store is doing the
business of the town.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAM LAMBERT AND THE NEW WAY STORE***


******* This file should be named 23547.txt or 23547.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/5/4/23547



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

