The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Gray Lady, by F. Hopkinson Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Little Gray Lady
       1909

Author: F. Hopkinson Smith

Release Date: December 3, 2007 [EBook #23695]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE GRAY LADY ***




Produced by David Widger






THE LITTLE GRAY LADY

By F. Hopkinson Smith

1909




I

Once in a while there come to me out of the long ago the fragments of a
story I have not thought of for years--one that has been hidden in the
dim lumber-room of my brain where I store my by-gone memories.

These fragments thrust themselves out of the past as do the cuffs of
an old-fashioned coat, the flutings of a flounce, or the lacings of a
bodice from out a quickly opened bureau drawer. Only when you follow
the cuff along the sleeve to the broad shoulder; smooth out the crushed
frill that swayed about her form, and trace the silken thread to the
waist it tightened, can you determine the fashion of the day in which
they were worn.

And with the rummaging of this lumber-room come the odors: dry smells
from musty old trunks packed with bundles of faded letters and worthless
deeds tied with red tape; musty smells from dust-covered chests, iron
bound, holding mouldy books, their backs loose; pungent smells
from cracked wardrobes stuffed with moth-eaten hunting-coats,
riding-trousers, and high boots with rusty spurs--cross-country riders
these--roisterers and gamesters--a sorry lot, no doubt.

Or perhaps it is an old bow-legged high-boy--its club-feet slippered on
easy rollers--the kind with deep drawers kept awake by rattling brass
handles, its outside veneer so highly polished that you are quite sure
it must have been brought up in some distinguished family. The scent of
old lavender and spiced rose leaves, and a stick or two of white orris
root, haunt this relic: my lady's laces must be kept fresh, and so must
my lady's long white mitts--they reach from her dainty knuckles quite
to her elbow. And so must her cobwebbed silk stockings and the filmy
kerchief she folds across her bosom:

It is this kind of a drawer that I am opening now--one belonging to the
Little Gray Lady.

As I look through its contents my eyes resting on the finger of a glove,
the end of a lace scarf, and the handle of an old fan, my mind goes back
to the last time she wore them. Then I begin turning everything upside
down, lifting the corner of this incident, prying under that no bit of
talk, recalling what he said and who told of it (I shall have the whole
drawer empty before I get through), and whose fault it was that the
match was broken off, and why she, of all women in the world, should
have remained single all those years. Why, too, she should have lost her
identity, so to speak, and become the Little Gray Lady.

And yet no sobriquet could better express her personality: She was
little--a dainty, elf-like littleness, with tiny feet and wee hands;
she was gray--a soft, silver gray--too gray for her forty years (and
this fragment begins when she was forty); and she was a lady in every
beat of her warm heart; in every pressure of her white hand; in her
voice, speech--in all her thoughts and movements.

She lived in the quaintest of old houses fronted by a brick path
bordered with fragrant box, which led up to an old-fashioned porch,
its door brightened by a brass knocker. This, together with the
knobs, steps, and slits of windows on each side of the door, was kept
scrupulously clean by old Margaret, who had lived with her for years.

But it is her personality and not her surroundings that lingers in my
memory. No one ever heard anything sweeter than her voice; in and nobody
ever looked into a lovelier face, even if there were little hollows in
the cheeks and shy, fanlike wrinkles lurking about the corners of her
lambent brown eyes. Nor did her gray hair mar her beauty. It was not
old, dry, and withered--a wispy gray. (That is not the way it happened.)
It was a new, all-of-a-sudden gray, and in less than a week--so
Margaret once told me--bleaching its brown gold to silver. But the
gloss remained, and so did the richness of the folds, and the wealth and
weight of it.

Inside the green-painted door, with its white trim and brass knocker and
knobs, there was a narrow hall hung with old portraits, opening into a
room literally all fireplace. Here there were gouty sofas, and five or
six big easy-chairs ranged in a half-circle, with arms held out as
if begging somebody to sit in them; and here, too, was an embroidered
worsted fire screen that slid up and down a standard, to shield one's
face from the blazing logs; and there were queer tables and old-gold
curtains looped back with brass rosettes--ears really--behind which
the tresses of the parted curtains were tucked; and there were more old
portraits in dingy frames, and samplers under glass, and a rug which
some aunt had made with her own hands from odds and ends; and a huge
work-basket spilling worsteds, and last, and by no manner of means
least, a big chintz-covered rocking-chair, the little lady's very
own--its thin ankles and splay feet hidden by a modest frill. There were
all these things and a lot more--and yet I still maintain that the
room was just one big fireplace. Not alone because of its size (and it
certainly was big: many a doubting curly head, losing its faith in Santa
Claus, has crawled behind the old fire-dogs, the child's fingers tight
about the Little Gray Lady's, and been told to look up into the blue--a
lesson never forgotten all their lives), but because of the wonderful
and never-to-be-told-of things which constantly took place before its
blazing embers.

For this fireplace was the Little Gray Lady's altar. Here she dispensed
wisdom and cheer and love. Everybody in Pomford village had sat in one
or the other of the chairs grouped about it and had poured out their
hearts to her. All sorts of pourings: love affairs, for instance, that
were hopeless until she would take the girl's hand in her own and smooth
out the tangle; to-say nothing of bickerings behind closed doors, with
two lives pulling apart until her dear arms brought them together.

But all this is only the outside of the old mahogany high-boy with its
meerschaum-pipe polish, spraddling legs, and rattling handles.

Now for the Little Gray Lady's own particular drawer.




II

It was Christmas Eve, and Kate Dayton, one of Pomford's pretty girls,
had found the Little Gray Lady sitting alone before the fire gazing into
the ashes, her small frame almost hidden in the roomy chair. The winter
twilight had long since settled and only the flickering blaze of the
logs and the dim glow from one lone candle illumined the room. This,
strange to say, was placed on a table in a corner where its rays shed
but little light in the room.

"Oh! Cousin Annie," moaned Kate (everybody in Pomford who got close
enough to touch the Little Gray Lady's hand called her "Cousin
Annie"--it was only the outside world who knew her by her other
sobriquet), "I didn't mean anything. Mark came in just at the wrong
minute, and--and--" The poor girl's tears smothered the rest.

"Don't let him go, dearie," came the answer, when she had heard the
whole story, the girl on her knees, her head in her lap, the wee hand
stroking the fluff of golden hair dishevelled in her grief.

"Oh, but he won't stay!" moaned Kate. "He says he is going to Rio--way
out to South America to join his Uncle Harry."

"He won't go, dearie--not if you tell him the truth and make him tell
you the truth. Don't let your pride come in; don't beat around the bush
or make believe you are hurt or misunderstood, or that you don't care.
You do care. Better be a little humble now than humble all your life. It
only takes a word. Hold out your hand and say: 'I'm sorry, Mark--please
forgive me.' If he loves you--and he does--"

The girl raised her head: "Oh! Cousin Annie! How do you know?"

She laughed gently. "Because he was here, dearie, half an hour ago
and told me so. He thought you owed him the dance, and he was a little
jealous of Tom."

"But Tom had asked me--"

"Yes--and so had Mark--"

"Yes--but he had no right--" She was up in arms again: she wouldn't--she
couldn't--and again an outburst of tears choked her words.

The Little Gray Lady had known Kate's mother, now dead, and what might
have happened but for a timely word--and she knew to her own sorrow
what had happened for want of one. Kate and Mark should not repeat that
experience if she could help it. She had saved the mother in the old
days by just such a word. She would save the daughter in the same way.
And the two were much alike--same slight, girlish figure; same blond
hair and blue eyes; same expression, and the same impetuous, high-strung
temperament. "If that child's own mother walked in this minute I
couldn't tell 'em apart, they do favor one another so," old Margaret
had told her mistress when she opened the door for the girl, and she
was right. Pomford village was full of these hereditary likenesses. Mark
Dab-ney, whom all the present trouble was about, was so like his father
at his age that his Uncle Harry had picked Mark out on a crowded dock
when the lad had visited him in Rio the year before, although he had
not seen the boy's father for twenty years--so strong was the family
likeness.

If there was to be a quarrel it must not be between the Dabneys and the
Daytons, of all families. There had been suffering enough in the old
days.

"Listen, dearie," she said in her gentle, crooning tone, patting the
girl's cheek as she talked. "A quarrel where there is no love is soon
forgotten, but a difference when both love may, if not quickly healed,
leave a scar that will last through life."

"There are as good fish in the sea as were ever caught," cried the girl
in sheer bravado, brushing away her tears.

"Don't believe it, dearie--and don't ever say it. That has wrecked more
lives than you know. That is what I once knew a girl to say--a girl just
about your age--"

"But she found somebody else, and that's just what I'm going to do.
I'm not going to have Mark read me a lecture every time I want to do
something he doesn't like. Didn't your girl find somebody else?"

"No--never. She is still unmarried."

"Yes--but it wasn't her fault, was it?"

"Yes--although she did not know it at the time. She opened a door
suddenly and found her lover alone with another girl. The two had stolen
off together where they would not be interrupted. He was pleading for
his college friend--straightening out just some such foolish quarrel as
you have had with Mark--but the girl would not understand; nor did she
know the truth until a year afterward. Then it was too late."

The Little Gray Lady stopped, lifted her hand from the girl's head, and
turned her face toward the now dying fire.

"And what became of him?" asked the girl in a hushed voice, as if she
dared not awaken the memory.

"He went away and she has never seen him since."

For some minutes there was silence, then Kate said in a braver tone:

"And he married somebody else?"

"No."

"Well, then, she died?"

"No."

The Littie Lady had not moved, nor had she taken her eyes from the
blaze. She seemed to be addressing some invisible body who could hear
and understand. The girl felt its influence and a tremor ran through
her. The fitful blaze casting weird shadows helped this feeling. At
last, with an effort, she asked:

"You say you know them both, Cousin Annie?"

"Yes--he was my dear friend. I was just thinking of him when you came
in."

The charred logs broke into a heap of coals; the blaze flickered and
died. But for the lone candle in the corner the room would have been in
total darkness.

"Shall I light another candle, Cousin Annie?" shivered the girl, "or
bring that one nearer?"

"No, it's Christmas Eve, and I only light one candle on Christmas Eve."

"But what's one candle! Why, father has the whole house as bright as day
and every fire blazing." The girl sprang to her feet and stepped nearer
the hearth. She would be less nervous, she thought, if she moved about,
and then the warmth of the fire was somehow reassuring. "Please let me
light them all, Cousin Annie," she pleaded, reaching out her hand toward
a cluster in an old-fashioned candelabra--"and if there aren't enough
I'll get more from Margaret."

"No, no--one will do. It is an old custom of mine; I've done it for
twenty years."

"But don't you love Christmas?" Kate argued, her nervousness increasing.
The ghostly light and the note of pain in her companion's voice were
strangely affecting.

The Little Gray Lady leaned forward in her chair and looked long and
steadily at the heap of smouldering ashes; then she answered slowly,
each word vibrating with the memory of some hidden sorrow: "I've had
mine, dearie."

"But you can have some more," urged Kate.

"Not like those that have gone before, dearie--no, not like those."

Something in the tones of her voice and quick droop of the dear head
stirred the girl to her depths. Sinking to her knees she hid her face in
the Little Lady's lap.

"And you sit here in the dark with only one candle?" she whispered.

"Yes, always," she answered, her fingers stroking the fair hair. "I can
see those I have loved better in the dark. Sometimes the room is full of
people; I have often to strain my eyes to assure myself that the door is
really shut. All sorts of people come--the girls and boys I knew when I
was young. Some are dead; some are far away; some so near that should I
open the window and shout their names many of them could hear. There are
fewer above ground every year--but I welcome all who come. It's the old
maid's hour, you know--this twilight hour. The wives are making ready
the supper; the children are romping; lovers are together in the corner
where they can whisper and not be overheard. But none of this disturbs
me--no big man bursts in, letting in the cold. I have my chair, my
candle, my thoughts, and my fire. When you get to be my age, Kate, and
live alone--and you might, dearie, if Mark should leave you--you will
love these twilight hours, too."

The girl reached up her hands and touched the Little Gray Lady's cheek,
whispering:

"But aren't you very, _very_ lonely. Cousin Annie?"

"Yes, sometimes."

For a moment Kate remained silent, then she asked in a faltering voice
through which ran a note almost of terror:

"Do you think I shall ever be like--like--that is--I shall ever be--all
alone?"

"I don't know, dearie. No one can ever tell what will happen. I never
thought twenty years ago I should be all alone--but I am."

The girl raised her head, and with a cry of pain threw her arms around
the Little Gray Lady's neck:

"Oh, no!--no! I can't bear it!" she sobbed! "I'll tell Mark! I'll send
for him--to-night-before I go to bed!"




III

It was not until Kate Dayton reached her father's gate that the spell
wrought by the flickering firelight and the dim glow of the ghostly
candle wore off. The crisp air of the winter night--for it was now quite
dark--had helped, but the sight of Mark's waiting figure striding along
the snow-covered path to her home and his manly outspoken apology,
"Please forgive me, Kate, I made an awful fool of myself," followed by
her joyous refrain, "Oh, Mark! I've been so wretched!" had done more. It
had all come just as Cousin Annie had said; there had been neither pride
nor anger. Only the Little Gray Lady's timely word.

But if the spell was broken the pathetic figure of the dear woman, her
eyes fixed on the dying embers, still lingered in Kate's mind.

"Oh, Mark, it is so pitiful to see her!--and I got so frightened; the
whole room seemed filled with ghosts. Christmas seems her loneliest
time. She won't have but one candle lighted, and she sits and mopes in
the dark. Oh, it's dreadful! I tried to cheer her up, but she says she
likes to sit in the dark, because then all the dead people she loves can
come to her. Can't we do something to make her happy? She is so lovely,
and she is so little, and she is so dear!"

They had entered the house, now a blaze of light. Kate's father was
standing on the hearth rug, his back to a great fireplace filled with
roaring logs.

"Where have you two gadabouts been?" he laughed merrily. "What do you
mean by staying out this late? Don't you know it's Christmas Eve?"

"We've been to see Cousin Annie, daddy; and it would make your heart
ache to look at her! She's there all alone. Can't you go down and bring
her up here?"

"Yes, I could, but she wouldn't come, not on Christmas Eve. Did she have
her candle burning?"

"Yes, just one poor little miserable candle that hardly gave any light
at all."

"And it was in the corner on a little table?"

"Yes, all by itself."

"Poor dear, she always lights it. She's lighted it for almost twenty
years."

"Is it for somebody she loved who died?"

"No--it's for somebody she loved who is alive, but who never came back
and won't."

He studied them both for a moment, as if in doubt, then he added in a
determined voice, motioning them to a seat beside him:

"It is about time you two children heard the story straight, for it
concerns you both, so I'll tell you. Your Uncle Harry, Mark, is the man
who never came back and won't. He was just your age at the time. He and
Annie were to be married in a few months, then everything went to smash.
And it was your mother, Kate, who was the innocent cause of his exile.
Harry, who was the best friend I had in the world, tried to put in a
good word for me--this was before I and your mother were engaged--and
Annie, coming in and finding them, got it all crooked. Instead of
waiting until Harry could explain, she flared up, and off he went. Her
hair turned white in a week when she found out how she had misjudged
him, but it was too late then--Harry wouldn't come back, and he never
will. When he told you, Mark, last year in Rio that he was coming home
Christmas I knew he'd change his mind just as soon as you left him, and
he did. Queer boy, Harry. Once he gets an idea in his head it sticks
there. He was that way when he was a boy. He'll never come back as long
as Annie lives, and that means never."

He stopped a moment, spread his fingers to the blazing logs, and
then, with a smile on his face, said: "If ever I catch you two young
turtledoves making such fools of yourselves, I'll turn you both
outdoors," and again his hearty laugh rang through the cheery room.

The girl instinctively leaned closer to her lover. She had heard some
part of the story before--in fact, both of them had, but never in its
entirety. Her heart went out to the Little Gray Lady all the more.

Mark now spoke up. He, too, had had an hour of his own with the Little
Gray Lady, and the obligation still remained unsettled.

"Well, if she won't come up here and have Christmas with us," he cried,
"why can't we go down there and have Christmas with her? Let's surprise
her, Kate; let's clean out all those dead people. I know she sits in the
dark and imagines they all come back, for I've seen her that way many a
time when I drop in on her in the late afternoon. Let's show her they're
alive."

Kate started up and caught Mark's arm. "Oh, Mark! I have it!" she
whispered, "and we will--yes--that will be the very thing," and so with
more mumblings and mutterings, not one word of which could her father
hear, the two raced up-stairs to the top of the house and the garret.




IV

Two hours later a group of young people led by Mark Dabney trooped out
of Kate's gate and turned down the Little Gray Lady's street. Most of
them wore long cloaks and were muffled in thick veils.

They were talking in low tones, glancing from side to side, as if
fearing to be seen. The moon had gone under a cloud, but the light of
the stars, aided by an isolated street lamp, showed them the way. So
careful were they to conceal their identity that the whole party--there
were six in all--would dart into an open gate, crouching behind the
snow-laden hedge to avoid even a single passer-by. Only once were they
in any danger, and that was when a sleigh gliding by stopped in front of
them, the driver calling out in a voice which sounded twice as loud
in the white stillness: "Where's Mr. Dabney's new house?" (evidently a
stranger, for the town pump was not better known). No one else stopped
them until they reached the Little Gray Lady's porch.

Kate crept up first, followed by Mark, and peered in. So far as she
could see everything was just as she had left it.

"The candle is still burning, Mark, and she's put more wood on the fire.
But I can't find her. Oh, yes--there she is--in her big chair--you
can just see the top of her head and her hand. Hush! don't one of you
breathe. Now, listen, girls! Mark and I will tiptoe in first--the front
door is never fastened--and if she is asleep--and I think she is--we
will all crouch down behind her until she wakes up."

"And another thing," whispered Mark from behind his hand--"everybody
must drop their coats and things in the hall, so we can surprise her all
at once."

The strange procession tiptoed in and arranged itself behind the Little
Gray Lady's chair. Kate was dressed in her mother's wedding-gown,
flaring poke bonnet, and long, faded gloves clear to her shoulder;
Mark had on a blue coat with brass buttons, a buff waistcoat, and black
stock, the two points of the high collar pinching his ruddy cheeks--the
same dress his father and Uncle Harry had worn, and all the young bloods
of their day, for that matter. The others were in their grandmother's
or grandfather's short and long clothes, Tom Fields sporting a
tight-sleeved, high-collared coat, silk-embroidered waistcoat, and
pumps.

Kate crept up behind her chair, but Mark moved to the fireplace and
rested his elbow on the mantel, so that he would be in full view when
the Little Gray Lady awoke.

At last her eyes opened, but she made no outcry, nor did she move,
except to lift her head as does a fawn startled by some sudden light,
her wondering eyes drinking in the apparition. Mark, hardly breathing,
stood like a statue, but Kate, bending closer, heard her catch her
breath with a long, indrawn sigh, and next the half-audible words:
"No--it isn't so--How foolish I am--" Then there came softly:
"Harry"--and again in almost a whisper--as if hope had died in her
heart--"Harry--"

Kate, half frightened, sprang forward and flung her arms around the
Little Gray Lady.

"Why, don't you know him? It's Mark, Cousin Annie, and here's Tom
and Nanny Fields, and everybody, and we're going to light all the
candles--every one of them, and make an awful big fire--and have a real,
real Christmas."

The Little Gray Lady was awake now.

"Oh! you scared me so!" she cried, rising to her feet, rubbing her eyes.
"You foolish Children! I must have been asleep--yes, I know I was!" She
greeted them all, talking and entering into their fun, the spirit of
hospitality now hers, saying over and over again how glad she was they
came, kissing one and another; telling them how happy they made her;
how since they had been kind enough to come, she would let them have a
_real_ Christmas--"Only," she added quickly, "it will have to be by the
light of one candle; but that won't make any difference, because you can
pile on just as much wood as you choose. Yes," she continued, her voice
rising in her effort to meet them on their own joyous plane--"pile
on all the kindling, too, Mark; and Kate, dear, please run and tell
Margaret to bring in every bit of cake she has in the pantry. Oh, how
like your mother you are, Kate! I remember that very dress. And you,
Mark! Why, you've got on the same coat I saw your father wear at the
Governor's ball. And you, too, Tom. Oh, what a good time we will all
have!"

Soon the lid of the old piano was raised, a spinet, really, and one of
the girls began running her fingers over the keys; and later on it was
agreed that the first dance was to be the Virginia reel, with all the
hospitable chairs and the fire screen and the gouty old sofa rolled back
against the wall.

This all arranged, Mark took his place with the Little Gray Lady for a
partner. The music struck up a lively tune and as quickly ceased as the
sound of bells rang through the night air. In the hush that followed a
sleigh was heard at the gate.

Kate sprang up and clapped her hands.

"Oh, they are just in time! There come the rest of them, Cousin Annie.
Now we are going to have a great party! Let's be dancing when they come
in; keep on playing!"

At this instant the door opened and Margaret put in her head.
"Somebody," she said, with a low bow, "wants to see Mr. Mark on
business."

Mark, looking like a gallant of the old school, excused himself with a
great flourish to the Little Gray Lady and strode out. In the hall, with
his back to the light, stood a broad-shouldered man muffled to the chin
in a fur overcoat. The boy was about to apologize for his costume and
then ask the man's errand, when the stranger turned quickly and gripped
his wrist.

"Hush--not a word! Where is she?" he cried.

With a low whistle of surprise Mark pushed open the door. The stranger
stepped in.

The Little Gray Lady raised her head.

"And who can this new guest be?" she asked--"and in what a queer
costume, too!"

The man drew himself up to his full height and threw wide his coat: "And
you don't know me, Annie?"

She did not take her eyes from his face, nor did she move except to turn
her head appealingly to the room as if she feared they were playing her
another trick.

He had reached her side and stood looking down at her. Again came the
voice--a strong, clear voice, with a note of infinite tenderness through
it:

"How white your hair is, Annie; and your hand is so thin! Have I changed
like this?"

She leaned forward, scanning him eagerly.

There was a little cry, then all her soul went out in the one word:

"Harry!"

She was inside the big coat now, his strong arms around her, her head
hidden on his breast, only the tips of her toes on the floor.

When he had kissed her again and again--and he did and before
everybody--he crossed the room, picked up the ghostly candle, and
smothered its flame.

"I saw it from the road," he laughed softly, "that's why I couldn't
wait. But you'll never have to light it again, my darling!"

I saw them both a few years later. Everything in the way of fading and
wrinkling had stopped so far as the Little Gray Lady was concerned. If
there were any lines left in her forehead and around the corners of her
eyes, I could not find them. Joy had planted a crop of dimples instead,
and they had spread out, smoothing the care lines. Margaret even claimed
that her hair was turning brown gold once more, but then Margaret was
always her loyal slave, and believed everything her mistress wished.

And now, if you don't mind, dear reader, we will put everything back and
shut the Little Gray Lady's bureau drawer.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Little Gray Lady, by F. Hopkinson Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE GRAY LADY ***

***** This file should be named 23695.txt or 23695.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/6/9/23695/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
