The Project Gutenberg EBook of A List To Starboard, by F. Hopkinson Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A List To Starboard
       1909

Author: F. Hopkinson Smith

Illustrator: F. Hopkinson Smith

Release Date: December 3, 2007 [EBook #23702]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LIST TO STARBOARD ***




Produced by David Widger





A LIST TO STARBOARD

By F. Hopkinson Smith

1909




I

A short, square chunk of a man walked into a shipping office on the East
Side, and inquired for the Manager of the Line. He had kindly blue eyes,
a stub nose, and a mouth that shut to like a rat-trap, and stayed
shut. Under his chin hung a pair of half-moon whiskers which framed his
weather-beaten face as a spike collar frames a dog's.

"You don't want to send this vessel to sea again," blurted out the
chunk. "She ought to go to the dry-dock. Her boats haven't had a
brushful of paint for a year; her boilers are caked clear to her
top flues, and her pumps won't take care of her bilge water. Charter
something else and lay her up."

The Manager turned in his revolving chair and faced him. He was the
opposite of the Captain in weight, length, and thickness--a slim,
well-groomed, puffy-cheeked man of sixty with a pair of uncertain, badly
aimed eyes and a voice like the purr of a cat.

"Oh, my dear Captain, you surely don't mean what you say. She is
perfectly seaworthy and sound. Just look at her inspection--" and he
passed him the certificate.

"No--I don't want to see it! I know 'em by heart: it's a lie, whatever
it says. Give an inspector twenty dollars and he's stone blind."

The Manager laughed softly. He had handled too many rebellious captains
in his time; they all had a protest of some kind--it was either the
crew, or the grub, or the coal, or the way she was stowed. Then he added
softly, more as a joke than anything else:

"Not afraid, are you, Captain?"

A crack started from the left-hand corner of the Captain's mouth,
crossed a fissure in his face, stopped within half an inch of his stub
nose, and died out in a smile of derision.

"What I'm afraid of is neither here nor there. There's cattle
aboard--that is, there will be by to-morrow night; and there's a lot of
passengers booked, some of 'em women and children. It isn't honest to
ship 'em and you know it! As to her boilers send for the Chief Engineer.
He'll tell you. You call it taking risks; I call it murder!"

"And so I understand you refuse to obey the orders of the Board?--and
yet she's got to sail on the 16th if she sinks outside."

"When I refuse to obey the orders of the Board I'll tell the Board, not
you. And when I do tell 'em I'll tell 'em something else, and that is,
that this chartering of worn-out tramps, painting 'em up and putting 'em
into the Line, has got to stop, or there'll be trouble."

"But this will be her last trip, Captain. Then we'll overhaul her."

"I've heard that lie for a year. She'll run as long as they can insure
her and her cargo. As for the women and children, I suppose they don't
count--" and he turned on his heel and left the office.

On the way out he met the Chief Engineer.

"Do the best you can, Mike," he said; "orders are we sail on the 16th."

*****

On the fourth day out this conversation took place in the smoking-room
between a group of passengers.

"Regular tub, this ship!" growled the Man-Who-Knew-It-All to the Bum
Actor. "Screw out of the water every souse she makes; lot of dirty
sailors skating over the decks instead of keeping below where they
belong; Chief Engineer loafing in the Captain's room every chance he
gets--there he goes now--and it's the second time since breakfast. And
the Captain is no better! And just look at the accommodations--three
stewards and a woman! What's that to look after thirty-five passengers?
Half the time I have to wait an hour to get something to eat--such as it
is. And my bunk wasn't made up yesterday until plumb night. That bunch
in the steerage must be having a hard time."

"We get all we pay for," essayed the Travelling Man. "She ain't rigged
for cabin passengers, and the Captain don't want 'em. Didn't want
to take me--except our folks had a lot of stuff aboard. Had enough
passengers, he said."

"Well, he took the widow and her two kids"--continued the
Man-Who-Knew-It-All--"and they were the last to get aboard. Half the
time he's playing nurse instead of looking after his ship. Had 'em all
on the bridge yesterday."

"He _had_ to take 'em," protested the Travelling Man. "She was put under
his charge by his owners--so one of the stewards told me."

"Oh!--_had to_, did he! Yes--I've been there before. No use
talking--this line's got to be investigated, and I'm going to do the
investigating as soon as I get ashore, and don't you forget it! What's
your opinion?"

The Bum Actor made no reply. He had been cold and hungry too many days
and nights to find fault with anything. But for the generosity of a few
friends he would still be tramping the streets, sleeping where he could.
Three meals a day--four, if he wanted them--and a bed in a room all to
himself instead of being one in a row of ten, was heaven to him. What
the Captain, or the Engineer, or the crew, or anybody else did, was
of no moment, so he got back alive. As to the widow's children, he
had tried to pick up an acquaintance with them himself--especially
the boy--but she had taken them away when she saw how shabby were his
clothes.

The Texas Cattle Agent now spoke up. He was a tall, raw-boned man, with
a red chin-whisker and red, weather-scorched face, whose clothing looked
as if it had been pulled out of shape in the effort to accommodate
itself to the spread of his shoulders and round of his thighs. His
trousers were tucked in his boots, the straps hanging loose. He
generally sat by himself in one corner of the cramped smoking-room, and
seldom took part in the conversation. The Bum Actor and he had exchanged
confidences the night before, and the Texan therefore felt justified in
answering in his friend's stead.

"You're way off, friend," he said to the Man-Who-Knew-It-All. "There
ain't nothin' the matter with the Line, nor the ship, nor the Captain.
This is my sixth trip aboard of her, and I know! They had a strike among
the stevedores the day we sailed, and then, too, we've got a scrub lot
of stokers below, and the Captain's got to handle 'em just so. That kind
gets ugly when anything happens. I had sixty head of cattle aboard here
on my last trip over, and some of 'em got loose in a storm, and there
was hell to pay with the crew till things got straightened out. I ain't
much on shootin' irons, but they came handy that time. I helped and I
know. Got a couple in my cabin now. Needn't tell me nothin' about the
Captain. He's all there when he's wanted, and it don't take him more'n a
minute, either, to get busy."

The door of the smoking-room opened and the object of his eulogy
strolled in. He was evidently just off the bridge, for the thrash of
the spray still glistened on his oilskins and on his gray, half-moon
whiskers. That his word was law aboard ship, and that he enforced it
in the fewest words possible, was evident in every line of his face
and every tone of his voice. If he deserved an overhauling it certainly
would not come from any one on board--least of all from Carhart--the
Man-Who-Knew-It-All.

Loosening the thong that bound his so'wester to his chin, he slapped it
twice across a chair back, the water flying in every direction, and then
faced the room.

"Mr. Bonner."

"Yes, sir," answered the big-shouldered Texan, rising to his feet.

"I'd like to see you for a minute," and without another word the two men
left the room and made their way in silence down the wet deck to where
the Chief Engineer stood.

"Mike, this is Mr. Bonner; you remember him, don't you? You can rely on
his carrying out any orders you give him. If you need another man let
him pick him out--" and he continued on to his cabin.

Once there the Captain closed the door behind him, shutting out the
pound and swash of the sea; took from a rack over his bunk a roll of
charts, spread one on a table and with his head in his hands studied
it carefully. The door opened and the Chief Engineer again stood beside
him. The Captain raised his head.

"Will Bonner serve?" he asked.

"Yes, glad to, and he thinks he's got another man. He's what he calls
out his way a 'tenderfoot,' he says, but he's game and can be depended
on. Have you made up your mind where she'll cross?"--and he bent over
the chart.

The Captain picked up a pair of compasses, balanced them for a moment in
his fingers, and with the precision of a seamstress threading a needle,
dropped the points astride a wavy line known as the steamer track.

The engineer nodded:

"That will give us about twenty-two hours leeway," he said gravely, "if
we make twelve knots."

"Yes, if you make twelve knots: can you do it?"

"I can't say; depends on that gang of shovellers and the way they
behave. They're a tough lot--jail-birds and tramps, most of 'em. If
they get ugly there ain't but one thing left; that, I suppose, you won't
object to."

The Captain paused for a moment in deep thought, glanced at the pin
prick in the chart, and said with a certain forceful meaning in his
voice:

"No--not if there's no other way."

The Chief Engineer waited, as if for further reply, replaced his cap,
and stepped out into the wind. He had got what he came for, and he had
got it straight.

With the closing of the door the Captain rolled up the chart, laid it
in its place among the others, readjusted the thong of his so'wester,
stopped for a moment before a photograph of his wife and child, looked
at it long and earnestly, and then mounted the stairs to the bridge.
With the exception that the line of his mouth had straightened and
the knots in his eyebrows tightened, he was, despite the smoking-room
critics, the same bluff, determined sea-dog who had defied the Manager
the week before.




II

When Bonner, half an hour later, returned to the smoking-room (he, too,
had caught the splash of the sea, the spray drenching the rail), the Bum
Actor crossed over and took the seat beside him. The Texan was the only
passenger who had spoken to him since he came aboard, and he had already
begun to feel lonely. This time he started the conversation by brushing
the salt spray from the Agent's coat.

"Got wet, didn't you? Too bad! Wait till I wipe it off," and he dragged
a week-old handkerchief from his pocket. Then seeing that the Texan took
no notice of the attention, he added, "What did the Captain want?"

The Texan did not reply. He was evidently absorbed in something outside
his immediate surroundings, for he continued to sit with bent back, his
elbows on his knees, his eyes on the floor.

Again the question was repeated:

"What did the Captain want? Nothing the matter, is there?" Fear had
always been his master--fear of poverty mostly--and it was poverty in
the worst form to others if he failed to get home. This thought had
haunted him night and day.

"Yes and no. Don't worry--it'll all come out right. You seem nervous."

"I am. I've been through a lot and have almost reached the end of my
rope. Have you got a wife at home?" The Texan shook his head. "Well,
if you had you'd understand better than I can tell you. I have, and a
three-year-old boy besides. I'd never have left them if I'd known.
I came over under contract for a six months' engagement and we were
stranded in Pittsburg and had hard work getting back to New York. Some
of them are there yet. All I want now is to get home--nothing else will
save them. Here's a letter from her I don't mind showing you--you can
see for yourself what I'm up against. The boy never was strong."

The big Texan read it through carefully, handed it back without a
comment or word of sympathy, and then, with a glance around him, as if
in fear of being overheard, asked:

"Can you keep your nerve in a mix-up?"

"Do you mean a fight?" queried the Actor.

"Maybe."

"I don't like fights--never did." Anything that would imperil his safe
return was to be avoided.

"I neither--but sometimes you've got to. Are you handy with a gun?"

"Why?"

"Nothing--I'm only asking."

Carhart, the Man-Who-Knew-It-All, here lounged over from his seat by the
table and dropped into a chair beside them, cutting short his reply. The
Texan gave a significant look at the Actor, enforcing his silence, and
then buried his face in a newspaper a month old.

Carhart spread his legs, tilted his head back on the chair, slanted his
stiff-brim hat until it made a thatch for his nose, and began one of his
customary growls: to the room--to the drenched port-holes--to the brim
of his hat; as a half-asleep dog sometimes does when things have gone
wrong with him--or he dreams they have.

"This ship reminds me of another old tramp, the _Persia_," he drawled.
"Same scrub crew and same cut of a Captain. Hadn't been for two of the
passengers and me, we'd never got anywhere. Had a fire in the lower hold
in a lot of turpentine, and when they put that out we found her cargo
had shifted and she was down by the head about six feet. Then the crew
made a rush for the boats and left us with only four leaky ones to go
a thousand miles. They'd taken 'em all, hadn't been for me and another
fellow who stood over them with a gun."

The Bum Actor raised his eyes.

"What happened then?" he asked in a nervous voice.

"Oh, we pitched in and righted things and got into port at last. But the
Captain was no good; he'd a-left with the crew if we'd let him."

"Is the shifting of a cargo a serious matter?" continued the Actor.
"This is my second crossing and I'm not much up on such things."

"Depends on the weather," interpolated a passenger.

"And on how she's stowed," continued Car-hart. "I've been mistrusting
this ship ain't plumb on her keel. You can tell that from the way she
falls off after each wave strikes her. I have been out on deck looking
things over and she seems to me to be down by the stern more than she
ought."

"Maybe she'll be lighter when more coal gets out of her," suggested
another passenger.

"Yes, but she's listed some to starboard. I watched her awhile this
morning. She ain't loaded right, or she's loaded _wrong,-purpose_. That
occurs sometimes with a gang of striking stevedores."

The noon whistle blew and the talk ended with the setting of everybody's
watch, except the Bum Actor's, whose timepiece decorated a shop-window
in the Bowery.

*****

That night one of those uncomfortable rumors, started doubtless by
Carhart's talk, shivered through the ship, its vibrations even reaching
the widow lying awake in her cabin. This said that some hundreds of
barrels of turpentine had broken loose and were smashing everything
below. If any one of them rolled into the furnaces an explosion would
follow which would send them all to eternity. That this absurdity was
immediately denied by the purser, who asserted with some vehemence that
there was not a gallon of turpentine aboard, did not wholly allay the
excitement, nor did it stifle the nervous anxiety which had now taken
possession of the passengers.

As the day wore on several additional rumors joined those already
extant. One was dropped in the ear of the Texan by the Bum Actor as the
two stood on the upper deck watching the sea, which was rapidly falling.

"I got so worried I thought I'd go down into the engine room myself,"
he whispered. "I'm just back. Something's wrong down there, or I'm
mistaken. I wish you'd go and find out. I knew that turpentine yarn was
a lie, but I wanted to be sure, so I thought I'd ask one of the stokers
who had come up for a little air. He was about to answer me when the
Chief Engineer came down from the bridge, where he had been talking to
the Captain, and ordered the man below before he had time to fill his
lungs. I waited a little while, hoping he or some of the crew would
come up again, and then I went down the ladder myself. When I got to the
first landing I came bump up against the Chief Engineer. He was standing
in the gangway fooling with a revolver he had in his hand as if he'd
been cleaning it. 'I'll have to ask you to get back where you came
from,' he said. 'This ain't no place for passengers'--and up I came.
What do you think it means? I'd get ugly, too, if he kept me in that
heat and never let me get a whiff of air. I tell you, that's an awful
place down there. Suppose you go and take a look. Your knowing the
Captain might make some difference."

"Were any of the stokers around?" "No--none of them. I didn't see a soul
but the Chief Engineer, and I didn't see him more than a minute."

The big Texan moved closer to the rail and again scrutinized the
sky-line. He had kept this up all the morning, his eye searching
the horizon as he moved from one side of the ship to the other. The
inspection over, he slipped his arm through the Actor's and started him
down the deck toward the Cattle Agent's cabin. When the two emerged the
Texan's face still wore the look which had rested on it since the
time the Captain had called him from the smoking-room. The Actor's
countenance, however, had undergone a change. All his nervous timidity
was gone; his lips were tightly drawn, the line of the jaw more
determined. He looked like a man who had heard some news which had first
steadied and then solidified him. These changes often overtake men of
sensitive, highly strung natures.

On the way back they encountered the Captain accompanied by the Chief
Engineer. The two were heading for the saloon, the bugle having sounded
for luncheon. As they passed by with their easy, swinging gait, the
passengers watched them closely. If there was danger in the air these
two officers, of all men, would know it. The Captain greeted the Texan
with a significant look, waited until the Actor had been presented,
looked the Texan's friend over from head to foot, and then with a nod to
several of the others halted opposite a steamer chair in which sat the
widow and her two children--one a baby and the other a boy of four--a
plump, hugable little fellow, every inch of whose surface invited a
caress.

"Please stay a minute and let me talk to you, Captain," the widow
pleaded. "I've been so worried. None of these stories are true, are
they? There can't be any danger or you would have told me--wouldn't
you?"

The Captain laughed heartily, so heartily that even the Chief Engineer
looked at him in astonishment. "What stories do you hear, my dear lady?"

"That the steamer isn't loaded properly?"

Again the Captain laughed, this time under the curls of the chubby boy
whom he had caught in his arms and was kissing eagerly.

"Not loaded right?" he puffed at last when he got his breath. "Well,
well, what a pity! That yarn, I guess, comes from some of the navigators
in the smoking-room. They generally run the ship. Here, you little
rascal, turn out your toes and dance a jig for me. No--no--not that
way--this way-r-out with them! Here, let me show you. One--two--off
we go. Now the pigeon wing and the double twist and the rat-tat-tat,
rat-tat-tat--that's the way, my lad!"

He had the boy's hands now, the child shouting with laughter, the
overjoyed mother clapping her hands as the big burly Captain with his
face twice as red from the exercise, danced back and forth across the
deck, the passengers forming a ring about them.

"There!" sputtered the Captain, all out of breath from the exercise, as
he dropped the child back into the widow's arms. "Now all of you come
down to luncheon. The weather is getting better every minute. The glass
is rising and we are going to have a fine night."

Carhart, who had watched the whole performance with an ill-concealed
sneer on his face, muttered to the man next him:

"What did I tell you? He's a pretty kind of a Captain, ain't he? He's
mashed on the widow just as I told you. Smoking-room yarn, is it? I bet
I could pick out half a dozen men right in them chairs who could run
the ship as well as he does. Maybe we'll have to take charge, after
all--don't you think so, Mr. Bonner?"

The Texan smiled grimly: "I'll let you do the picking, Mr. Carhart--"
and with his hand on the Actor's arm, the two went below.

A counter-current now swept through the ship. If anything was really
the matter the Captain would not be dancing jigs, nor would he leave
the bridge for his meals. This, like all other counter-currents--wave or
otherwise--tossed up a bobble of dispute when the two clashed. There
was no doubt about it: Carhart had been "talking through his
hat"--"shooting off his mouth"--the man was "a gas bag," etc., etc. When
appeal for confirmation was made to the Texan and the Actor, who now
seemed inseparable, neither made reply. They evidently did not care to
be mixed up in what Bonner characterized with a grim smile as "more hot
air."

All through the meal the Captain kept up his good-natured mood; chatting
with the widow who sat on his right, the baby in her lap; making a pig
of a lemon and some tooth-picks for the boy, who had crawled up into
his arms; exchanging nods and smiles down the length of the table with
several new arrivals, or congratulating those nearest to him on their
recovery after the storm, ending by carrying both boy and baby to the
upper deck--so that he might "not forget how to handle" his own when he
got back, he laughed in explanation.




III

Luncheon over, the passengers, many of whom had been continuously in
their berths, began to crowd the decks. These soon discovered that the
ship was not on an even keel; a fact confirmed when attention was called
to the slant of the steamer chairs and the roll of an orange toward the
scuppers. Explanation was offered by the Texan, who argued that the
wind had hauled, and being then abeam had given her a list to starboard.
This, while not wholly satisfactory to the more experienced, allayed
the fears of the women--there were two or three on board beside the
widow--who welcomed the respite from the wrench and stagger of the
previous hours.

Attention was now drawn by a nervous passenger to a gang of sailors
under the First Officer, who were at work overhauling the boats on the
forward deck, immediately under the eyes of the Captain who had returned
to the bridge, as well as to an approaching wall of fog which, while he
was speaking, had blanketed the ship, sending two of the boat gang on
a run to the bow. The fog-horn also blew continuously, almost without
intermission. Now and then it too would give three short, sharp snorts,
as if of warning.

The passengers had now massed themselves in groups, some touch of
sympathy, or previous acquaintance, or trait of courage but recently
discovered, having drawn them together. Again the Captain passed down
the deck. This time he stopped to light a cigarette from a passenger's
cigar, remarking as he did so that it was "as thick as pea soup on the
bridge, but he thought it would lighten before morning." Then halting
beside the chair of an old lady who had but recently appeared on deck,
he congratulated her on her recovery and kept on his way to the boats.

The widow, however, was still anxious.

"What are they doing with the boats?" she asked, her eyes following the
Captain's disappearing figure.

"Only overhauling them, madam," spoke up the Texan, who had stationed
himself near her chair.

"But isn't that unusual!" she inquired in a tremulous voice.

"No, madam, just precaution, and always a safe one in a fog. Collision
comes so quick sometimes they don't have time even to clear the davits."

"But the sailors are carrying up boxes and kegs and putting them in
the boats; what's that for?" broke in another passenger, who had been
leaning over the forward rail.

"Grub and water, I guess," returned the Texan. "It's a thousand miles to
the nearest land, and there ain't no bakery on the way that I know of.
Can't be too careful when there's women and babies aboard, especially
little fellows like these--" and he ran his hand through the boy's
curls. "The Captain don't take no chances. That's what I like him for."

Again the current of hope submerged the current of despair. The slant of
the deck, however, increased, although the wind had gone down; so
much so that the steamer chairs had to be lashed to the iron hand-hold
skirting the wall of the upper cabins. So had the fog, which was now so
dense that it hid completely the work of the boat gang.

With the passing of the afternoon and the approach of night, thus
deepening the gloom, there was added another and a new anxiety to the
drone of the fog-horn. This was a Coston signal which flashed from the
bridge, flooding the deck with light and pencilling masts and rigging in
lines of fire. These flashes kept up at intervals of five minutes, the
colors changing from time to time.

An indefinable fear now swept through the vessel. The doubters and
scoffers from the smoking-room who stood huddled together near the
forward companion-way talked in whispers. The slant of the deck they
argued might be due to a shift of the cargo--a situation serious, but
not dangerous--but why burn Costons? The only men who seemed to be
holding their own, and who were still calm and undisturbed, were the
Texan and the Actor. These, during the conference, had moved toward the
flight of steps leading to the bridge and had taken their positions near
the bottom step, but within reach of the widow's chair. Once the Actor
loosened his coat and slipped in his hand as if to be sure of something
he did not want to lose.

While this was going on the Captain left the bridge in charge of the
Second Officer and descended to his cabin. Reaching over his bunk, he
unhooked the picture of his wife and child, tore it from its frame,
looked at it intently for a moment, and then, with a sigh, slid it into
an inside pocket. This done, he stripped off his wet storm coat, thrust
his arms into a close-fitting reefing jacket, unhooked a holster from
its place, dropped its contents into his outside pocket, and walked
slowly down the flight of steps to where the Texan and the Actor stood
waiting.

Then, facing the passengers, and in the same tone of voice with which he
would have ordered a cup of coffee from a steward, he said:

"My friends, I find it necessary to abandon the ship. There is time
enough and no necessity for crowding. The boats are provisioned for
thirty days. The women and children will go first: this order will be
literally carried out; those who disobey it will have to be dealt with
in another way. This, I hope, you will not make necessary. I will also
tell you that I believe we are still within the steamer zone, although
the fog and weather have prevented any observation. Do you stay here,
madam. I'll come for you when I am ready--" and he laid his hand
encouragingly on the widow's arm.

With this he turned to the Texan and the Actor:

"You understand, both of you, do you not, Mr. Bonner? You and your
friend will guard the aft companion-way, and help the Chief Engineer
take care of the stokers and the steerage. I and the First Officer will
fill the boats."

The beginning of a panic is like the beginning of a fire: first a curl
of smoke licking through a closed sash, then a rush of flame, and then a
roar freighted with death. Its subduing is along similar lines: A sharp
command clearing the way, concentrated effort, and courage.

Here the curl of smoke was an agonized shriek from an elderly woman who
fell fainting on the deck; the rush of flame was a wild surge of men
hurling themselves toward the boats, and the roar which meant death was
the frenzied throng of begrimed half-naked stokers and crazed emigrants
who were wedged in a solid mass in the companion-way leading to the
upper deck. The subduing was the same.

[Illustration: Back, all of you ]

"Back, all of you!" shouted the Engineer. "The first man who passes
that door without my permission I'll kill! Five of you at a time--no
crowding--keep 'em in line, Mr. Bonner--you and your friend!"

The Texan and the Bum Actor were within three feet of him as he
spoke--the Texan as cool as if he were keeping count of a drove of
steers, except that he tallied with the barrel of a six-shooter instead
of a note-book and pencil. The Bum Actor's face was deathly white and
his pistol hand trembled a little, but he did not flinch. He ranged the
lucky ones in line farther along, and kept them there. "Anything to
get home," he had told the Texan when he had slipped Bonner's other
revolver, an hour before, into his pocket.

On the saloon deck the flame of fear was still raging, although the
sailors and the three stewards were so many moving automatons under
the First Officer's orders. The widow, with her baby held tight to her
breast, had not moved from where the Captain had placed her, nor had
she uttered a moan. The crisis was too great for anything but implicit
obedience. The Captain had kept his word, and had told her when danger
threatened; she must now wait for what God had in store for her. The boy
stood by the First Officer; he had clapped his hands and laughed when he
saw the first boat swung clear of the davits.

Carhart was the color of ashes and could hardly articulate. He had edged
up close to the gangway where the boats were to be filled. Twice he had
tried to wedge himself between the First Officer and the rail and twice
had been pushed back--the last time with a swing that landed him against
a pile of steamer chairs.

All this time the fog-horn had kept up its monotonous din, the Costons
flaring at intervals. The stoppage of either would only have added to
the terror now partly allayed by the Captain's encouraging talk, which
was picked up and repeated all over the ship.

The first boat was now ready for passengers.

"This way, madam--you first--" the Captain said to the widow. "You must
go alone with the baby, and I--"

He did not finish the sentence. Something had caught his ear--something
that made him lunge heavily toward the rail, his eyes searching the
gloom, his hand cupped to his ear.

"Hold hard, men!" he cried. "Keep still-all of you!"

[Illustration: Hold hard men ]

Out of the stillness of the night came the moan of a distant fog-horn.
This was followed by a wild cheer from the men at the boat davits. At
the same instant a dim, far-away light cut its way through the black
void, burned for a moment, and disappeared like a dying star.

Another cheer went up. This time the watch on the foretop and the men
astride the nose sent it whirling through the choke and damp with an
added note of joy.

The Captain turned to the widow.

"That's her--that's the _St. Louis!_ I've been hoping for her all day,
and didn't give up until the fog shut in."

"And we can stay here!"

"No--we haven't a moment to lose. Our fires are nearly out now. We've
been in a sinking condition for forty-eight hours. We sprung a leak
where we couldn't get at it, and our pumps are clogged.

"Stand aside, men! All ready, madam! No, you can't manage them
both--give me the boy,--I'll bring him in the last boat."






End of Project Gutenberg's A List To Starboard, by F. Hopkinson Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LIST TO STARBOARD ***

***** This file should be named 23702.txt or 23702.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/7/0/23702/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
