The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Border Ruffian, by Thomas A. Janvier

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Border Ruffian
       1891

Author: Thomas A. Janvier

Release Date: December 10, 2007 [EBook #23803]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BORDER RUFFIAN ***




Produced by David Widger






A BORDER RUFFIAN.

By Thomas A. Janvier

Copyright, 1891, by Harper & Brothers




I.--WEST.

_The Incident of the Boston Young Lady, the Commercial Traveller, and
the Desperado._




I.

Throughout the whole of the habitable globe there nowhere is to be found
more delightful or more invigorating air than that which every traveller
through New Mexico, from Albuquerque, past Las Vegas, to the Raton
Mountains, is free to breathe.

Miss Grace Winthrop, of Boston, and also Miss Winthrop, her paternal
aunt, and also Mr. Hutchinson Port, of Philadelphia, her maternal
uncle--all of whom were but forty hours removed from the Alkali Desert
west of the Continental Divide--felt in the very depths of their several
beings how entirely good this air was; and, as their several natures
moved them, they betrayed their lively appreciation of its excellence.

Miss Grace Winthrop, having contrived for herself, with the intelligent
assistance of the porter, a most comfortable nest of pillows, suffered
her novel to remain forgotten upon her knees; and, as she leaned her
pretty blond head against the wood-work separating her section from that
adjoining it, looked out upon the brown mountains, and accorded to those
largely-grand objects of nature the rare privilege of being reflected
upon the retina of her very blue eyes. Yet the mountains could not
flatter themselves with the conviction that contemplation of them wholly
filled her mind, for occasionally she smiled a most delightful smile.

Miss Winthrop, retired from the gaze of the world in the cell that the
Pullman-car people euphemistically style a state-room, ignored all such
casual excrescences upon the face of nature as mountains, and seriously
read her morning chapter of Emerson.

Mr. Hutchinson Port, lulled by the easy, jog-trot motion of the car,
and soothed by the air from Paradise that, for his virtues, he was being
permitted to breathe, lapsed into calm and grateful slumber: and dreamed
(nor could a worthy Philadelphian desire a better dream) of a certain
meeting of the Saturday Night Club, in December, 1875, whereat the
terrapin was remarkable, even for Philadelphia.

Miss Winthrop, absorbed in her Emersonian devotions, and Mr. Hutchinson
Port, absorbed in slumber, did not perceive that the slow motion of the
train gradually became slower, and finally entirely ceased; and even
Grace, lost in her pleasant daydream, scarcely observed that the
unsightly buildings of a little way-station had thrust themselves
into the foreground of her landscape--for this foreground she ignored,
keeping her blue eyes serenely fixed upon the great brown mountains
beyond. Nor was she more than dimly conscious of the appearance upon the
station platform of a tall, broad-shouldered young man clad in corduroy,
wearing a wide-brimmed felt-hat, and girded about with a belt, stuck
full of cartridges, from which depended a very big revolver. In a vague
way she was conscious of this young man's existence, and of an undefined
feeling that, as the type of a dangerous and interesting class, his
appearance was opportune in a part of the country which she had been led
to believe was inhabited almost exclusively by cut-throats and outlaws.

In a minute or two the train went on again, and as it started Grace was
aroused and shocked by the appearance at the forward end of the car of
the ruffianly character whom she had but half seen from the car window.
For a moment she believed that the train-robbery, that she had been
confidently expecting over since her departure from San Francisco, was
about to take place. Her heart beat hard, and her breath came quickly.
But before these symptoms had time to become alarming the desperado had
passed harmlessly to the rear end of the car, and after him had come the
porter carrying his valise and a Winchester rifle.

"Goin' to Otero? Yes, sah! All right, sah! Put yo' heah; nice seat on
shady side, sah! Thank yo', sah! Have a pillow, sah?" And, hearing this
address on the part of the porter, Grace knew that the desperado,
for the moment at least, was posing in the character of a law-abiding
citizen, and was availing himself of his rights as such to ride in
a Pullman-car. Being thus relieved of cause for immediate alarm, her
breast presently began to swell with a fine indignation at the impudence
of this abandoned person in thus thrusting himself into a place
reserved, if not absolutely for aristocratic, certainly, at least, for
respectable society.




II.

The slight stir incident to the entrance of this offensive stranger
aroused Mr. Hutchinson Port from his agreeable slumber. He yawned
slightly, cast a disparaging glance upon the mountains, and then,
drawing an especially good cigar from his case, betook himself to the
smoking-room. Grace did not realize his intentions until they had become
accomplished deeds.

Mr. Hutchinson Port--although a member (on the retired list) of the
First City Troop, and therefore, presumably, inflamed with the martial
spirit characteristic of that ancient and honorable organization--was
not, perhaps, just the man that a person knowing in such matters would
have selected to pit against a New Mexico desperado in a hand-to-hand
conflict. But Grace felt her heart sink a little as she saw the round
and rather pursy form of her natural protector walk away into the depths
of a mirror at the forward end of the car, and so vanish. And in
this same mirror she beheld, seated only two sections behind her, the
scowling ruffian!

The situation, as Grace regarded it, was an alarming one; and it was
the more trying to her nerves because it did not, reasonably, admit of
action. She was aware that the very presence of a ruffian in a Pullman
car was in the nature of a promise, on his part, that for the time being
it was not his intention either to murder or to rob--unless, indeed,
he were one of a robber band, and was awaiting the appearance of his
confederates. For her either to call her uncle, or break in upon the
Emersonian seclusion of her aunt, she felt would not be well received,
under the circumstances, by either of these her relatives. As to the
porter, that sable functionary had vanished; there was no electric bell,
and the car, one of a Pullman train, had no conductor.

For protection, therefore, should need for protection arise, Grace
perceived that she must depend upon the one other passenger. (They had
lingered so long amid the delights of a Santa Barbara spring that
they were journeying in that pleasant time of year when spring travel
eastward has ended, and summer travel has not yet begun.) This one
other passenger was a little man of dapper build and dapper dress,
whose curiously-shaped articles of luggage betokened his connection with
commercial affairs. Grace was forced to own, as she now for the first
time regarded him attentively, that he did not seem to be wrought of the
stern stuff out of which, as a rule, champions are made.

As she thus looked upon him, she was startled to find that he was
looking very fixedly upon her; and she was further startled, as their
eyes met, by the appearance upon his face of a friendly smile. She would
have been vastly surprised had she been aware that this little person
labored under the belief that he had already effected a favorable
lodgement in her good graces; and she would have been both surprised
and horrified could she have known that each of her own strictly
confidential smiles during her day-dream had been accepted by the
commercial traveller as intended for himself; and had been met, as they
successively appeared, by his own smiles in answer. Yet this was the
actual state of the case; and the little man's soul was uplifted by the
thought that here was a fresh proof, and a very pleasant one, of how
irresistible were his personal appearance and his personal charm of
manner when arrayed in battery against any one of the gentler sex.

Viewed from the stand-point of his experience, this inquiring look
and its attendant eye-encounter indicated that the moment for more
pronounced action now had arrived. With the assured air of one who
possibly may be repulsed, but who certainly cannot be defeated, he arose
from his seat, crossed to Miss Grace Winthrop's section, and, with a
pleasant remark to the effect that in travelling it always was nice to
be sociable, edged himself into the seat beside her.

For a moment, the insolent audacity of this move was so overwhelming
that Grace was quite incapable of coherent expression. The lovely pink
of her cheeks became a deep crimson that spread to the very tips of her
ears; her blue eyes flashed, and her hands clinched instinctively.

"Looked like a perfect little blue-eyed devil," the drummer subsequently
declared, in narrating a highly-embellished version of his adventure,
"but she didn't mean it, you know--at least, only for a minute or two. I
soon combed her down nicely." What he actually said, was:

"Been travellin' far, miss?"

"What do you mean by this? Go away!" Grace managed to say; but she could
not speak very clearly, for she was choking.

"Come, don't get mad, miss! I know you're not mad, really, anyway. When
a woman's as handsome as you are, she can't be bad-natured. Come from
California, I suppose? Nice country over there, ain't it?"

What with surprise and rage and fright, Grace was very nearly frantic
For the moment she was powerless--her uncle in the smoking-room, her
aunt locked up with her Emersonian meditations, the porter in the lobby;
the only available person upon whom she could call for aid a horrible
drunken murderer and robber, steeped in all the darkest crimes of the
frontier! She felt herself growing faint, but she struggled to her feet.
The drummer laid his hand on her arm: "Don't go away, my dear! Just stay
and have a little talk. You see--"

But the sentence was not finished. Grace felt her head buzzing, and
then, from somewhere--a long way off, it seemed--she heard a voice
saying: "I beg your pardon; this thing seems to be annoying you. Permit
me to remove it."

Her head cleared a little, for there was a promise of help--not only in
the words but in the tone. And then she saw the desperado calmly settle
a big hand into the collar of the little man's coat, lift him out of the
seat and well up into the air, and so carry him at arm's-length--kicking
and struggling, and looking for all the world like a jumping-jack--out
through the passage-way at the forward end of the car.

As they disappeared, she precipitately sought refuge in the
state-room--where Miss Winthrop was aroused from her serious
contemplation of All-pervading Thought by a sudden and most energetic
demand upon her protection and her salts-bottle. And, before she could
be made in the least degree to comprehend why Grace should require
either the one or the other, Grace had still further complicated and
mystified the matter by fainting dead away.




III.

In the course of two or three hours--aided by Miss Winthrop's salts
and Mr. Hutchinson Port's travelling-flask of peculiar old Otard, which
together contributed calmness and strength, and being refreshed by a
little slumber--Grace was able to explain in an intelligible manner the
adventure that had befallen her.

"And no matter what dreadful crimes that horrible man may have
committed," she said, in conclusion. "I shall be most grateful to him to
my dying day. And I want you, Uncle Hutchinson, no matter how unpleasant
it may be to you to do so, to thank him from me for what he did. And,
oh! it was so funny to see that detestable little impudent man kicking
about that way in the air!" Which remembrance, at the same moment, of
both the terrifying and the ludicrous side of her recent experience, not
unnaturally sent Grace off into hysterics.

Mr. Hutchinson Port was quite ready to carry the message of thanks to
the desperado, and to add to it some very hearty thanks of his own. But
his good intentions could not be realized; the desperado no longer was
on the train.

"Yes, sah; I knows the gen'l'm yo' means, sah," responded the porter,
in answer to inquiries. "Pow'fl big gen'l'm yo' means, as got on this
mo'nin' to Vegas. Thet's th' one, sah! He'd some kind er trib-bilation
with th' little gen'l'm'--th' drummer gen'lm' as got on las' night to
Lamy--an' he brought him out, holdin' him like he was a kitten, to the
lobby, an' jus' set him down an' boxed his ears till he hollered! Yes,
sah, thet's th' one. He got off to Otero. An' th' little man he got off
to Trinidad, an' said he was agoin' up by the Denver to Pueblo. Yes,
sah; they's both got off, sah! Thank yo', sah! Get yo' a pillow, sah?"




IV.

And so it came to pass that Miss Grace Winthrop returned to Boston
cherishing towards desperadoes in general, and towards the desperadoes
of New Mexico in particular, sentiments as generous as they were
unusual.

Miss Winthrop the elder, whose soul was accustomed to a purer ether than
that in which desperadoes ordinarily are found, presently forgot the
vicarious excitements of her journey eastward in the calm joys of the
Summer School of Philosophy.

And Mr. Hutchinson Port longed to be able to forget the whole State of
California: when he realized, as he did with a most bitter keenness,
that the superficial charms of that greatly overrated region had
detained him upon the Western coast until the terrapin season was
absolutely at an end!




II.--EAST.

_The Incident of the Mysterious Stranger, and the Philadelphia
Dinner-party._




I.

Mrs. Rittenhouse Smith had achieved righteousness. That is to say, being
a Philadelphian, she was celebrated for giving successful dinners. The
person who achieves celebrity of this sort in Philadelphia is not unlike
the seraph who attains to eminence in the heavenly choir.

It was conceded that Mr. Rittenhouse Smith (he was one of _the_ Smiths,
of course--not the others. His mother was a Biddle) was an important
factor in his wife's success; for, as became a well-brought-up
Philadelphian, he attended personally to the marketing. But had these
Smith dinners been commendable only because the food was good, they
would not have been at all remarkable. In Philadelphia, so far as the
eating is concerned, a bad dinner seems to be an impossibility.

In truth, Mrs. Smith's dinners were famous because they never were
marred by even the slightest suggestion of a _contretemps_; because they
glided along smoothly, and at precisely the proper rate of speed, from
oysters to coffee; and, because--and to accomplish this in Philadelphia
was to accomplish something very little short of a miracle--they never
were stupid.

Therefore it was that Mrs. Rittenhouse Smith stood among the elect, with
a comfortable sense of security in her election; and she smelled with a
satisfied nose the smell of the social incense burned before her
shrine; and she heard with well-pleased ears the social hosannas which
constantly were sung in her praise.




II.

Occupying a position at once so ornate and so enviable, the feelings of
Mrs. Rittenhouse Smith may be imagined upon finding herself confronted.
with the tragical probability that one of her most important
dinner-parties would be a failure.

In preparing for this dinner-party she had thought deeply in the still
watches of the night, and she had pondered upon it in the silence
of noonday. For Mrs. Smith, above all others, knew that only by such
soulful vigilance can a perfect dinner be secured. It was her desire
that it should be especially bright intellectually, for it was to be
given to Miss Winthrop, of Boston, and was to include Miss Winthrop's
niece, Miss Grace Winthrop, also of Boston. These ladies, as she knew,
belonged to clubs which, while modestly named after the days of the
week, were devoted wholly to the diffusion of the most exalted mental
culture. Moreover, they both were on terms of intimacy with Mr. Henry
James. On the other hand, it was her desire that the dinner should
be perfect materially, because among her guests was to be Miss Grace
Winthrop's uncle, Mr. Hutchinson Port. It was sorely against Mrs.
Smith's will that Mr. Hutchinson Port was included in her list, for
he had the reputation of being the most objectionable diner-out in
Philadelphia. His conversation at table invariably consisted solely
of disparaging remarks, delivered in an undertone to his immediate
neighbors, upon the character and quality of the food. However, in the
present case, as Miss Grace Winthrop's uncle, he was inevitable.

And, such was Mrs. Smith's genius, she believed that she had mastered
the situation. Her list--excepting, of course, Mr. Hutchinson Port, and
he could not reasonably be objected to by his own relatives--was all
that she could desire. The nine other guests, she was satisfied, were
such as could be exhibited creditably even to ladies belonging to Boston
clubs and personally acquainted with Mr. Henry James. As to the dinner
itself, Mr. Rittenhouse Smith, who never spoke inconsiderately in
matters of this grave nature, had agreed with her that--barring, of
course, some Providentially interposed calamity such as scorching the
ducks or getting too much salt in the terrapin--even Mr. Hutchinson Port
would be unable to find a flaw in it.

And now, at the last moment, at twelve o'clock of the day on which the
dinner was to take place, came a note from the man upon whom she had
most strongly counted to make the affair a success--the brightest man
on her list, and the one who was to take out Miss Grace Winthrop--saying
that he was laid up with a frightful cold and face-ache! He tried to
make a joke of it, poor fellow, by adding a sketch--he sketched quite
nicely--of his swelled cheek swathed in a handkerchief. But Mrs.
Rittenhouse Smith was in no humor for joking; she was furious!

When a woman misses fire in this way, it usually is possible to fill her
place with a convenient young sister, or even with an elderly aunt. But
when a man is wanted, and, especially, as in the case in point, a clever
man, the matter very readily may become desperate. Mrs. Rittenhouse
Smith certainly was dismayed, yet was she not utterly cast down. She had
faith in her own quick wits, which had rescued her in times past from
other social calamities, though never from one darker than this, of
having, at a single fatal blow, her best man cut off from one of her
most important dinner-parties, and the dinner-party itself reduced to
thirteen; an ominous and dismal number that surely would be discovered,
and that would cast over her feast a superstitious gloom.

In this trying emergency Mrs. Smith acted with characteristic decision
and wisdom. She perceived that to send invitations simultaneously to
all the possible men of her acquaintance might involve her in still
more awkward complications, while to send invitations successively might
result in a fatal loss of time. Obviously, the only practicable course
was a series of prompt, personal appeals from one to another, until
assurance was received that the vacant place certainly would be filled.
Therefore she despatched a note to Mr. Rittenhouse Smith, at his
down-town office, acquainting him with the impending catastrophe and
bidding him drop all other concerns until he had averted it by securing
a satisfactory man.




III.

Now, under ordinary circumstances, Mr. Rittenhouse Smith would have
obeyed his wife's orders cheerfully and promptly; but on this
particular day there was a flurry in the stock-market (Mr. Smith was a
stock-broker), and every minute that he was away from his office exposed
him to serious business danger. At what he considered to be the safest
moments, he made no less than five sallies after as many different men;
and three of these had engagements for the evening, and two of them were
out of town. What with the condition of the stock-market and the gloomy
outlook for the dinner-party, Mr. Smith, albeit he was ordinarily a
calm, sedate man, was almost distraught.

Three o'clock brought a prospect of relief, but after a day of such
active dealing his books could not be settled hurriedly. In point of
fact, when at last he was able to leave his Third Street office the
State House clock was striking five; and the dinner, in accordance
with Philadelphia custom, was to be at seven! He knew that his wife had
discharged into his hands the matter of procuring the needed man; and he
knew that this line of action on her part had been both right and wise;
but he groaned in spirit, as he thought how dreadful a responsibility
was his!

Mr. Smith was a methodical man, and in the calmness partly bred of his
naturally orderly habits, and partly bred of his despair, he seated
himself at his desk, in company with a comforting cigar, to think of any
possible men whom he might beat up at their homes as he went westward.
While he thus meditated--and while blackness settled down upon his soul,
for of none could he think available for his purpose--he looked idly
at the list of hotel arrivals in the morning paper that chanced to lie
beside him; and suddenly he arose with a great shout of joy, for in this
list he beheld the name, "Van R. Livingstone."

Here, indeed, was good-fortune at last! Van Rensselaer Livingstone was
in college with him, in his own class, at Harvard. They had been capital
friends while their college life lasted; and although Livingstone had
spent the last ten or twelve years in Europe, they had not wholly lost
track of each other. Clever, handsome, well-born, and well-bred, he was
everything that the present occasion required. He seemed to have been
sent from heaven direct. In twenty minutes Mr. Smith was asking for him
at his hotel.

"Mr. Livingstone? Mr. Livingstone is out."

"Did he leave any word as to when he would come in?"

"Yes, sir. He said that a gentleman might call, and to say that he
certainly would be back at six, and would not go out again to-night."

Mr. Smith looked at his watch--it was 5:30. Had there been any
uncertainty as to Livingstone's return, he would have waited. But it
was clear that he was coming back to dine at his hotel, and to spend the
evening there. A note, therefore, could be trusted to do the business,
and by writing, instead of waiting, Mr. Smith would save half an hour;
moreover, if he waited, he would not have time to make the mayonnaise.

Probably it is only in Philadelphia that it ever occurs nowadays to the
master of a feast to dress the salad; which, doubtless, is the reason
why a better salad is served at certain dinner-tables in Philadelphia
than at any other dinner-tables in the whole world.

The thought of the mayonnaise settled the matter. Mr. Smith hastily
wrote an account of the trying situation, and concluded his note with a
solemn demand upon "dear old Van" to fill the vacant place, "in the holy
name of the class of '68, and for love of your old classmate, R. Smith."




IV.

Presently the person thus adjured returned to his hotel, and with
a somewhat puzzled expression read the adjuration. "R. Smith," he
murmured, reflectively. "I think I do remember a Dicky Smith, from
Philadelphia, at Columbia. But he wasn't in my class, and my class
wasn't '68, but '76, and I don't remember ever saying a dozen words
to him. He's got a good deal of cheek, whoever he is--and he, and
his dinner, and his missing man may all go to the devil together! His
invitation is absurd!" And with this ultimatum Mr. Livingstone laid the
letter and envelope neatly together, preparatory to tearing them into
fragments.

But before this purpose was accomplished, another view of the situation
came into his mind. "I don't see why I shouldn't go," he thought. "I've
been muddling all day with this wretched wool man--which is a bore, even
if I have made a pretty good bargain with him for next season's clip;
and Ned hasn't come to time, which is another bore, for now I'll have to
eat my dinner alone. And this Dicky Smith writes like a gentleman, even
if he is cheeky; and he certainly seems to be in a peck of troubles
about his missing man, and his thirteen at table, and the rest of it.
Why, it's a regular adventure! And to think of having an adventure in
Philadelphia, of all places in the world! By Jove, I'll go!"




V.

"How very, very good of you, Mr. Livingstone, to come to our rescue!" It
was Mrs. Rittenhouse Smith who spoke, and she spoke in a guarded tone;
for Livingstone was among the last to arrive, and she had no desire to
publish among her guests the catastrophe that so nearly had overtaken
her.

"And I know," she continued: "that you will understand how sorry I am
that this first visit of Mr. Smith's old friend to our house should be
under such peculiar circumstances. But you will have your reward, for
you are to take out the very prettiest and the very brightest girl
here. Come and be rewarded!" And Mrs. Smith slipped her hand upon her
benefactor's arm, and piloted him across the room.

"Miss Winthrop, permit me to present Mr. Livingstone. Miss Winthrop is
half Boston and half European, Mr. Livingstone; and as you, after these
ten years abroad, must be wholly European, you can cheer each other as
fellow foreigners in the midst of Philadelphia barbarism"--with which
pleasant speech the hostess turned quickly to receive the last arrival
(a man, of course; only a man would dare to be even near to late at
one of Mrs. Rittenhouse Smith's dinners), and then, standing beside the
doorway, with Mr. Hutchinson Port, marshalled her company in to dinner.
It was a comfort to her to know that for once in his fault-finding
life Mr. Port would be compelled, since he was to be seated beside his
hostess, to eat his food without abusing it.

Just at this time two things struck Mrs. Smith as odd. One was that as
she presented her handsome guest to Miss Grace Winthrop she certainly
had felt him start, while his arm had trembled curiously beneath her
hand. The other was that as Mr. Rittenhouse Smith left the drawing-room,
passing close beside her with Miss Winthrop upon his arm, he made a face
at her. The first of these phenomena struck her as curious. The second
struck her as ominous. Had it been possible she would have investigated
the cause of Mr. Smith's facial demonstration. But it was not possible.
She only could breathe a silent prayer that all would go well--and the
while sniff anxiously to discover if perchance there were a smell of
scorching duck.

Mrs. Smith would have been still more mystified could she have been
cognizant at this juncture of her husband's and of Miss Grace Winthrop's
and of Mr. Livingstone's thoughts.

The first of these was thinking: "It isn't Van Rensselaer Livingstone,
any more than I am; though he certainly looks like him. And I'm sure
that he knows that he don't know me. And I think that we've managed to
get into a blank idiotic mess!"

And the second of these was thinking: "If he's been in Europe for the
past ten years, there's not one chance in fifty that I ever have laid
eyes on him. But I know I have!"

And the third of these was thinking: "There isn't man in the room who
looks enough like Dicky Smith to be his tenth cousin. But if ever the
goodness of heaven was shown in the affairs of men it is shown here to
me to-night!"




VI.

Even as the sun triumphs over the darkness of night and the gloom of the
tempest, so did Mrs. Rittenhouse Smith's dinner-party emerge radiantly
from the sombre perils which had beset it. It was a brilliant,
unqualified success.

Miss Winthrop was good enough to say, when the evening was ended--saying
it in that assured, unconscious way that gives to the utterances of
Boston people so peculiar a charm--"Really, Mrs. Smith, you have given
me not only a delightful dinner, but a delightful surprise; I would not
have believed, had I not seen it myself, that outside of Boston so many
clever people could be brought together!"

And Mr. Hutchinson Port, upsetting all his traditions, had kept up a
running fire of laudatory comment upon the dinner that had filled
Mrs. Smith's soul with joy. She had expected him, being cut off by her
presence from engaging in his accustomed grumbling, to maintain a moody
silence. She had not expected praise: and she valued his praise the more
because she knew that he spoke out of the fulness of his wisdom; and
because in a matter of such vital moment as eating she knew that she
could trust him to be sincere. His only approach to invidious comment
was in regard to the terrapin.

With the grave solemnity that marks the serving of this delicacy in
Philadelphia; in the midst of a holy calm befitting a sacred rite, the
silver vessels were carried around the board, and in hushed rapture (a
little puzzling to the Bostonians) the precious mixture was ladled out
upon the fourteen plates; and Mr. Hutchinson Port, as the result of
many years of soulful practice, was able to secure to himself at one
dexterous scoop more eggs than fell to the lot of any other two men.

It was while rapturously eating these eggs that he spake: "My dear Mrs.
Smith, will you forgive me if I venture to suggest, even to you--for
what I have seen this night has convinced me that you are one of the
very few people who know what a dinner ought to be--that the Madeira
used in dressing terrapin cannot possibly be _too_ old?"




VII.

Proceeding in accordance with the cue that Mrs. Smith had given her,
Miss Grace Winthrop engaged Mr. Livingstone in conversation upon
European topics; and was somewhat astonished to find, in view of his
past ten years in Europe, that they evidently had very little interest
for him. And all the while that she talked with him she was haunted by
the conviction that she had seen him somewhere; and all the while she
was aware of something in his manner, she could not tell what, that
seemed to imply that she ought to know who he was.

What Miss Grace Winthrop did feel entirely certain about, however, was
that this was one of the cleverest and one of the manliest men she had
ever come across. His well-shaped hands were big and brown, and his face
was brown, and the set of his head and the range of his broad shoulders
gave him an alert look and a certain air of command. There was that
about him which suggested a vigorous life in the open air. There was
nothing to suggest ten years in Europe, unless it were the charm of his
manner, and his neat way of saying bright things.

As for Livingstone, he was as one who at the same time is both entranced
and inspired. He knew that he never had been happier in his life; he
knew that he never had said so many clever things in so short a time.
Therefore it was that these young people always thereafter were most
harmoniously agreed that this was the very happiest dinner that they had
eaten in all their lives.

It came to an end much too soon for either of them. The ladies left the
room, and cigars were invoked to fill their place. This was the
moment that Livingstone had looked forward to as affording the first
practicable opportunity for taking his host apart and explaining that
his, Livingstone's, presence at that particular feast certainly must be
owing to some mistake. And this was the moment that Mr. Smith, also, had
looked forward to as available for clearing up the mystery--of which
his wife still was blissfully ignorant--as to who their stranger guest
really was. But the moment now being come, Livingstone weakly but
deliberately evaded it by engaging in an animated conversation with Mr.
Hutchinson Port in regard to the precise number of minutes and seconds
that a duck ought to remain before the fire; and Mr. Smith--having
partaken of his own excellent wines and meats until his whole being was
aglow with a benevolent friendliness--contented himself with thinking
that, no matter who his guest was, he certainly was a capital fellow;
and that to cross-question him as to his name, at least until the
evening was at an end, would be a gross outrage upon the laws of
hospitality.

Livingstone, however, had the grace to feel a good deal ashamed of
himself as they returned to the drawing-room. In all that had gone
before, he had been a victim of circumstances. He had an uncomfortable
conviction that his position now was not wholly unlike that of an
impostor. But as he pushed aside the portiere he beheld a pair of blue
eyes which, he flattered himself, betrayed an expression of pleased
expectancy--and his compunctions vanished.

There was only a little time left to them, for the evening was almost
at an end. Their talk came back to travel. Did she like travelling in
America? he asked. Yes, she liked it very much indeed, "only "--as a
sudden memory of a past experience flashed into her mind--"one does
sometimes meet such dreadfully horrid people!"

They were sitting, as they talked, in a narrow space between a table and
the wall, made narrower by the presence of an unused chair. Just as this
memory was aroused, some one tried to push by them, and Livingstone,
rising, lifted the obstructing chair away. To find a clear space in
which to put it down, he lifted it across the table; and for a moment he
stood erect, holding the chair out before him at arm's-length.

When he seated himself and turned again to speak to Grace, he was
startled to find that her face and shoulders, and even her arms--her
arms and shoulders were delectable--were crimson; and in her eyes he
found at last the look of recognition that he had hoped for earlier in
the evening, but that now he had ceased to expect. Recognition of this
emphatic sort he certainly had not expected at all.

"You--you see," she said, "I al--always have thought that you were
a robber and a murderer, and shocking things like that. And I didn't
really see you that day, except as you walked away, holding up that
horrid little man, kicking--just as you held up the chair. Can you ever,
ever forgive me for thinking such wicked things about you, and for being
so ungrateful as not to know you at the very first?"

And Livingstone, then and later, succeeded in convincing her that he
could.




VIII.

By an emphatic whisper Miss Grace Winthrop succeeded in impressing
upon her aunt the necessity--at no matter what sacrifice of the
social conventions--of being the last to go. In the matter of keeping
Livingstone, she experienced no difficulty at all. And when the
unnecessary eight had departed, she presented to her aunt and uncle her
deliverer, and--in a delightfully hesitating way--told to Mr. and Mrs.
Smith the story of her deliverance.

It was when this matter had been explained that Livingstone, who felt
that his position now was absolutely secure, brought up the delicate
question of his own identity.

"You can understand, I am sure, Mrs. Smith," he said, "how very grateful
I am to you for this evening; but, indeed, I don't think that I am the
person you meant to ask. And it has occurred to me, from something that
you said about my having been in Europe for a good while, that Mr. Smith
might have meant his invitation for Van Rensselaer Livingstone. He's my
cousin, you know; and he has spent the last ten years in Europe, and
is there yet, I fancy. But I am Van Ruyter Livingstone, and if I can
be said to have a home anywhere--except the old home in New York, of
course--it is on my sheep range in New Mexico.

"But you won't be cruel enough, Mrs. Smith, after letting me into
Paradise--even if I did get in by mistake--to turn me out again; will
you?"

And Mrs. Rittenhouse Smith, who was a clever woman, as well as a
remarkably clear-sighted one, replied that even if she wanted to turn
Mr. Van Ruyter Livingstone out of Paradise she believed that it was now
too late.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Border Ruffian, by Thomas A. Janvier

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BORDER RUFFIAN ***

***** This file should be named 23803.txt or 23803.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/8/0/23803/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
