Project Gutenberg's How Doth the Simple Spelling Bee, by Owen Wister

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: How Doth the Simple Spelling Bee

Author: Owen Wister

Release Date: December 19, 2007 [EBook #23923]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW DOTH THE SIMPLE SPELLING BEE ***




Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 How doth the Simple Spelling Bee

 BY

 OWEN WISTER

 AUTHOR OF "THE VIRGINIAN," "LADY BALTIMORE," ETC., ETC.



 WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY F. R. GRUGER

 New York
 THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
 LONDON: THE MACMILLAN CO., LTD. 1907
 _All rights reserved_




 COPYRIGHT, 1907,
 BY THE CURTIS PUBLISHING COMPANY.

 COPYRIGHT, 1907,
 BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.


 Set up and electrotyped. Published February, 1907.


 Norwood Press
 J. S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
 Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




 ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                         FACING PAGE

 "Hup, hup, hup!"                                        _Frontispiece_

 Flung the cakes at my man Edward.                                   10

 "Chickle is not liquid refreshment."                                24

 Professors Totts and Egghorn signing their respective works.        54

 Masticator B. Fellows.                                              58

 Professor Dudelsacker.                                              82

 Jesse had mounted upon the table with the still faintly bellowing
 Totts.                                                              96




[Illustration: "Hup, hup, hup!"]




HOW DOTH THE SIMPLE SPELLING-BEE


 _How doth the Simple Spelling-bee
  Impruv each shining ower._


Of course, I know not how it may be with you; but with me the mail
brings daily a multitude of communications that I have not sought, and
do not want; nor do I refer to bills alone; and so, when there came one
day a printed card saying:--

     Why Heifer?

I tossed it into my waste-paper basket, and remembered it no more. Some
days had passed, during which I had worked onward at the index of my
forthcoming volume, when my memory was jogged by the arrival of a new
absurdity:--

     Why not Heffer?

Like its predecessor, this card went at once into my basket. I had
nearly finished the B's in my index before the mail brought the
following:--

     It ought to be your custom now
     To simplify, and spell plough plow;
     Therefore write quickly on your cuff
     From this day forth to spell tough tuff.
     A third must follow these first tu,
     So you will always spell through thru,
     Nor in the midst of things leave off,
     But joyfully now make cough coff.
     By this time you must clearly noa
     Dough can't be doe, do, dow, but doa.

Well, if they purposed to reform our spelling, which has always been a
mere rag-bag of lawlessness, I hoped that they would do it right; but I
was too deeply immersed in completing the index of my forthcoming volume
to spend thought upon this question; nor did I court interruption. My
waste-paper basket, therefore, received another willing contribution.
And when presently the clue to these cards reached me in the following
telegraphic message, just at the outset of my morning's work:--

                  CHICKLE UNIVERSITY,
               Arkansopolis, October 6, 1906.
     English spelling rotten to the core. Help us.
               MASTICATOR B. FELLOWS.

I responded, not without satire:--

     Utterly prostrated by news. Helpless.
               THOMAS GREENBERRY.

And thinking that thus I was rid of him, I proceeded quietly with the
index of my forthcoming volume.

But Masticator B. Fellows, president and proprietor of Chickle
University, had not done with me so easily. Since his street-boyhood,
sixty years ago, this ardent personality ('tis thus the daily press
describes him) had made his own way, and had his own way; he was his
own capital, and there is no record of his ever having sunk a cent of
it. Of habits strictly pure, he had never seen a card or a drop of
liquor that he had touched, and he had never seen a dollar that he had
not touched. He had organized every industry along his path, from
paper-selling, boot-blacking, and so upward to his organized lobby at
Washington, through which he had caused a heavy tariff to be put upon
every commodity necessary to the American people. It was he who had
advised his brother organizers to keep Religion on the free list,
because, as he assured them, "if we tax it, they'll do without it,
while if we don't, they'll trust us for a while yet." And now, at the
age of seventy-five, with uncounted millions, and ten United States
Senators, and a fourth young wife all in his pocket, he proposed to hand
his name to Immortality by simplifying the spelling of English all over
the earth. Well, let him do it if he would only do it right.

But this he must do without my assistance; there were other professors,
many of them. I did not permit the circulars that now began to pour in
from Chickle University to distract me from my index. Striking as these
circulars were--and I will instance but one of them:--

     Judge, budge, ridge, acknowledge
               ARE SLOW
     Call in and try our Quick Spelling
     Juj. Buj. Rij. Aknolej--

they went into the basket one after another. To this method of
suggestion a second was soon added, and my coat-pockets, as well as my
mail, began to be filled with spelling literature. I would go out for a
walk, and during this exercise some paper or pamphlet would be slipped
into the coat, which I would discover upon my return. I remember pulling
out a little book of verse, beginning:--

     I am only a primer to teach you to spel,
     Which is something that nobody does very wel.
       A sweet little primer,
       A dear little primer,
     Sing hel, bel, tel, fel, sel, nel, quel, swel and smel.

I felt, let me confess it, annoyed the next day on returning from my
walk to find a new method of suggestion, in great charcoal letters, on
the white marble of my house-front:--

            Such nuisances as
     Solemn Comptroller and Wednesday
             are preventing
            THE KING OF SIAM
          from learning English

Nor was my annoyance decreased by the further announcement that defaced
my house-front upon the day following:--

     MILLIONS OF SCHOOL CHILDREN
     turn away weeping from
     PEOPLE MANUOEVRE DIAPHRAGM

Much should be conceded to the man who is fighting for his Immortality,
as was Masticator; but not too much. And displeasure, it may fairly be
said, began to rise in me, when I found, next morning, a page of the
primer introduced in the midst of my index:--

     Of the bad English spelling you'll surely beware,
     When you notice how stair, pear and heir rhyme with there;
       The sad English spelling,
       The mad English spelling,
     Sing hi! for the mare and the mayor and the prayer.

     Next consider, for instance, a word like enhearsed:
     Now what business has it to be rhyming with first?
       Sing hi! the old spelling,
       The horrible spelling,
     The spelling of nursed and of versed and of worst.

     But our simplified speling can cure every il,
     And permits nothing foolish like two l's in pil.
       Sing hi! the new speling,
       Our comforting speling,
     Sing pil, bil, fil, wil, til, sil, quil, spil.

Yes, Masticator was going too far--and how had he managed to tamper
with my index? I rang the bell, and questioned my man Edward sharply. He
knew nothing of it, nor did the housemaid, whom I also questioned
sharply. And I trusted I should be less harassed on the morrow.

[Illustration: Flung the cakes at my man Edward.]

But on the morrow, at breakfast, lifting with my fork the top buckwheat
cake in order to spread butter upon the second, I found a leaflet
between the two cakes, inscribed:--

       Phthisis
     How can you eat while a word like that is allowed?

I flung the cakes at my man Edward, and in five minutes I had dismissed
every servant in the house. Quite unable to work, I left the house
myself, and set out to take the air. No; Masticator was not doing it
right; he was taking too many sudden liberties, not only with the
language, but with myself. Becoming gradually aware that a number of
young persons were following me with loud and disconcerting expressions,
I stepped into a shop where I am unknown, and where they at once offered
to brush off my back. A double mirror showed me these words, chalked
plainly:--

     He wants a
         P
     in Consumtion

Being now without servants, I decided that I should be free from
persecution in the luxurious wilderness of a great hotel. Upon getting
into bed in my room in the twelfth story, a dreadful contact caused me
to leap to the floor, where my foot dashed down upon some similar
dreadfulness, and the shock threw me flat on my face and stomach, only
to feel myself instantly plastered with more of the same odious and
encasing substance. I believe that I shouted loudly in the dark for some
time before hotel employees rushed to my succor; the door was burst open
and the light turned on. It was fly-paper; and much time was consumed in
relieving my person of it. Every piece bore its motto, such as:--

     If you'll but drop the e in pi
     Better on stomach pi will li.

and also:--

     The b in lam
     's not worth a dam--

and others.

As early as possible the next morning I sent a message of capitulation
to Masticator B. Fellows.

     What can I do for you?

was the message; and the reply came back:--

     Delighted you are with us.
     Private car train twenty-one to-day.

The secretary of Masticator was at the steps of the car and presented me
at once to a most lovely girl. At the news she was to serve on the
Simplified Spelling Committee with me, my heart bounded, every doubt
left me, and I exclaimed:--

"I will spell just as you say."

"Then," she most sweetly returned, "never let us consent to any
simplification of kiss." And I counted such answer a very happy omen.

She had come from a woman's college, and her important work on the
authorship of Shakespeare's plays had demonstrated, beyond refutation,
that the plays had been written by Queen Elizabeth, in collaboration
with Sir Walter Raleigh and Lady Jane Grey.

"Shall we be in Harrisburg soon, Mr. Kibosh?" she asked the secretary.

"It will be ten minutes after seven, Miss Appleby."

"And that is a whole three hours!" she cried, with no pleasure in her
voice.

"Here is some good chickle," said Kibosh. And when she would take none,
"Then I will," he said. "The private stock of Masticator B. Fellows. The
public gets nothing like this."

He took a small object from the box that he held and put it in his
mouth; and soon, while the train sped on, his large long jaws were
oscillating with a smooth motion, and content, like a lukewarm glaze,
overspread his immense bald features.

Thus it came to me what chickle was. "Chewing-gum!" I exclaimed!

Kibosh opened gentle eyes upon me. "We do not use that word at
Arkansopolis." He smiled, removed the plastic morsel from his mouth, and
placed it on the window-sill, that he might speak to me without
impediment.

"We always say chickle at Arkansopolis. We like that better. Masticator
B. Fellows likes that better. When his genius bought up the small
plants----"

"Is there a chewing-gum trust, too?" asked Miss Appleby.

"Chickle, Miss Appleby, chickle, if you please. When Masticator's genius
organized this noble industry, thereby placing a superior, pure, cheap,
and uniform article within the reach of eighty million jaws----"

"But the whole nation does not chew gum!" the lovely girl again, with
some spirit, interrupted.

"Chickle, Miss Appleby, if you please. Fifty per cent of our population
chickles, and that makes eighty million jaws. When the time came
to--ahem--float the proposition, after the bonds, there was an issue of
one billion preferred, and two billions of common stock. It did not seem
fitting, Miss Appleby, it did not seem dignified, that Wall Street
should bandy back and forth such an expression as--ahem--'chewing-gum
common.' To the eye, such an expression printed in the financial
columns would seem--would--in short, hence chickle, Miss Appleby, noun
and verb. Never anything else at Arkansopolis. Will you not chickle now?
No? Ah, well. But at least you are with us in the Higher Spelling." His
hand sought the window-sill, and then his mouth; and his jaws resumed
their placid oscillation.

Miss Appleby had gone out upon the broad rear platform of our car; and
there, as she sat alone, I joined her, saying:--

"Shall we talk of the Higher Spelling?"

But she seemed inclined for not much talk upon any subject; and the
nearer Harrisburg drew, the more difficult I found it to engage her
attention.

"There is nothing to see," I assured her when, as our train entered the
station, she left me with something almost like eagerness.

I did not get out during our somewhat long stop, being occupied in my
private stateroom with unpacking and disposing my clothes for the
journey. As we started again, I emerged to find Miss Appleby in bright
conversation with a newcomer.

"Professor Jesse Willows," said Kibosh, "of Paw-paw University, Mountain
Dew City." And as the extraordinarily handsome young man rose, quite
six-feet-two, to greet me, Kibosh continued: "The professor's
Dictionary of Deadly Weapons, as well as his great work on Bowie-Knives
in the Stone Age, makes him a welcome member of our committee."

I felt, I know not why, less glad to see this Professor Willows than
Miss Appleby seemed. His long black coat and black tie were fairly
proper for a man of erudition; but his hat was soft and broad of brim,
and his trousers were of brown corduroy, drawn over high boots.

"And what, sir," I asked him, "may your views be on the Higher
Spelling?"

"Bless yore heart, suh," he gayly responded, "what's spellin', anyway?
Just alphabet lettuhs fixed like some man chose to fix 'em befo' you
an' me were bawn. An' so I say such a man's had his notions more'n long
enough, and it's high time we-all took a whirl at the dictionary."

"I admit, sir," I responded, "that our spelling is but a rag-bag of
lawlessness. But it has been ratified by a noble army of great writers.
They and the daily press have spread it over the world. Therefore we
must go slowly. We must do it right. Derivation----"

"Bless yore heart, suh," the impetuous youth interrupted me, "what's
derivation? Just conquest follo'd by mispronunciation. Julius Caesuh he
lambastes Gaul; and he talks Latin to 'em; he says '_honor_,' an' he
goes home; an' the Gauls retain Caesuh's _i_dea, as all puffeck gennlemen
should, but the nearest they kin git to the Latin is '_honneur_.' An'
then, whoop they come over to England, an' they lambaste the
Anglo-Saxons, an' talk to 'em about '_honneur_.' An' the Anglo-Saxons,
bein' also puffeck gennlemen, they ketches on to the _i_dea, but
be-Jeroosalemmed if they kin say it straight, either; an' so it gits to
be '_honour_.' An' then comes our glorious Revolution; an' we tell the
English, 'Good-by to yo', King Geawge. Good-by to yore iniquitous
parliament. Good-by to yore whole dog-goned outfit of tyrants and
helots. We-all don' keer how you-all spell anything whatsoever, an' the
language of Washington, an' Jeffuhson, an' Patrick Henry, an' all the
glorious fathuhs of libuhty, is goin' to spell it _honor_ without a u.'
An' there you are, back to yore original Latin."

"A noble sentiment, Professor," said Kibosh. "A truly noble sentiment.
Will you not join me in a chickle?"

The professor bounded to his full, long height, with all the agility of
the _felis catus_ of his own wild, native mountains.

"I'm with you, suh!" he exclaimed. "Be-Jeroosalemmed if I wasn't pow'ful
thirsty."

"Chickle is not liquid refreshment," said Kibosh, mildly; and he held
out the box to his tall guest.

[Illustration: "Chickle is not liquid refreshment."]

The professor glared at it for a moment. "You and yore chickle," he then
began, with alarming deliberation, "can go right----"

A quick, girlish cough sounded behind him.

"----to my private cabin in this cyah," the professor continued, with no
change in countenance or voice, "where I will join you, and where we
will find liquid refreshment."

Kibosh did not dare refuse him, and I came without being asked.

"It's a glorious exercise, suh," said the professor to me, in the
private cabin.

"In moderation, yes," I answered.

"May I inquiuh to what you-all are referrin'?" he asked haughtily.

"Why, to this," I answered, tapping my glass.

The professor grew more stiff. "I referred to simplifyin' the spellin'
of our language," he said.

"A glorious exercise?" I repeated vaguely.

"Fo' the imagination, suh. Turn yore eye whah you will, you'll see words
that need refawmin', words that need our help, words that cry an' clamuh
to be relieved of the stigma of their congested and nonsensical
appearance; nouns, adjectives, verbs, all stuck in the hopeless mud of
antiquity, an' holdin' out their hands for we-all to drag 'em out an'
bring 'em up to date." He now gave me a list. "Look, suh, at those
pore, sufferin', aged cripples, awaitin' the renewal of their youth."

"You have a magnificent collection," I remarked to him, after a glance
at the list.

"Pshaw!" he returned. "I could double that in an hour. I just jotted
that down as I came up the valley from Paw-paw in the Chattanooga
Limited. Why, just lookin' out of the cyah windo' would give me notions.
I saw a thistle. Down she went on the list, an' down went whistle next
her, suggested by our locomotive. Thistle. Whistle. Look at those
disgraces. Look at the dead wood in 'em. Are not they just congested
all up with pitfalls for the young? Once we get to work at Arkansopolis,
and they'll be thissl and wissl, or my name is not Jesse Willows."

He paused, and I looked at his list again. The railway journey had given
him a number of suggestions; I saw, in hasty writing:--

     Freight. That's dopy. Should be frate.
     Bridge. Another has-been. Brij.

My perusal was interrupted by his seizing the list away from me. "The
po'tuh has turned the gas higher," he said. "That gives me another whole
big line of 'em." And he wrote:--

     Light should be lite. So also fight, and tight and others on the
     same plan.

"Po'tuh!" he called out, "what is yore name?"

"Michael, Colonel," the man answered.

"Another!" exclaimed the professor. And he wrote:--

     Michael, Mycle, because cycle.
     Bicicle because icicle.

I kept various doubts to myself, and resolved that such must continue my
policy if I were ever to have peace; but, no matter how I might agree to
spell bicycle, I was secretly determined never to address my younger
brother as Mycle. Imagine thus mutilating a name that had been in our
family for generations!

Professor Willows showed his list to Miss Appleby; I saw him, and I saw
her evidently add some words to it. But, to my surprise, this seemed to
cause them mirth. They did not seek my company, and conversed together
without ceasing, in a corner of our car, while Kibosh slumbered; and I
wondered if the Higher Spelling was the subject that brought their heads
so close to each other. That girl was more and more a disappointment to
me; and I retired in no very good humor.

Mycle was not the only word to which, as I dressed myself next morning,
I found my opinion to be entirely adverse; frate seemed to me
objectionable, nor did I feel any leanings toward brij and lite. And the
surprising readiness with which Professor Willows accepted my criticism
failed to make upon me the happy impression which the adoption of one's
views by another is apt to cause.

"You don't like frate, suh?" he said, whipping out his pencil, and
quickly writing on his list. "Bless yore heart, then we'll just make it
frait. How does that hit yore fancy?"

I thanked him for his amiability, but my fancy was as little hit by
frait as it had been by frate; and it was still less hit when he came to
me with his customary enthusiasm some twenty-five minutes after
breakfast, to show me forty-three more words that he had simplified
since rising from table. Still keeping all thoughts to myself, I read:--

     Earth and dearth to irth and dirth, like mirth. Also worth to
     wirth. Pheasants whirr. Cats should pirr.

I passed the list back with I know not what commendations of his
rapidity. He retired with it to the rear platform, where sat Miss
Appleby; and almost immediately I heard egregious peals of laughter
coming from them both. This, for some reason, kindled in me such
annoyance that I put my head out of the door, and cried loudly to them:
"Do you intend to make flirt flurt, or hurt hirt? And how about squirt?"
And I shut the door sharp upon my words before they could make answer
to me. But still, even through the closed door and thick plate-glass
windows, their shameless merriment reached me, and seemed, if anything,
louder than ever.

The outlook for the Higher Spelling was scarce a bright one, I thought,
if the rest of my colleagues, whom I had yet to meet, should approach
their solemn responsibilities in anything of the spirit shown by
Professor Willows and Miss Appleby. His facile adoption of a new
spelling, and equally facile relinquishment of it, gave but poor
evidence of any deep thought on this matter; and to see him through the
plate-glass as he talked to her on the rear platform, no one would
easily be persuaded that spelling was the subject of their colloquy; and
lastly, when he fetched a large shawl and hung it across the window
outside, so that they were wholly screened from view, I found it no
light effort to believe that it was to shield her from the cold blast,
as he informed me.

I sought (without great eagerness) the companionship of Kibosh. "Do you
not fear," I asked him, "that we may not find ourselves able to reach an
agreement as to the system by which this respelling should proceed?"

"What would hinder it?" he inquired.

"Of course, our present spelling is but a rag-bag of lawlessness," I
replied, for I was growing fond of my description of it. "But great
authors and newspapers have spread it round the globe. The sun never
sets on English spelling. We must join the great English universities
with us. We must join Canada, India, Australia. We must do it right."

"England will have to follow us!" he declared.

"If you'll watch England," I said, "I think you'll find she has her own
ideas about that."

"Then our publishers and writers will ignore England," he replied.

"If you'll watch our publishers and writers," I again said, "you'll see
they'll be slow to let go their English market by making books that
would be illegible throughout the British Empire."

"What are authors, anyhow?" he demanded. "It is our business men who are
our glory."

"If you'll watch our business men," I repeated, not without acerbity,
"you'll find they have London correspondents, and they'll not care to
run two sorts of spelling with their stenographers."

Kibosh thought awhile, and then, with his gentle smile, he again removed
his chickle and placed it on the window-sill.

"But, nevertheless, Masticator will have gained his point," he said.

"Scarcely so, if a system fails us, and we do nothing," I suggested.

He seemed not to hear me. "And all of the committee, every member, will
have gained the point as well."

"You'll pardon me, but what is the point?" I now asked him.

"And the English language," he continued more and more gently, "it will
have gained the point, too."

"I must confess," I said, "to utter ignorance of your meaning."

Kibosh smiled for a long while, looking at me very kindly.

"You will readily appreciate," he at length began, "that the greatest
need of mankind is Publicity. It is as essential to the German Emperor
as it is to the female society leader, or the trick mule. We are no
exceptions, we leaders of thought, and teachers of youth, and captains
of industry; we too must have Publicity or--ahem--pass under. And as the
demand for Publicity increases, the supply of it naturally diminishes.
You understand that? Well, now, any association with Masticator B.
Fellows means Publicity at once for the lucky individual. But there are
times when the vast sweep of economic currents ties up all the available
Publicity, and at those times great enterprises languish from its
scarcity. It may befall that even such giant operators as Masticator B.
Fellows find themselves embarrassed. It is then only the man of genius
whose magic hand can smite the rock in some novel way, and cause
Publicity again to gush forth fresh and sparkling--it is then only he
who is heard from. There has been such a time of late. Publicity was
tied up, and Masticator needed some for his--for certain plans he has to
benefit the human race. Now, what does Masticator do? He surveys the
general situation, he thinks it over, and presently he says 'Spelling
Reform.' He smites the rock, and there you have it. You understand me?
Well, supposing you gentlemen do fail to--ahem--make any considerable
impression upon the English language, you will have made a considerable
impression on the public; the rock will have gushed, Masticator's point
will be gained. He will have secured the Publicity he needs for his--his
benevolent enterprises; each of you gentlemen will have secured
Publicity for your names and works; and we mustn't forget the English
language. It will have got Publicity, too; it needs it, like all the
rest of us. I'm sure you understand me."

Thus Kibosh finished, and it entered my mind to descend at our next
stop, and take the first train back to my own place; but this thought I
quickly dismissed, remembering Masticator's methods of reaching those
whom he wanted. And (although I know this is unworthy) I was become
very curious to see what we should all do, once we were gathered
together. Were all the rest of my colleagues coming for Publicity? I
glanced at the window, where the shawl still screened Professor Willows
and Miss Appleby, and it seemed to me that they had come rather for
Privacy.

"Who are the rest of my colleagues?" I now asked Kibosh.

"Well, now, I'm afraid you've got me," he responded. "There's--let me
see--Professor Flawless Nathaniel Maverick, of Fishball University,
Massachusetts. He is with us. A profound scholar, sir."

"What is his line?" I asked.

"Well, now, that's another tough one. Let us see. Did he write The Fuel
of the Future?"

I shook my head, being ignorant.

"Or was it The Mustard Plaster in Pharaoh's Time?" Kibosh dreamily
pursued.

"What is the fuel of the future?" I asked.

"Pecan nuts. I am certain of that," answered Kibosh. "But whether he's
that one, or whether it's Lysander Totts----"

"Who is Lysander Totts?" I inquired.

"Another profound scholar, sir. Of Numa Pompilius University, New York.
But we've got them from all around--from Seminole, Florida, Oglethorpe,
Georgia, Lafitte, Louisiana, Sandys, Virginia, Graftsburg,
Pennsylvania--but you'll meet them to-morrow at Chickle University. All
profound scholars, sir. It was Totts, come to think of it."

"Think of what?" I asked.

"Pecan nuts," said Kibosh.

I should have been glad to learn the names of all my colleagues, and
what they had written, that I might be the better prepared to meet them;
but Kibosh could be sure only of Totts and his book; and Professor
Willows and Miss Appleby had not heard even of Totts, when I asked them
at lunch to enlighten me.

"What mattuh, suh?" cried Willows, cheerily. "They'll tell you quick
enough themselves why they're so famous."

At this remark Miss Appleby broke into much gayety.

"Got many words this mawnin', Professuh?" asked Willows of me; and I
retorted, with what should have been telling reproof, that I was not of
those who can improvise thorough work.

It was extraordinary how much this young man's remarks pleased Miss
Appleby. He was but a poor companion for the lovely girl; and when,
after lunch, he retired to slumber in his cabin (as he called it), I
took my seat beside her on the rear platform. She was most amiable, but
bade me first take down the shawl behind us. The cold blasts, she said,
had ceased. We talked for some time, and it was easy to see that under
proper guidance her mind would open to all befitting things. Not until
Professor Willows came out of his cabin and joined us, did I feel her
grow distant again. Without preliminary, he asked: "What does a man who
sits down on a sharp needle most resemble?" And, without waiting, he
answered, "A profane upstart."

Into such levity I could not possibly enter; I resolved to wait the
morrow, and the succeeding days of our convention at Chickle University,
for opportunities to exert upon this impressionable young girl my
wholesome influence.

We reached our destination during the forenoon of the next day, and I
was amazed when I beheld spreading out before me the vast institution
where we were to hold our sittings. Chickle University covered, with its
grounds and buildings, four square miles. Swift electric cars ran
everywhere by routes so well planned that less than four minutes were
consumed between the two most distant points. The several thousand
buildings were of a uniform pattern, but lettered on the outside, so as
easily to be distinguished: House of Latin, House of Chiropody, House of
Marriage and Divorce, and so forth. Everything was taught here, and had
its separate house; and the courses of instruction were named on a plan
as uniform as the buildings: Get French Quick, Get Religion Quick, Get
Football Quick, and so forth. The University was open to both sexes. I
saw great crowds of young men and women trying to push their way into
the House of Marriage and Divorce; and Kibosh informed me that this
course was the second in popularity, and in such active demand that a
corps of ninety-six instructors was kept lecturing continuously day and
night. The football course had overflowed its own building so copiously
that it was also filling the houses of Latin, Greek, Music, History, and
Literature.

"And what do those students do?" I inquired.

"There have been none," he answered. "We have accommodations for two
million students; but if this spelling reform fails to prove
the--ahem--you'll remember what we said about rock-smiting, Mr.
Greenberry--fails to prove the--er--attraction that Masticator
anticipates, any idle houses in this University plant can be readily
turned into the Chickle plant, which adjoins it."

I asked him, would they not meet great difficulty in finding professors
for two million students?

"Professors are our lightest expense," he replied. "We can always pick
them up for next to nothing."

So saying, Kibosh led us to the library; and here were some gentlemen
assembled whose appearance clearly proclaimed them to be profound
scholars, and who were to be of our spelling committee. While Kibosh
made us known to each other, and we exchanged our formal greetings, the
eye of each scholar sought the eye of every other scholar with that
thirsty look an author wears, when the hope for compliments upon his
writings flutters in his breast. But we were true professors, all of us,
and not one had read a word that any of the others had ever written.

Deceit should always be discouraged, nay, firmly punished, in the young;
for by reason of their immaturity they have but little judgment when to
practise it; but to the old it is frequently of the greatest service.
Intending, therefore, to be as agreeable as possible, I approached
Professor Lysander Totts with a feigned knowledge of his work. Shaking
him cordially by the hand, I said, "Ah, yes; Pecan Nuts!"

"What?" he replied, staring.

"Why, Pecan Nuts!" I repeated. "Let me congratulate----"

"My name is Totts," he interrupted.

"To be sure!" I exclaimed. "Who has not read The Fuel of the Future?"

"I haven't," said Totts.

I corrected myself hastily. "What an absurd slip of the tongue!" I
gayly ejaculated. "I meant Mustard Plasters in Pharaoh's Time."

"I haven't read that, either," said Totts.

I should now have been at some loss, but a plaintive voice behind me
said, "Hup, hup, hup, hup."

I turned, and saw a smiling little old man, with delicate silver locks
that hung well-nigh to his collar.

"Hup, hup," said he again, very amiably.

I turned back to Totts in bewilderment.

"He stutters," Totts explained.

The voice behind me now said with a sudden sort of explosion, "I wrote
it."

I turned again, and, catching both his hands as a drowning man is said
to catch a straw, I wrung them earnestly and long. "A great work!" I
called out to him, as if he were deaf. "A very great work!" And not well
knowing what I did, I further shouted to Miss Appleby, who was passing
us: "He wrote it! Pecan Nuts!"

"Hup, hup," said the little man. "Mustard Plasters."

Little as I owe Miss Appleby, I must always hold her memory in gratitude
for her coming forward at this extreme moment.

"Of course it is Mustard Plasters!" she said, with delightful sweetness;
"and you must write your name in my copy, dear Professor Egghorn."

He extended an eager hand for the volume.

"It is in my trunk," she continued promptly; "and your signature will
make a unique gem of what is already a precious treasure. And you, dear
Professor Totts, when I am unpacked, you will surely not refuse me the
same honor? Professor Totts, you know," she added to me, "has proved
that Cleopatra was a man."

"Then who wrote Pecan Nuts?" I whispered to her hastily.

"He hasn't come yet," she hastily whispered back.

"I am sure," said Kibosh, leading a tall new arrival among us, "that
Professor Camillo Cottsill needs no introduction here. We all welcome
the man who has said the last word on--the last word on--on--well, now,
really, it escapes me, Professor," he finished, turning his wide, gentle
smile upon the newcomer, who glared at him angrily, and announced with
unnecessary loudness:--

"Nostalgia in the Lobster."

"Thank you, Professor," said Kibosh; "thank you kindly. I think lunch is
now awaiting us in the House of Bread."

After brief preparation in the rooms assigned to us, we lunched with the
students; and, as I passed down the hall, I saw Totts and Egghorn
signing their respective volumes for Miss Appleby.

[Illustration: Professors Totts and Egghorn signing their respective
works.]

"So quickly unpacked?" I asked her.

"Dear, no!" she returned. "Professor Willows easily bought them for me
at the University Book Shop."

"I have but one complaint against your exquisite deceit," I said to her.
"Why did you leave me out?"

"Ah!" she said, "who could deceive you?"

I strove, but unsuccessfully, to occupy a seat beside her at table; it
was Jesse Willows who got it, the other being taken by Egghorn, while
Totts placed himself opposite. Napoleon preferred men with great noses,
but that of Totts would have pleased him too well, I think; and Totts
blew it continually. It was my hope that supper, or dinner, or whatever
they called the next meal, would not be served with the distressing
rapidity of this one; one had barely the time to swallow, and the food
went whole down one's throat; but the next meal, and all meals, were the
same, and, had our convention lasted longer than it did, I should have
fallen victim to a grave dyspepsia. This, I learned, was another
instance of the vast genius of Masticator B. Fellows: while educating
his students, he created in them the need for the product of his own
monopoly. He gave them no time to chew at their meals, and chickle was
served free in all the houses. For chewing, at some time or other, is
necessary to digestion, and among the thousands at Chickle University I
saw not one anywhere, boy or girl, whose mouth was not going like a slow
rabbit's; and to judge from the universal oscillatory motion of the jaws
of the American people in trains and all public places, I see they are
learning that great economic principle of Masticator's, which is
announced everywhere in the street cars:--

     TIME IS MONEY

     He who chickles
     Saves his nickles--

nickles being the simple spelling of nickels.

This great man allowed us at length to see him next morning, when we
assembled to begin our work. We sat round an imposing table some twenty
strong--for all the profound scholars were now arrived--and in front of
each scholar, on the ample green baize table-cover, was a great
dictionary, with a great glass inkstand and writing materials. Tall
blackboards stood behind us, waiting to receive the words we should
reform; but the best of it was to find myself sitting next Miss Appleby,
with Willows quite an agreeable distance away. Kibosh had arranged all
our seats, and it is the best thing I know of him.

[Illustration: Masticator B. Fellows.]

When Masticator B. Fellows entered to open our convention, it was
plain at once whence Kibosh had acquired his manner and his
appearance--so far as he could acquire this latter: the secretary might
have been an early, bad photograph of the magnate. To see Masticator, he
was the creature of brotherly love, the preacher of benign gospels, the
teacher of female academies; no smell of Senate or Syndicate hung about
him. Bald, with a silken skull-cap, bland, with his ten pointed fingers
meeting as if to bless, with a sunrise smile, and a black coat as long
and unlovely as conscious virtue, he stood before us in benevolent
silence, and we rose as one scholar. But at once he motioned us to sit
down.

"I think there's a dollar-sign in his jaw," whispered Miss Appleby to
me.

Already Masticator was addressing us, slowly and softly.

"Dear friends," he said, "be welcome. I am worth two hundred and
forty-five millions. Thank God that you are not. Thank God that you are
poor. Thank God for your scanty meals and clothing, and your ceaseless
failure to make both ends meet. Pray God you may die poor. How I envy
you all your blessed privilege of struggle! Thank God, and now to
business.

"Everything is getting better. Man is getting better. Woman is getting
better. Life, Liberty, Happiness--all getting better. And chickle.
Better and better. Then why not English Spelling? Dear friends, I expect
results from you. Let us sing the Ode."

A gasoline organ began to play at the end of the apartment, and we
profound scholars stood up and sang together:--

     My spelling 'tis of thee,
     Sweet land of spelling-bee,
       Of thee I sing.
     Land of the pilgrims' pride,
     Land where my fathers dide,
     For spelling simplifide
       Let freedom ring

"A beautiful pome," said Lysander Totts, on my other side.

"Where were you educated?" I asked him.

"Surracuse, Noo Yorruk," he responded; and he blew his large nose.

"And now, dear friends," Masticator was saying, "I leave you. Remember
the poor foreigners, remember the little children. It is for them that
the English language exists; and for them we must, therefore, smooth our
spelling's cruel path. I expect results, dear friends." So saying, he
was gone.

"Yes, there is a dollar-sign in his jaw," repeated Miss Appleby.

"Suggestions are now in order," said Kibosh, taking the chairman's seat.

Three profound scholars stood up. "The only way----" they began, with
one voice.

"Professor Flawless Nathan Maverick has the floor," said Kibosh. "I
presume the Professor will think no change in pecan nuts necessary." And
the chairman smiled sociably at the scholar.

"The only way," said Maverick, "is to abolish all words that foreigners
cannot spell."

"You mean cut 'em out of the language, suh?" inquired Jesse Willows.

"I do."

"Phew!" whistled Willows.

"Order, gentlemen," smiled the chairman. "Professor Camillo Cottsill has
the floor."

"The only way," said this scholar, "is to abolish all words that
children cannot spell."

"Phew!" repeated Willows.

"Order, gentlemen, please," said the chairman, gently tapping an
inkstand with a pencil. But he was not heeded.

"Who are you whistling at?" demanded Camillo Cottsill.

"Can't yore children spell?" retorted Willows.

"Can yours?" shouted Cottsill.

At this Jesse Willows blushed a deep red, and so did Miss Appleby.

"He is not married, Professor," said Kibosh, tapping the inkstand
soothingly.

"My little daughter Zola B. can spell everything," said Maverick.

"How about the others?" demanded Cottsill.

"My salary only affords me one," stated Maverick, with resignation.

"Then how can you judge?" said Cottsill. "Receive, and believe, and
bereave should be cut out at once."

"They should not," said Maverick.

"Oh, cut everything out," sighed Willows.

"Hup, hup, hup, hup," began Professor Egghorn.

"The author of Mustard Plasters has the floor," said Kibosh, with
civility.

"The only way," continued Egghorn, "is to hup, hup, hup."

"Start the organ, please," said Kibosh to an assistant; and while the
gasoline music played, "My spelling 'tis of thee," Kibosh walked round
the table and gave every one an individual box of chickle. We chewed in
silence, waiting for the voice of Professor Egghorn to go again.

"Hup, hup," said he, at length; "phonetic."

"I object!" Cottsill and Maverick called out loudly together.

"I move it's phonetic," said Totts.

"Second the hup, hup," said Egghorn.

"Those in favor----" Kibosh began.

"That's not properly seconded," interrupted Cottsill.

"Motion!" finished Egghorn, with a shriek. And we carried phonetic by
eighteen to two.

"Since Professor Egghorn has shown us the only way," said Kibosh, "will
he not kindly lead off with his suggestions for a reform list?"

But once again the professor's utterance was transfixed.

"Give the pore gennleman a piece of chalk," said Willows, "and send him
to the blackboa'd."

With the blackboard we now made visible progress, which I decided it was
best for the present not to interrupt. Let as many suggestions as
possible be made; then we could weed them out. Consent was undivided
upon a number of words, and some old spelling passed away in peace. The
letter u disappeared from honor and favor, although, with much surprise,
I overheard Miss Appleby saying to herself that she intended to retain
it in all her private correspondence. The k was kicked out of Frederic.

("There's nothing new about that, either," said Miss Appleby, in a
whisper.)

"But I shall not permit any such liberty to be taken with my own name,"
said Professor Maverick, firmly; and this was conceded to him, Professor
Totts objecting.

"We shall never reach consistency at this rate," grumbled Lysander
Totts.

"Who came here to be consistent?" retorted Maverick.

"We came here for spelling reform," added Camillo Cottsill.

("Good gracious," said Miss Appleby, under her breath.)

Presently it was the letter h that occupied us; and old honour now
became onor (some were for oner, but gave in), followed by erb, our, and
umor.

"What's that?" demanded Totts, pointing to our.

"Time of day," answered Maverick. "Sixty minutes make one our."

"Then nobody can tell it from our cat, our cow," said Professor Totts.

"We can't help that," said Maverick.

"We're only here for simplification," Cottsill said again.

("Good gracious," repeated Miss Appleby.)

"Make it ower," suggested Cottsill; and this was done.

"Make it minits, too," said Totts; and this was done.

"Make it sekonds," said Maverick; and this was done.

Cottsill turned to Egghorn at the blackboard. "Add eir, umble, otel, and
istorical," said he.

"No, he sha'n't!" cried Totts, fiercely.

"Are we phonetic or not?" demanded Cottsill, turning on him.

("You're a pack of geese," said Miss Appleby.)

"I never said umble in my life!" shouted Totts.

"I reckon he don't use the aixpression," said Willows.

"And if istorical is adopted, I'll resign now," Totts continued.

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," protested Kibosh.

"I move those last h's be laid on the table," said Maverick; and this
was done.

"Past participles," Egghorn now wrote on the blackboard. "Termination
_ed_ to be changed to _t_; for instance, blest, exprest, dro----"

"What are you going to do with rest?" interrupted Totts.

"And test?" said some one down the table.

"And nest?" another called out.

"Can't you let him finish?" said Cottsill. And Egghorn continued,
"Dropt, stopt, spilt, kilt, and so forth."

("Kilt!" whispered Miss Appleby. "Oh, dear!")

"Rattlet instead of rattled will look funny," observed some one.

"So will mart and wart," remarked Willows, "instead of marred and
warred."

"If you have rattlet and mart and wart," yelled Totts, "I'll resign
right now, right now, right now!"

"Who thought of having them, having them, having them?" thundered
Cottsill.

"Gentlemen! Oh, Gentlemen!" wailed Kibosh.

"But consistency----" objected Maverick.

"You cut out consistency yourself," Cottsill reminded him. We despatched
the past participles, and came also without much disturbance through
catalog, demagog, and so forth (vogue and rogue made some trouble, and
our fundamental principle of inconsistency had once more to be
asserted), but when their blood was roused and the fire of
simplification grew hot in them, and they adopted the following with
cheers and noises of feet----

     Receev, deceev, conceev, beleev,
     weev, leev, greev, seez, pleez, teez--

I felt that we had really got near the weeding-out point, especially
when Jesse Willows rose and added fleez. "Plural of dogbiters," he
explained, and sat down quietly. At this Miss Appleby gave one brief,
happy laugh, but at once resumed a singular tapping of her foot which I
had begun to observe. We now thoroughly phoneticked many words: blud,
for instance, and wunss (which is so much phoneticker than once!) and
the days of the week: Munday, for instance, and Toozday. (I say Tewsday,
myself, but I did not mention it to these profound American scholars.)

"My little daughter Zola B.," said Professor Maverick, "can always spell
Wednesday."

"My nine children never can," said Totts.

"I withdraw the objection," said Maverick; and so it was Wensday.

Skwirl, for squirrel, was next agreed upon, and lepard, and eegl. And as
the blood of the scholars grew ever hotter and hotter, Constitooshun,
Deklarayshun, and United Staits were adopted.

"But my Zola B.----" began Maverick.

"What are you-all goin' to call yore next?" asked Willows.

Maverick sighed. "My salary only affords----"

"Beg yore pardon, suh, I forgot," said Willows, with sympathy.

It was here that I rose. "Gentlemen," I said, "let us do it right. Of
course, English spelling is but a rag-bag of lawlessness."

"He has said that before," muttered Jesse Willows.

"But," I continued, "the sun never sets on English spelling."

"I object to these constant, trivial interruptions," stated Cottsill.

"Yes, let us onward," urged the chairman.

"Play ball!" added Totts.

"Chew gum!" finished Cottsill.

"I'm through," Egghorn said, sitting down.

It was beyond my power to guide them. I also sat down. I also was
through.

"Through?" exclaimed Totts. "That reminds me." And running to his
blackboard he wrote:--

     THRU

"What's that thing?" asked Willows.

"Hup, hup," began Egghorn.

"Through," replied Totts, raising his voice.

"_What_?" said Willows, raising his voice, too.

"Through, through!" answered the convention in a body.

And Miss Appleby, amid the general din, remarked, "That's the way a pig
would spell if it got the chance."

"Thru, clu, blu, nu, hu," wrote Totts.

"Hu? Hu?" repeated Willows, vacantly; "what's hu?"

"Hup, hup, hup," vainly continued Egghorn, waving his arms.

"Hu's who," explained Cottsill, loudly.

"Who, who!" explained the whole convention to Willows.

"Booh, pooh!" said Willows. And running to the blackboard he added:

"Bu, pu, and stu, also glu."

But Egghorn was now standing on his chair, and screaming, "Hup, hup,
hup," with the most energetic violence.

"Oh, write it!" every one cried out to him.

They lifted Egghorn down from his chair, and he ran eagerly to his
blackboard, upon which he wrote, "This is illiterate, this is
unscholarly."

And again the convention cried out together, "We're not here to be
scholarly, we're not here to be literate."

"Have yore way, gennlemen," said Jesse Willows, "I'll stand for
anything."

"Well, I can't stand this any longer!" exclaimed Miss Appleby; and
rising to her pretty feet, she continued, "Gentlemen, in your charitable
solicitude for foreigners, you may be making our spelling easy for
Lithuanians (though I doubt it), but you are making it quite impossible
for the English."

Upon this a cold silence fell, and then, "And who are the English,
madam?" asked Cottsill.

Miss Appleby gave her delightful brief laugh. "I'm sorry you don't know,
sir," said she, "for I didn't come here to begin your education." And
she sat down. There was an impulse in me to call her Gertrude, but I
felt it to be premature.

A general murmuring confusion of consulting and dissenting voices now
arose among the scholars.

"But what did you come here for?" I asked Miss Appleby.

"Not to see unbroken dogs put their muddy paws all over the greatest
language in the world," she retorted.

"Dear me, dear me," I returned, with soothing deprecation, for she was
plainly very much incensed, "then what did you come for?"

"Oh, for reasons," she returned evasively.

Doubts that I could not define began suddenly to fill my mind, and I
said to her, "Didn't you write about Shakespeare?"

"A college joke," she answered contemptuously. "I'm writing a poem now.
I shall call it, 'How we brought the Good Spelling from Ghent to Aix.'"

"Then you don't believe in the Higher Spelling?" I asked.

"No!" she declared, with defiance.

"Does Professor Willows?" I pursued.

"Hadn't you better ask him about that?" she replied.

I think my face must have turned the reddest that anger can paint faces;
for now, at any rate, I had no doubts as to how I had been made game of
in the private car. Yes, they had mocked me. The impudent young man had
manufactured absurd spelling for my serious attention, and he and Miss
Appleby had then made merry together over it, and over myself. But
before I could frame a fitting rebuke to the frivolous though lovely
young woman beside me, a distracting hubbub of voices was set up, and
through this I heard Kibosh calling:--

"On your blackboards, gentlemen, on your blackboards."

[Illustration: Professor Dudelsacker.]

The convention gradually heard him, too, and scholar after scholar
bounded from his chair, seized a piece of chalk, and began to write.
Only one was left, who stood at his place, pouring forth the most
execrable sounds I have ever heard.

"Professor Dudelsacker has the floor," said Kibosh.

"Burrmeowskreeyiyiwurrburrwowwowmeow," went the professor.

"Turn that Central Pennsylvania Dutch quacker out!" shouted some one.

"I've resigned already meowowwow," squealed Dudelsacker, in a fury; and
he took his departure at once.

But this brought us no calm. Twenty pieces of chalk were rattling on
the blackboards like a platoon of busy telegraphic instruments. Each
scholar was making his own list for the new dictionary of English, and I
read the lists of Totts, Maverick, and Cottsill, so far as they had
written them. Jesse Willows was writing, too, with sweeping flourishes;
but I had ceased to place faith in his integrity.

     Surracuse     Beverly Fahms     Cyar
     Yurrup        Rud               Cyard
     Surrup        But               Cyart
     Mawrul        Cut               Gyarden
     Sawrul        Grantha           Coat-house
     Kwawrul       Anywheres}
     Awringe       Everywheres}      _Cottsill's list_
     Amurrican     Nowheres}
     Tremenjus     Tremendious}

"Awringe," I murmured aloud, in ignorance of its meaning; but my own
voice revealed to me that it was our chief Florida fruit, as pronounced
by Lysander Totts, of Numa Pompilius, New York, discoverer of
Cleopatra's true sex. The whole great West was rattling away on the
boards behind me, but what I saw in front of me was enough to hold my
attention; and my eyes were straying back and forth between awringe and
grantha, when Totts, happening to glance up from his work, beheld the
work of Maverick next him.

He stopped abruptly. "Rud?" he inquired of the professor from Fishball
University, author of Pecan Nuts.

"Road," explained Maverick, writing out the old spelling. "Road, boat,
coat."

"Hm," said Totts, with disapprobation.

"But what is grantha?" I whispered to Miss Appleby.

"Can it be a breakfast food?" she suggested; and again I wished to call
her Gertrude.

Totts was still gazing at Maverick's list. "Hm. Yes," he repeated. "Bean
talk from Boston. We don't want it."

"Are we phonetic or not?" returned Maverick, sharply.

But Totts had now caught sight of Cottsill's list. "Anywheres?" he read
aloud. "Why anywheres? Rub all those out."

"I will not," declared the author of Nostalgia in the Lobster. "I guess
if you can be phonetic, I can."

"I'm afraid they're skipping grantha," said Miss Appleby.

"Who says anywheres?" demanded Totts.

"I do," snapped Cottsill.

"Well, I don't," Totts replied. "And, what's more, I won't."

Cottsill raised his voice. "I guess I can be phonetic just as----"

"Anywheres is vulgar," interrupted Totts.

"Vulgar yourself!" screamed Cottsill, jumping up and down.

"Vulgar! Vulgar!" chimed in Maverick, whom the term bean talk had
nettled.

But Totts had spied the list of Jesse Willows, and was pointing at it
disdainfully. "And pray," said he, "what may a coat-house be?"

Now the handsome young man from Paw-paw was the last person to select
for addressing in such a tone as Lysander Totts had taken.

"I beg yore pardon, suh?" he remarked, so politely that I became filled
with apprehension.

Miss Appleby was gazing at him with all her eyes. "What do you think of
him?" she whispered to me.

I suppose that indignation at his unwarrantable treatment of me in the
car rendered me imprudent. "My dear Miss Appleby," I said to her, "my
dear Gertrude, he is as beautiful as the day, as ignorant as a
Socialist, and as dishonest as a plumber."

"How dare you speak of my husband so?" she replied. "We were married
this morning. That's all we came for to your silly convention. Good-by."
And rising, she swept out of the room.

But her exit was unobserved. The great West was still rattling on its
blackboards, Maverick and Cottsill were scowling darkly at Totts. Totts
was pointing one finger at coat-house, and Willows was smiling steadily
at Totts, in a manner that now convinced me we were approaching the edge
of something quite particular. Nor did even the bridegroom know that his
bride had left us.

"I beg yore pardon, suh?" he repeated.

"Coat-house. What's that?" said Totts.

"It is whah they'd have you, suh, if they caught you teachin' any o'
those railroad accidents o' yore's to the young."

"Yes, indeed; yes, indeed!" cried Maverick and Cottsill, eagerly.

Totts loudly blew his nose. "It shall remain court-house in the
dictionary of scholars," he remarked.

Willows ran his eye up and down Totts' list, and then up and down Totts.
"Schooling," he softly returned, "has done powerful little for the
Amurrican who sails to Yurrup and puts surrup on his hot cakes."

"Yes, indeed; yes, indeed!" said Cottsill and Maverick again.

"Gentlemen, gentlemen!" pleaded Kibosh, "do not quarrel."

"Kwawrul, you mean," smiled Jesse Willows. "It's immawrul to kwawrul in
Surracuse, Noo Yorruk."

Totts now began to show signs of jumping up and down.

"Have we adopted phonetic spelling, or have we not?" he roared.

"Not yore kind," said Willows.

"Yore!" echoed Totts. "Listen to that dialect!" And he blew his noise
more loudly.

"Hup, hup," began Egghorn; but his voice stuck as usual.

"You should get a chauffeur," said Cottsill, severely, to him.

"Hup, hup. Compromise," finished Egghorn.

"Ah, yes, gentlemen, there we have it!" said Kibosh, earnestly.
"Compromise is progress. Let us all accept one another. Thus the cause
will profit."

His exhortation produced a brief, a very brief, lull. Each looked at the
neighboring blackboards in silence; and Kibosh, doubtless with the idea
of harmony, set the organ once more to playing, "My spelling 'tis of
thee," while the rattling West continued to create a new language behind
us.

At length Cottsill sighed. "Very well," he said, "for the sake of
anywheres, I'll vote for surrup."

"That's wise, that's kind, that's good," said Kibosh; and he beat one
hand gently on the table.

At this hopeful point, Jesse Willows noticed, for the first time, that
no lady was now present, and his long body made a singular twisting and
free motion beneath his clothes.

"I will vote for rud and anywheres," Totts said. "But I doubt if I can
accept coat-house."

Jesse Willows took him instantly by the nose. "You'll accept nothin',"
said he, with great sweetness; and he shook him forward and back. "I am
weary of you and yore antics," and he shook him right and left. "You're
goin' to rub out everything you have written," and he shook him round
and round.

"Help," gurgled the struggling Totts. "Help!"

"No, indeed; no, indeed," cried Maverick and Cottsill, delighted.

"You gentlemen are included," said Willows to them, and they both
hastily covered their noses with their hands. "I don't mean that way,"
he continued. "But you're goin' to rub yore lists out, too. Why, you're
the contemptiblest of all the great American frauds. Just because you
have written a picayune book on some picayune specialty, you pass for
bein' educated in our half-civilized country. Put you among genuine
scholars and you would look like old gum shoes. I know my accent is
provincial," he paused and looked at Totts for a moment, "but it's a
heap prettier'n yore's," he shook Totts round and round again, "and you
and I are just goin' to let the English language take care of herself.
She has done it for a thousand years, and she'll do it for a thousand
more, changin' what she pleases an' keepin' what she pleases."

So saying, the young man, even as one drags a resisting dog by a chain,
dragged the howling Totts by his nose to the blackboard, and forced the
rubber into his hand; and as Totts hung back his firmly imprisoned organ
received a still more acute sensation, whereat he leaped into the air,
and erased his Surracuse list at one sweep. And next, since Cottsill and
Maverick were hanging back also, one with his arms shielding grantha,
while the other shielded anywheres, Totts was conducted to those words.
"Out with grantha," commanded Jesse. "We'll keep it grandfather for a
while yet, Mr. Bean Talk." They attempted to defend their lists, but
vainly; and in the conflict that arose, a rubber flew crooked and hit
one of the great West sharply in the back of the neck. He, being under a
misapprehension, thereupon kicked his neighbor savagely, and in a moment
all the profound scholars engaged together in a blind war, rubbing out
one another's lists, whacking one another's heads, and often rolling
by twos and threes beneath the table, from which dictionaries and
inkstands were falling continuously. It was with the greatest difficulty
that I got the gasoline organ between myself and harm's way. Jesse
Willows had mounted upon the table with the still faintly bellowing
Totts, whom he led slowly from one end to the other, amid the clouds of
chalk and the general bedlam.

[Illustration: Jesse had mounted upon the table with the still faintly
bellowing Totts.]

At the first pause which exhaustion brought, Masticator B. Fellows was
perceived to be looking on quietly.

"Gentlemen," he said, "dear friends" (and these words stopped
everything), "I am well pleased with what you have accomplished. I
expected results, and I have got them. The surgeon awaits you in the
House of Bandages."

No serious wounds were found; but also no scholar was found to be upon
speaking terms with any other. By the generosity of Masticator each was
sent home separately in a private car, on a special train, with plenty
of chickle.

Masticator had created all the publicity that he desired. New students
swarmed in armies to his University, and he presently issued a billion
more shares of Chickle common. The press of the whole country rang with
the enterprise.

     SIMPLE SPELLERS WED

was one of the first headlines that greeted me upon my homeward journey.
Yes; Jesse Willows and Gertrude Appleby were the exceptions; these two
scholars had gone away in the same car together to their honeymoon,
while I returned lonely to the index of my forthcoming volume.

Heigho!





End of Project Gutenberg's How Doth the Simple Spelling Bee, by Owen Wister

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW DOTH THE SIMPLE SPELLING BEE ***

***** This file should be named 23923.txt or 23923.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/9/2/23923/

Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
