The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Day at the County Fair, by Alice Hale
Burnett, Illustrated by Charles F. Lester


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Day at the County Fair


Author: Alice Hale Burnett



Release Date: December 27, 2007  [eBook #23999]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY AT THE COUNTY FAIR***


E-text prepared by Roberta Staehlin, Suzanne Shell, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23999-h.htm or 23999-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/9/23999/23999-h/23999-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/9/9/23999/23999-h.zip)





The Merryvale Girls

A DAY AT THE COUNTY FAIR

by

ALICE HALE BURNETT

Author of "Beth's Garden Party,"
"Geraldine's Birthday Surprise,"
"A Day at the County Fair," Etc.

Pictures by Charles F. Lester







The New York Book Co.
201-213 East 12th Street New York

Copyright, 1916, by
American Authors Publishing Co.




CONTENTS

    CHAPTER                                      PAGE

       I. THE INVITATION                            9

      II. THE MOTOR TRIP                           15

     III. THE PICNIC LUNCH                         22

      IV. THE FUN BEGINS                           25

       V. THE GREASED POLE                         32

      VI. JERRY'S TREAT                            37

      VII. UNCLE BILLY'S STORY                     44

     VIII. AN EXCITING MOMENT                      52

       IX. HOME AGAIN                              58




[Illustration: With a queer swaying motion the huge ball rose slowly in
the air.]

A DAY AT THE COUNTY FAIR


CHAPTER I

THE INVITATION


"Oh, push it harder, much harder, so I can go away up to the tree
tops," cried Jerry. "Don't you just love to fly through the air this
way?"

Mary Lee gave the swing one more push.

"There!" she exclaimed, "that's the best I can do, Geraldine White. I'm
hot all over now," and she dropped down on the soft grass at the foot
of a big tree.

"After the old cat dies, I'll give you a fine swing," promised Jerry.
"You'll think you're in an airship."

"Indeed you won't," protested Mary. "It's horrid and makes me feel ill.
Oh, look," she exclaimed, "here comes Beth Burton."

Flying down the street, her hair streaming behind her, came Beth, her
cheeks aglow and her dark eyes dancing with excitement.

Mary had run at once to meet her and Jerry followed as soon as she
could stop the swing.

"It's the loveliest news," panted Beth when she had reached them--"an
invitation."

"Oh, do tell us what it is," demanded the other two in chorus.

"Well," continued Beth, placing an arm about each as they all walked up
the path, "it's to go motoring. My uncle Billy is going to take us,"
and she gave each girl a little hug. "But that isn't all," she added.
"There's a surprise on the end of the ride."

Jerry danced up the path with joy.

"A motor ride and a surprise all in one day," thought Jerry.

"I think it's just dear of him to ask us to go, too," said Mary. "He
could have taken you alone."

Beth smiled, as she replied:

"It wouldn't be half as much fun without you, and I don't know what the
surprise is, either; Uncle Billy wouldn't tell me."

Jerry suddenly stopped dancing.

"Mary Lee," she said, "you're just as big a goose as I am. We've never
asked Beth when it's to be."

"Why, to-day, of course," was the laughing answer; "that's why I
hurried so. We'll stop for you both at eleven o'clock, and Uncle Billy
says he'll bring us all back safely by six o'clock to-night. I do hope
your mothers will allow you to go."

"Oh, mercy! I must hurry. I'll have to ask Mother, and then change my
dress," and Mary darted down the path. "I'll come back here when I'm
ready," she called to them over her shoulder.

"I shall have to hurry home, too," laughed Beth, "but, Jerry, before I
leave, do go in and ask your mother if you may go."

It took but a moment for Jerry to reach the house and in another she
had reached the room where her mother sat sewing.

"Oh, it's going to be such fun! May I go? The whole day, and a motor
ride, and a surprise, too. Isn't it sweet of Beth?"

"Jerry, what are you talking about?" asked Mrs. White; "a motor ride
and a surprise; what do you mean, dear?"

"Oh," giggled Jerry, "I always get mixed up when I talk fast," and
standing beside her mother, she explained about the invitation she had
just received from Beth.

"Indeed you may go, and I'm sure you will enjoy it very much," was her
mother's reply. "But now you'd better run upstairs and get ready, for
you haven't much time."

Jerry, happy to receive her mother's permission, flew to the door.

"It's all right, Beth dear," she called. "I may go."

"Oh, I'm so glad," answered Beth; "be sure you're ready at eleven."




CHAPTER II

THE MOTOR TRIP


"Mercy, goodness! Five minutes to eleven, and I can't find my hat," and
poor Jerry darted from one closet to another in her search. "Where do
you suppose it is?"

"It's just where you left it," answered Mary, who had arrived ten
minutes before and had been helping Jerry hunt for the missing hat.
"Now stop running around and try to think a minute."

Jerry stood still and thought very hard.

"Why, I believe it's--it's in my hat box, you dear thing! Why didn't
you tell me to do that before?" and Jerry darted up the stairs to her
room, and in another minute called out:

"Yes, here it is, safe and sound," at which Mary burst into laughter.

"Honk, honk!" sounded from without.

"Here they are,--here they come," and both girls flew to meet Beth, who
had just stepped out of the car as it stopped before the house.

Mrs. White followed the girls down the path and Uncle Billy smilingly
promised her to have the girls home before dark.

"Jerry, you sit in front for a while with Uncle Billy," suggested
Beth. "I think it will be nice if we take turns riding beside him."

"Fine idea," laughed Uncle Billy, "then I can get acquainted with all
of you."

Jerry climbed in the front seat while Mary and Beth sat in the wide
seat behind, with a large wicker lunch basket on the floor before them.

"Good-bye," they called as the car started, and Mrs. White waved her
handkerchief until they were out of sight.

It was the beautiful month of September and the leaves were turning to
red and gold. The air was soft and cool against their faces and the sky
was dotted here and there with tiny white clouds that looked like
little ships sailing on an ocean of blue.

Uncle Billy had headed the car toward the west and it sped down the
country road, leaving the town of Merryvale far behind. Past fields and
farms they flew, through woodlands and over little bridges under which
ran tiny, bubbling brooks.

"It's like being in fairyland," whispered Mary. "Look, the leaves have
made a gold and crimson carpet."

"Yes, and at night the fairies dance in the moonlight," answered Beth,
"and drink honey from the blue bells. Wouldn't that soft mossy bank
make a lovely throne for the queen?"

[Illustration: "Don't you just love to fly through the air this way?"
cried Jerry.]

"What are you two talking about?" demanded Jerry, turning around in
her seat and facing them. "I don't believe you know that Beth's Uncle
Billy let me drive this car for a long way and he hardly helped at
all."

"Well, I should say we didn't, or we'd have been scared to death,"
laughed Beth.

"Well, it's not half as dangerous as driving an airship, and I'm going
to do that some day. I'd love to go away up above the clouds."

"And talk to the man in the moon, I suppose," teased Mary.

"That would be fun, if you didn't have any engine trouble," chuckled
Uncle Billy, joining in the fun.

"What's engine trouble?" demanded Jerry. "Do you mean something
happening to the works of it?"

"That's it," declared Uncle Billy, "and when it happens down you come
faster than even you would like."

"Just down right side up or head over heels," insisted Jerry.

"Well, it needn't make any difference to you, because you are not going
to do it, Geraldine White," interrupted Beth, looking at Mary, who
hastened to agree with her.

"Lots of times I've wished I were a boy," sighed Jerry. "Nobody ever
seems to mind what they do."

"What's the surprise, Uncle Billy?" asked Beth. "Why are you stopping?"

"I don't know myself," said Uncle Billy with a frown on his forehead,
as the car gradually came to a stop, "but I'll have to find out."

"Whatever's the matter?" cried Jerry. "Do you think we're having engine
trouble?" and she hopped out and stood by the roadside gazing at the
car.

"Nothing so easy as that," answered Uncle Billy, in great disgust;
"it's gas. We have run out of it. Looks as though they didn't fill up
the tank in the garage before we started, as I told them to do."

"Gasoline!" gasped Beth, "and that's what makes it go."




CHAPTER III

THE PICNIC LUNCH


"Oh, cheer up," said Uncle Billy in his jolly way, "some one will be
along before a great while and we'll all drive to the nearest town with
them."

Beth stood up on the seat and clapped her hands.

"Listen, everyone," she said, "let's have luncheon while we're
waiting."

All were delighted with her plan and in less time than it takes to tell
it the basket was lifted out of the car and in the shade of a large
tree close by the little party made merry over the dainty sandwiches
and iced lemonade.

There were little cakes, too, with pink and white icing.

"I know Martha made these," commented Jerry; "they taste like a cake we
had at your party, Beth."

Uncle Billy declared that never before in his life had he eaten so many
good things, all at one time.

"There's a wagon!" and Mary, who had been the first to see it, jumped
to her feet and pointed up the road toward a farm wagon, piled high
with hay, which was approaching them.

Uncle Billy started off at once to meet it and while the girls were
busily packing the things back into the basket he was telling the man
who drove the wagon about their mishap.

"You can all come along with me to town and then send some one back
with gasoline to fetch in your car, if you like. I'm driving in to the
county fair," explained the farmer.

"Fine!" decided Uncle Billy. "We'll do it." So in great haste the girls
were soon swung up, one by one, to the top of the hay. Then Uncle Billy
climbed on.

"All aboard!" he shouted, and at the word the farmer started his team.
As the wagon bumped and swayed along the road, the girls held hands to
keep from sliding off.




CHAPTER IV

THE FUN BEGINS


"Did you ever see so many wagons in all your life? Why, there are
hundreds of them," declared Jerry, when they had reached the little
town and were driving down the main street.

"How would you like to go to the fair?" suggested Uncle Billy with his
eyes twinkling with merriment.

"Oh, do you really mean it?" questioned Mary. "I've always wanted to
see a county fair."

"So have I," echoed each of the others.

"All right; it's a bargain," nodded Uncle Billy. "You all wait here,"
he told the girls a few minutes later, as he helped them out of the
wagon, "while I get some one to bring the car into town."

He left the girls chatting together in great excitement over the
unexpected treat, and when he returned there were a great many
questions to answer as he led the way toward the great entrance gate.

"Tickets, tickets to the fair grounds! Here you are, boss! This way to
the ticket booth."

"I wonder if he thinks you all belong to me?" said Uncle Billy, smiling
and nodding to the man in the plaid suit and high hat who had addressed
them.

"How funny!" laughed Beth. "You don't look a bit like our fathers."

"There's the merry-go-round," pointed out Mary when they were inside
the grounds, "and there's one of those funny houses you get lost in."

"Oh," exclaimed Jerry to Uncle Billy, "look at yourself in that mirror.
You're only a foot high and fat as a butter ball."

The three girls laughed until they cried, as Uncle Billy bowed and
smiled at himself before the mystic mirror that made the tallest person
seem short and squatty.

"Let's ride on the merry-go-round," proposed Beth; "it's almost ready
to start."

"Jump aboard," ordered her uncle, "I'll see to the tickets."

Jerry had at once chosen a very wild-looking lion to ride upon, but
Mary and Beth decided on two beautiful white horses, that rose up and
down on the iron rods that ran through their wooden bodies, as the
platform circled about.

The music was a jolly tune that the girls had heard before, so they
laughed and sang and waved each time to Uncle Billy as they sped past
him.

When the ride was over they walked to the other side of the grounds,
where a great crowd had gathered.

"What is it?" asked Jerry. "What is the fun about?" for everyone seemed
to be laughing.

Uncle Billy soon found a place for the girls near the inner circle, and
to their great surprise they saw a number of boys trying to catch some
very shiny little black pigs within a small enclosure. The crowd roared
with delight whenever a pig would slip through the fingers of the boy
trying to catch him.

"What makes them so shiny?" asked Beth, "and why do they want to catch
them?"

"Why, grease makes them shiny," replied Uncle Billy, "and the boy who
is clever enough to catch one gets the pig, or a prize."

"I do hope that boy with the red hair and freckles will catch his,"
whispered Mary; "he looks just like a boy I know."

"Oh, I know whom you mean;--Reddy," said Jerry with a smile.

"Isn't it dreadful the way those pigs squeal," and Beth put her hands
over her ears to shut out the sound.

At last the red-haired boy, whom Mary hoped would win, drove a pig into
a corner, and as the crowd watched he managed to grasp it by a fore and
hind leg and held it close to him.

"Now I've got you, you little rascal!" he cried, and the crowd cheered
as the little black pig wriggled in his arms and tried in vain to get
away.

The boy was now shown a number of prizes from which to choose. He
selected a silver watch and chain, with which he started off as proud
as a peacock.

"You brought him good luck, wishing that he would win," said Beth to
Mary as they turned to go.




CHAPTER V

THE GREASED POLE


"Did you ever see such large tomatoes?" exclaimed Jerry, pointing to a
booth where some prize vegetables were being exhibited.

"I'm glad you like them," said a fat, smiling old woman who was
standing near them, "for I grew them myself and they're prize winners."

"Oh, I don't see how you ever did it," declared Jerry. "I had a garden
once and most everything died but the weeds."

"Well, my dear, wasn't that just too bad? Perhaps you forgot to water
the plants. It's a bit of care every day that brings them along," and
she patted Jerry's rosy cheeks.

"I guess the poor things starved to death," thought Jerry as she joined
the others, "for I'm sure I often forgot them."

"What an enormous pumpkin, Uncle Billy. Do you think it's real?" asked
Beth, as they stopped before a large display of them.

"Yes, of course it's real," he assured her, "and just think of all the
good pies it will make."

"I wonder if Cinderella's chariot was as big a pumpkin as that," mused
Mary.

"What are those funny looking poles over there, with cross pieces at
the top?" Jerry exclaimed, "there's a boy trying to climb up one of
them."

"Let's go over and see," suggested one of the others, so they made
their way over and joined the crowd about the two poles and were soon
watching the boys who tried to climb up to secure the presents hanging
from the cross pieces.

"I believe they are greased to be slippery like the pigs were,"
remarked Mary.

"They are," Uncle Billy replied, "it's a game brought over from
France."

It did seem for a while that not one of the boys ever would succeed in
reaching the top. They would climb up a short way and then slide
back, while the crowd laughed and cheered.

[Illustration: "Now I've got you, you little rascal!" he cried, and the
crowd cheered.]

Finally a long-legged boy twisted himself around one of the poles and
with funny, quick motions worked his way up near the top.

"Oh, I do hope he gets there," whispered Jerry, under her breath as the
boy had almost reached the top, "his clothes look so ragged and poor."

"He's up," shouted the crowd. "What's he going to take?"

The boy now had one arm thrown about the crosspiece and was looking at
all the different things he had to choose from.

"Take your time, sonny; look them all over first," called out a
good-natured man in the crowd below, but the boy was quick to decide
and slid a shining pair of skates from off the pole across his
shoulders.

"They'll come in handy before very long," he told the crowd with a
laugh as he came down the pole.

"Good for you, Spider," called out his boy friends, running up to
admire the fine new skates which he was proud to show.

"What a horrid name," commented Beth, "but I'm glad he won."




CHAPTER VI

JERRY'S TREAT


Uncle Billy now led the party over to the pop corn and peanut stand
where he made several purchases for them, after which he told Jerry
that he had a treat in store for her.

"It's a secret between us and we'll tell you all about it when we get
back," he said to the others. "Now what would you like to do while we
are away?"

"Ride on the merry-go-round," declared both the girls in a breath, and
so after a few minutes, when they had reached the merry-go-round a
long string of tickets was handed Beth and she willingly promised to
remain there until Uncle Billy returned.

"What is it we're going to do?" asked Jerry in great excitement,
dancing along beside Uncle Billy as they started away.

"Away over your head I see something," he answered--"something round
like a ball, with a basket hanging beneath it. Can you guess what it
is?"

"Oh, do stop teasing," pleaded Jerry, "and tell me."

"It's a balloon," replied Uncle Billy. "Would you like to go up in it?"

"Oh, yes," she answered, her eyes dancing with delight. "Will it sail
away off?"

"No, Jerry, it won't or you wouldn't catch me going up in it. I'm going
to look it all over first to find out if it's perfectly safe."

"But suppose the rope should break?" insisted Jerry as they hurried
along.

"We'd let the gas escape from the bag, and that would make the balloon
sink slowly to the earth. Of course we would not let all of the gas
out, but just enough to let it sink to the ground. Why, you little
monkey," added Uncle Billy, "I believe you wanted it to break away,"
and he laughed at her daring.

After the balloon ropes were well tested, both climbed into the basket
where two women passengers were already standing beside the attendant.

"Only fifty cents for ten minutes above the clouds," shouted the man
selling tickets, "step this way and get off the earth."

"He's trying to be funny, isn't he?" laughed Jerry as she held tightly
to the basket's edge.

"All aboard for the ascension," someone called, and with a queer,
swaying motion and sudden lurches the huge ball of gas rose slowly into
the air.

"Oh, dear, I wish I'd never come!" exclaimed the woman standing next to
Jerry. "Aren't you scared, little girl?"

"Oh, but don't you like it?" was Jerry's surprised answer. "I think
it's wonderful. It's almost like being a bird."

Uncle Billy bent down to look at Jerry as they arose higher into the
air.

"Is it as fine as you thought it would be?" he asked.

"Oh, it's heaps nicer," she cried, clapping her hands. "See how small
everything is down there, and do you see the merry-go-round? What would
Mary and Beth think if they knew?"

"Over those hills is Merryvale," he pointed out. "That road winding in
and out leads into the town. It's the one we came by."

"Looks just like a piece of ribbon, doesn't it?" she answered.

"Seems as though we've stopped going up now," she observed a moment
later.

"Well, thank goodness," sighed the woman seated next to her, "I'm sure
it's plenty high enough for anybody. I'm most scared out of my wits
now."

Jerry squeezed Uncle Billy's hand as she looked up at him.

"She's afraid," she whispered.

"Which way is the ocean, Uncle Billy?" she added, a moment later.

"Which one--you know we have two of them?" was his teasing reply.

"Of course I know that, but I mean the Atlantic. That's the one I like
the best because you go to Europe that way."

Uncle Billy then pointed his long arm toward the east.

"Away, way over there," he said.

"My, but the world's an awfully big place," declared Jerry, "and to
think my doll, Togo Sen, has crossed an ocean and I've never even seen
one."

When the ten minutes had passed the balloon commenced to descend.

"It's been a beautiful surprise, Uncle Billy, I'll never forget it,"
said Jerry.

"I thought it would make you happy," was his answer.




CHAPTER VII

UNCLE BILLY'S STORY


"Here they are," cried Beth as Jerry and Uncle Billy came into view.
"We thought you'd never come," she reproved as they drew near. "Where
in the world have you two been?"

"We haven't been anywhere in the world," laughed Jerry, "we've been far
above it."

"What are you talking about?" demanded Mary. "Tell us this minute."

"Well, we've been ballooning," confessed Uncle Billy.

"The very idea," gasped Beth. "Do you mean you dared to go up in one of
those awful things?"

"Well, I'm glad you didn't invite us to go, for we'd never have done
it," declared Mary, as the others laughed.

"Take a chance on a beautiful doll, only ten cents. Won't you young
ladies take a chance?" said a boy, stepping up to them and waving a
handful of tickets.

"How do we know she's beautiful?" asked Uncle Billy. "We'd like to see
her first."

"Only a few tickets left," urged the boy, "you'd better take them now.
The doll's right over there in the glass case for you to look at."

The three girls darted off for a peep at the doll and Uncle Billy,
after buying four tickets from the boy, followed them, and all stood
gazing at the beautiful large French doll.

"Oh, if one of us could only win her!" exclaimed Mary, "she would be so
stylish at our parties with that lovely French look, and we would call
her Mlle. Marie, like your French teacher, Beth."

"We'd have to have very fancy parties when we invited her," responded
Beth, "or she might turn up her nose."

"We will call out the winning number from this spot in just a half hour
from now," called the ticket seller, "and everyone be on hand who has a
ticket."

"Let's have some ice cream," suggested Uncle Billy, "it'll help pass
the time while we're waiting to find out who's the lucky one."

"Oh, goody, I love ice-cream!" exclaimed Mary. "Uncle Billy, you always
think of the nicest things."

When they had found a small table in one corner of the raised platform
where refreshments were served, the little party seated themselves
quickly and looked about at the crowds of people passing below them.

"Isn't it pretty here?" observed Mary, looking at the garlands of
leaves and flowers that covered the beams above their heads.

"I think it's the best day I ever had," announced Jerry.

The band, almost hidden by palms and huge ferns, now struck up a lively
tune, and Beth tapped her fingers on the table as she kept time with
the music.

Uncle Billy ordered for each the cream she most liked and a generous
plate of little cakes.

"I'll take plain vanilla with chocolate sauce," he said to the waiter,
and when Mary asked why he didn't take strawberry, as it was so good,
he threw back his head and gave a hearty laugh.

"I'll tell you," he said, "but you must promise never to repeat it."

"We promise," they agreed, so leaning forward, until their heads were
close together, he began:

"It happened a long time ago. I was just eight years old, and had been
told by my mother to take a strawberry shortcake she had made, to our
church where a supper was being held."

Here Uncle Billy paused and looked at each of the smiling faces before
him.

"I'm afraid you're going to think I was a pretty bad little chap," he
said.

"Oh, no, really we won't," they assured him, "do go on and tell us."

"Well," he continued, "it was a long walk to the church, and after I
had gone a way I sat down by the roadside to rest. Also I was very fond
of strawberries, so I took just a peep to see what it looked like. Then
I took, oh, just a little sample, to see how it tasted, and didn't I
smack my lips over it.

"And then, I'm ashamed to say what followed. Although I knew it was
wrong I ate more and more until a fourth of it was gone, then what was
I to do? I couldn't take it to the supper that way, so I decided to eat
it all and hoped my mother wouldn't ask any questions when I got back
home."

"Oh," giggled Jerry, "did you do it?"

"I almost did--there wasn't very much left when I started for home. My
mother didn't say a word when she saw me, because as she told me years
later, she didn't have to ask any questions, for my face was covered
with strawberry stains and little flecks of cream.

"Well, I went to bed early that night. I didn't feel any too well, and
before long a real pain came and danced up and down inside me. Oh,
wasn't I sorry I had eaten that cake.

"Mother came in then, and I felt better--well enough to tell her about
it. I said then I'd never eat strawberries as long as I lived. And I
never have."

[Illustration: "I think," answered Mary, "I shall call her Elizabeth
Geraldine for her two aunts."]

Jerry laughed until the tears rolled down her cheeks, and Mary said it
always happened to her that way, too, when she did bad things. Beth
thought how sweet it must have been to have a mother to comfort you,
for her mother had died when she was just a tiny girl.

"We must hurry now," said Uncle Billy, "if we want to hear the lucky
number called," so off they started.




CHAPTER VIII

AN EXCITING MOMENT


"We're just in time," announced Mary, "and here comes the man who sold
us the tickets."

The crowd drew closer to the high box which served as a platform, as
the man stepped upon it. The first thing he did was to open a shoe box,
which he had been carrying under his arm. He then requested anyone who
wished to step up so as to see that the numbers in the box ran from 1
to 100. Several people examined the slips in the box and seemed
satisfied that what he had told them was true.

"All right," he continued. "Now will some young lady step up on the
platform and draw a number out of this box?"

"Isn't it exciting," cried Jerry. "It's so near."

Some one lifted a little girl of three or four years up to the platform
and the man held the open box before her.

"Everyone look at his number--we don't want to be kept waiting," he
shouted.

Uncle Billy then gave each of the girls one of the tickets he had
bought and kept the fourth one himself.

At a nod from the man, the little girl stretched out her hand and
plunged it down into the box.

"Just take one of them out," directed the man and the little tot
smilingly obeyed, holding up one of the pieces of cardboard.

"Number 97 wins the doll," called the man from the box, as his eyes
swept the eager crowd.

For a moment there was not a sound, then,

"I have it," cried a hearty voice, so close to the girls that it made
them jump, and Uncle Billy strode forward to show his number and
receive the doll.

A roar of laughter went up from the crowd as he placed the doll on his
shoulder and started to return to the girls.

"Isn't it wonderful," cried Mary in delight.

"Oh, I'm so glad he got it," and Jerry jumped up and down in her
excitement.

"So am I," agreed Beth, "I'm so happy. But what will he do with it?"

The crowd disappeared, and after Uncle Billy had joined the girls they
found a seat where all could take their time to examine the beautiful
new doll.

"What will we name her?" inquired Mary, patting the doll's golden
curls.

"Aren't her eyes beautiful? They're blue like your's, Mary," remarked
Jerry.

Uncle Billy, who had said nothing up to this time, now drew a letter
from his pocket from which he tore three little strips of paper.

"I'm going to chance her all over again," he declared. "Each of you
take a slip. The shortest wins the doll."

"Not I," objected Jerry, "because I've had a balloon ride and I loved
it more than anything else. Let Beth and Mary choose."

"Oh, that wouldn't be fair," protested Mary.

"Yes, it is," agreed Uncle Billy. "I understand. Jerry doesn't want to
be selfish."

"Well," insisted Beth, "I have the best of all, so I'm not going to
draw."

"What do you mean?" asked Mary.

"Why, can't you guess, my Uncle Billy," laughed Beth. "He's only make
believe yours, but he's really mine."

Uncle Billy put his arm about her and kissed her happy face.

"That's right, too," he said. "Little Beth has me."

"Oh, Mary, don't you refuse, too," pleaded Jerry, her eyes shining, "or
the poor dear won't have any home."

Mary held out her arms to take the doll which Uncle Billy handed to
her.

"I'll love you always," she whispered, "and Annabel will love you too."

"Well, what is her name to be?" asked Uncle Billy, as Mary with her
new-found daughter stood before them.

"I think," answered Mary, with a smile, holding the doll very close in
her arms, "I shall call her 'Elizabeth Geraldine,' for her two aunts."




CHAPTER IX

HOME AGAIN


"If we're going to get home before dark, as I promised, we'd better be
moving along," said Uncle Billy. "I expect to find a man with our car
outside the grounds."

The three girls arose reluctantly from their seat on the long bench.

"Well, I suppose the very best of days must come to an end," sighed
Jerry.

"Why, it hasn't ended yet," said Beth, cheeringly. "We still have the
long ride home, and you must sit in front, for I'm sure Mary and I
will have our hands full to keep Elizabeth Geraldine from falling out."

"Yes," agreed Mary, "for don't you remember how we lost poor Annabel
driving home from the party that day?"

As Uncle Billy had planned, his car stood at the entrance gate, and he
soon had the happy little party aboard.

All the way home Jerry talked gaily to Uncle Billy, telling him all
about the merry times she had with the others, and of her dog Patsy
that she loved so well.

"I must see him," declared Uncle Billy. "He must be a fine dog, from
all that you say about him."

Beth and Mary had many things to talk about.

"Now we'll have to give a big party to introduce Elizabeth Geraldine to
society," planned Beth. "Won't it be fun?"

"We'll have to make new dresses for all the other children so they'll
look nice too. And, of course, I shall have to make some plainer
clothes for her," said Mary, looking at Elizabeth Geraldine, "because
it wouldn't do for her to look so stylish all the time. Oh, Beth," she
suddenly added, "it was just dear of you and Jerry to want me to have
her. I'll never, never forget it."

"Where's the first stop?" asked Uncle Billy, when they had reached the
town of Merryvale.

"Two blocks down on this side," directed Beth. "Mary lives in the
brown house next to the corner."

"I don't know what to say," declared Mary a few moments later as the
car drew up before her door, "except that I've had a lovely time. It's
been just like a fairy story," she laughed, "wishing for Elizabeth
Geraldine and getting her."

"Good-bye, dear," called out Beth and Jerry.

"Good-bye, Uncle Billy," and Mary blew him a kiss from her fingertips
as the car started away and he waved to her.

When they reached Jerry's home, she threw her arms about Beth.

"Oh, I've just had the best time, and I'll never forget you, Uncle
Billy. It's been a wonderful day."

Beth, who had now taken the front seat, sat close to Uncle Billy as
they sped toward home.

"You're the very best uncle in the world," she told him. "We've all
been happy, but I've been the happiest of all."

"You always will be, Beth, because you have found out that the greatest
joy is in doing for others."


    THE END


       *     *     *     *     *


    THE MERRYVALE GIRLS
    By ALICE HALE BURNETT

    Four delightful books for the smaller girls, each a complete
    story in itself, describing in simple language the interesting
    experiences of Beth, Mary and Jerry, three little maids of
    Merryvale.

       *     *     *     *     *

    BETH'S GARDEN PARTY

    The three girls take part in a very formal little affair on
    the lawn of Beth's home. Each of the guests receives a present
    in the shape of a downy white kitten. The drive home in Beth's
    pony cart furnishes a few exciting moments, but Patsy bravely
    comes to the rescue.

    A DAY AT THE COUNTY FAIR

    The girls are taken to the fair in a motor, but a slight delay
    occurs on the way. How they finally arrived at the fair ground
    and their amusing experiences are most entertainingly told.

    GERALDINE'S BIRTHDAY SURPRISE

    Geraldine, whom of course we know better as Jerry, plays
    the part of hostess to her many friends, although it must be
    admitted that her guests knew of the affair before she did.
    A jolly evening is spent by the girls which is shared in by
    some of our young Merryvale boy friends.

    MARY ENTERTAINS THE SEWING CLUB

    Mary entertains the club at her home, and the efforts of some
    of the members cause many outbursts of merriment. The girls
    decide to hold a "fair of all nations" for the benefit of the
    Merryvale Day Nursery. Their many friends aid them and their
    plans succeed beyond their expectations.

    12mo. Cloth. Illustrations in Color. 40c per vol., postpaid




    THE MERRYVALE BOYS
    By ALICE HALE BURNETT

    Six real stories for small boys, each complete in itself,
    telling about the many interesting doings of "Toad" and "Chuck"
    Brown, and their friends, "Fat," "Reddy" and others.

    The books are written so the boy may read and understand them
    and the action faithfully portrays boy life in a small town.

       *     *     *     *     *

    CIRCUS DAY AT MERRYVALE

    "Toad" and "Reddy," by good fortune, each earn two tickets to
    the circus, although they find watering elephants a harder task
    than it at first seemed. A jolly party of boys visit the circus.

    FATHER BROWN'S INDIAN TALE

    Dad's story is followed by an unexpected visitor who at first
    startles then interests all of the little party gathered around
    the fireside.

    THE PICNIC AT MERRYVALE

    Did you ever go to a picnic in a large farm wagon, filled with
    boys and girls? Then did you catch a fine lot of trout and broil
    them before a camp-fire? "Toad" and "Reddy" did these very things
    and had a day long to be remembered.

    CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS IN MERRYVALE

    Daddy Williams' Toy Shop is the center of interest to "Toad" and
    his friends long before Christmas arrives. They plan a surprise
    that brings joy to a poor family. The boys erect snow forts and
    the two sides have a battle royal.

    MERRYVALE BOYS ON THE FARM

    "Toad's" grandmother invites him and "Reddy" to spend a month
    in the country. Their experiences at Sunnyside farm, with its
    horses, cows, pigs and chickens, are most entertainingly told,
    and they have the time of their lives boating, swimming and
    fishing in the creek.

    HALLOWE'EN AT MERRYVALE

    For many days the boys had been looking forward to the party to
    be held at Toad Brown's house, but the evening finally arrived
    and a number of new games were played, although a few things
    happened which were not on the program.

    _Illustrations in Color 12mo. Cloth 40c per Vol., Postpaid_




    THE HICKORY RIDGE BOY SCOUTS
    A SERIES OF BOOKS FOR BOYS

    By Capt. Alan Douglas, Scout-master

       *     *     *     *     *

    The Campfires of the Wolf Patrol

    Their first camping experience affords the scouts splendid
    opportunities to us their recently acquired knowledge in a
    practical way. Elmer Chenoweth, a lad from the northwest woods,
    astonishes everyone by his familiarity with camp life. A clean,
    wholesome story every boy should read.


    Woodcraft; or, How a Patrol Leader Made Good

    This tale presents many stirring situations in which the boys
    are called upon to exercise ingenuity and unselfishness. A
    story filled with healthful excitement.


    Pathfinder; or, The Missing Tenderfoot

    Some mysteries are cleared up in a most unexpected way, greatly
    to the credit of our young friends. A variety of incidents
    follow fast, one after the other.


    Fast Nine; or, a Challenge from Fairfield

    They show the same team-work here as when in camp. The description
    of the final game with the team of a rival town, and the outcome
    thereof, form a stirring narrative. One of the best baseball
    stories of recent years.


    Great Hike; or, The Pride of The Khaki Troop

    After weeks of preparation the scouts start out on their
    greatest undertaking. Their march takes them far from home, and
    the good-natured rivalry of the different patrols furnishes many
    interesting and amusing situations.


    Endurance Test; or, How Clear Grit Won the Day

    Few stories "get" us more than illustrations of pluck in the face
    of apparent failure. Our heroes show the stuff they are made of
    and surprise their most ardent admirers. One of the best stories
    Captain Douglas has written.


    Under Canvas; or, The Hunt for the Cartaret Ghost

    It was hard to disbelieve the evidence of their eyes but the boys
    by the exercise of common-sense solved a mystery which had long
    puzzled older heads.


    Storm-bound; or, a Vacation Among the Snow Drifts

    The boys start out on the wrong track, but their scout training
    comes to the rescue and their experience proves beneficial to
    all concerned.

       *     *     *     *     *

    Boy Scout Nature Lore to be Found in The Hickory Ridge Boy
    Scout Series, all illustrated:--

    Wild Animals of the United States--Tracking--Trees and
    Wild Flowers of the United States--Reptiles of the United
    States--Fishes of the United States--Insects of the United
    States and Birds of the United States.

    _Cloth Binding Cover Illustrations in Four Colors 40c. Per Volume_




    The Campfire and Trail Series

    1. IN CAMP ON THE BIG SUNFLOWER.

    2. THE RIVALS OF THE TRAIL.

    3. THE STRANGE CABIN ON CATAMOUNT ISLAND.

    4. LOST IN THE GREAT DISMAL SWAMP.

    5. WITH TRAPPER JIM IN THE NORTH WOODS.

    6. CAUGHT IN A FOREST FIRE.

    7. CHUMS OF THE CAMPFIRE.

    8. AFLOAT ON THE FLOOD.

    By LAWRENCE J. LESLIE.

    A series of wholesome stories for boys told in an interesting
    way and appealing to their love of the open.

    _Each, 12mo. Cloth. 40 cents per volume_

    THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY
    201 EAST 12th STREET NEW YORK



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY AT THE COUNTY FAIR***


******* This file should be named 23999.txt or 23999.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/9/9/23999



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

