The Project Gutenberg EBook of Every Man His Own Poet, by Newdigate Prizeman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Every Man His Own Poet
       Or, The Inspired Singer's Recipe Book

Author: Newdigate Prizeman

Release Date: December 31, 2007 [EBook #24083]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERY MAN HIS OWN POET ***




Produced by K. Nordquist, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









 EVERY MAN
 HIS OWN POET.




                     EVERY MAN HIS OWN POET:

                                OR,

                 The Inspired Singer's Recipe Book.


                               BY A

                        NEWDIGATE PRIZEMAN.



 Nuper ventosa isthaec et enormis loquacitas animos juvenum ad magna
 surgentes veluti pestilenti quodam sidere afflavit.--PETRONIUS.



                              Oxford:
                THOS. SHRIMPTON & SON, BROAD STREET.
                               1872.




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. A table
    of contents, though not present in the original publication, has
    been provided below:

      INTRODUCTION.
      OF THE NATURE OF POETRY.
      RECIPES.
        HOW TO MAKE AN ORDINARY LOVE POEM.
        HOW TO MAKE A PATHETIC MARINE POEM.
        HOW TO WRITE AN EPIC POEM LIKE MR. TENNYSON.
        HOW TO WRITE A POEM LIKE MR. MATTHEW ARNOLD.
        HOW TO WRITE A POEM LIKE MR. BROWNING.
        HOW TO WRITE A MODERN PRE-RAPHAELITE POEM.
        HOW TO WRITE A NARRATIVE POEM LIKE MR. MORRIS.
        HOW TO WRITE A SATANIC POEM LIKE THE LATE LORD BYRON.
        HOW TO WRITE A PATRIOTIC POEM LIKE MR. SWINBURNE.
      CONCLUSION.




INTRODUCTION.


To have attempted in former times a work of this description, would have
seemed, we cannot deny, to savour either of presumption or of idiotcy,
or more probably of both. And rightly. But we live in times of progress.
The mystery of yesterday is the common-place of to-day; the Bible, which
was Newton's oracle, is Professor Huxley's jest-book; and students at
the University now lose a class for not being familiar with opinions,
which but twenty years ago they would have been expelled for dreaming
of. Everything is moving onward swiftly and satisfactorily; and if, when
we have made all faiths fail, we can only contrive to silence the
British Association, and so make all knowledge vanish away, there will
lack nothing but the presence of a perfect charity to turn the
nineteenth century into a complete kingdom of heaven. Amongst changes,
then, so great and so hopeful--amongst the discoveries of the rights of
women, the infallibility of the Pope, and the physical basis of life, it
may well be doubted if the great fathers of ancient song would find, if
they could come back to us, anything out of the way or ludicrous in a
recipe-book for concocting poetry.

Some, indeed, object that poetry is not progressive. But on what grounds
this assertion is based, it is not possible to conjecture. Poetry is as
much progressive as anything else in these days of progress.
Free-thought itself shews scarcely more strikingly those three great
stages which mark advance and movement. For poetry, like Free-thought,
was first a work of inspiration, secondly of science, and lastly now of
trick. At its first stage it was open to only here and there a genius;
at its next to all intelligent men; and at its third to all the human
race. Thus, just as there is no boy now, but can throw stones at the
windows which Bishop Colenso has broken, so there is scarcely even a
young lady but can raise flowers from the seed stolen out of Mr.
Tennyson's garden.

And surely, whatever, in this its course of change, poetry may have lost
in quality, is more than made up for by what it has gained in quantity.
For in the first place it is far pleasanter to the tastes of a
scientific generation, to understand how to make bad poetry than to
wonder at good; and secondly, as the end of poetry is pleasure, that we
should make it each for ourselves is the very utmost that we can desire,
since it is a fact in which we all agree, that no man's verses please
him so much as his own.




OF THE NATURE OF POETRY.


Poetry as practised by the latest masters, is the art of expressing what
is too foolish, too profane, or too indecent to be expressed in any
other way. And thus, just as a consummate cook will prepare a most
delicate repast out of the most poor materials, so will the modern poet
concoct us a most popular poem from the weakest emotions, and the most
tiresome platitudes. The only difference is, that the cook would prefer
good materials if he could get them, whilst the modern poet will take
the bad from choice. As far, however, as the nature of materials goes,
those which the two artists work with are the same--_viz._, animals,
vegetables, and spirits. It was the practice of Shakespeare and other
earlier masters to make use of all these together, mixing them in
various proportions. But the moderns have found that it is better and
far easier to employ each separately. Thus Mr. Swinburne uses very
little else but animal matter in the composition of his dishes, which it
must be confessed are somewhat unwholesome in consequence: whilst the
late Mr. Wordsworth, on the contrary, confined himself almost
exclusively to the confection of primrose pudding, and flint soup,
flavoured with the lesser-celandine; and only now and then a beggar-boy
boiled down in it to give it a colour. The robins and drowned lambs
which he was wont to use, when an additional piquancy was needed, were
employed so sparingly that they did not destroy in the least the general
vegetable tone of his productions; and these form in consequence an
unimpeachable lenten diet. It is difficult to know what to say of Mr.
Tennyson, as the milk and water of which his books are composed chiefly,
make it almost impossible to discover what was the original nature of
the materials he has boiled down in it. Mr. Shelley, too, is perhaps
somewhat embarrassing to classify; as, though spirits are what he
affected most, he made use of a large amount of vegetable matter also.
We shall be probably not far wrong in describing his material as a kind
of methylated spirits; or pure psychic alcohol, strongly tinctured with
the barks of trees, and rendered below proof by a quantity of sea-water.
In this division of the poets, however, into animalists, spiritualists,
and vegetarians, we must not be discouraged by any such difficulties as
these; but must bear in mind that in whatever manner we may neatly
classify anything, the exceptions and special cases will always far
outnumber those to which our rule applies.

But in fact, at present, mere theory may be set entirely aside: for
although in the case of action, the making and adhering to a theory may
be the surest guide to inconsistency and absurdity, in poetry these
results can be obtained without such aid.

The following recipes, compiled from a careful analysis of the best
authors, will be found, we trust, efficient guides for the composition
of genuine poems. But the tyro must bear always in mind that there is no
royal road to anything, and that not even the most explicit directions
will make a poet all at once of even the most fatuous, the most
sentimental, or the most profane.




RECIPES.


The following are arranged somewhat in the order in which the student is
recommended to begin his efforts. About the more elaborate ones, which
come later, he may use his own discretion as to which he will try first;
but he must previously have had some training in the simpler
compositions, with which we deal before all others. These form as it
were a kind of palaestra of folly, a very short training in which will
suffice to break down that stiffness and self-respect in the soul, which
is so incompatible with modern poetry. Taking, therefore, the silliest
and commonest of all kinds of verse, and the one whose sentiments come
most readily to hand in vulgar minds, we begin with directions,


HOW TO MAKE AN ORDINARY LOVE POEM.

Take two large and tender human hearts, which match one another
perfectly. Arrange these close together, but preserve them from actual
contact by placing between them some cruel barrier. Wound them both in
several places, and insert through the openings thus made a fine
stuffing of wild yearnings, hopeless tenderness, and a general
admiration for stars. Then completely cover up one heart with a
sufficient quantity of chill church-yard mould, which may be garnished
according to taste with dank waving weeds or tender violets: and
promptly break over it the other heart.


HOW TO MAKE A PATHETIC MARINE POEM.

This kind of poem has the advantage of being easily produced, yet being
at the same time pleasing, and not unwholesome. As, too, it admits of no
variety, the chance of going wrong in it is very small. Take one
midnight storm, and one fisherman's family, which, if the poem is to be
a real success, should be as large and as hungry as possible, and must
contain at least one innocent infant. Place this last in a cradle, with
the mother singing over it, being careful that the babe be dreaming of
angels, or else smiling sweetly. Stir the father well up in the storm
until he disappears. Then get ready immediately a quantity of cruel
crawling foam, in which serve up the father directly on his
re-appearance, which is sure to take place in an hour or two, in the
dull red morning. This done, a charming saline effervescence will take
place amongst the remainder of the family. Pile up the agony to suit the
palate, and the poem will be ready for perusal.


HOW TO WRITE AN EPIC POEM LIKE MR. TENNYSON.

    (_The following, apart from its intrinsic utility, forms in itself a
    great literary curiosity, being the original directions from which
    the Poet Laureate composed the Arthurian Idylls._)

To compose an epic, some writers instruct us first to catch our hero.
As, however, Mr. Carlyle is the only person on record who has ever
performed this feat, it will be best for the rest of mankind to be
content with the nearest approach to a hero available, namely a prig.
These animals are very plentiful, and easy to catch, as they delight in
being run after. There are however many different kinds, not all equally
fit for the present purpose, and amongst which it is very necessary to
select the right one. Thus, for instance, there is the scientific and
atheistical prig, who may be frequently observed eluding notice between
the covers of the "Westminster Review;" the Anglican prig, who is often
caught exposing himself in the "Guardian;" the Ultramontane prig, who
abounds in the "Dublin Review;" the scholarly prig, who twitters among
the leaves of the "Academy;" and the Evangelical prig, who converts the
heathen, and drinks port wine. None of these, and least of all the last,
will serve for the central figure, in the present class of poem. The
only one entirely suitable is the blameless variety. Take, then, one
blameless prig. Set him upright in the middle of a round table, and
place beside him a beautiful wife, who cannot abide prigs. Add to these,
one marred goodly man; and tie the three together in a bundle with a
link or two of Destiny. Proceed, next, to surround this group with a
large number of men and women of the nineteenth century, in fancy-ball
costume, flavoured with a great many very possible vices, and a few
impossible virtues. Stir these briskly about for two volumes, to the
great annoyance of the blameless prig, who is, however, to be kept
carefully below swearing-point, for the whole time. If he once boils
over into any natural action or exclamation, he is forthwith worthless,
and you must get another. Next break the wife's reputation into small
pieces; and dust them well over the blameless prig. Then take a few
vials of tribulation and wrath, and empty these generally over the whole
ingredients of your poem: and, taking the sword of the heathen, cut into
small pieces the greater part of your minor characters. Then wound
slightly the head of the blameless prig; remove him suddenly from the
table, and keep in a cool barge for future use.


HOW TO WRITE A POEM LIKE MR. MATTHEW ARNOLD.

Take one soulfull of involuntary unbelief, which has been previously
well flavoured with self-satisfied despair. Add to this one beautiful
text of Scripture. Mix these well together; and as soon as ebullition
commences grate in finely a few regretful allusions to the New Testament
and the lake of Tiberias, one constellation of stars, half-a-dozen
allusions to the nineteenth century, one to Goethe, one to Mont Blanc,
or the Lake of Geneva; and one also, if possible, to some personal
bereavement. Flavour the whole with a mouthful of "faiths" and
"infinites," and a mixed mouthful of "passions," "finites," and
"yearnings." This class of poem is concluded usually with some question,
about which we have to observe only that it shall be impossible to
answer.


HOW TO WRITE A POEM LIKE MR. BROWNING.

Take rather a coarse view of things in general. In the midst of this,
place a man and a woman, her and her ankles, tastefully arranged on a
slice of Italy, or the country about Pornic. Cut an opening across the
breast of each, until the soul becomes visible, but be very careful that
none of the body be lost during the operation. Pour into each breast as
much as it will hold of the new strong wine of love: and, for fear they
should take cold by exposure, cover them quickly up with a quantity of
obscure classical quotations, a few familiar allusions to an unknown
period of history, and a half-destroyed fresco by an early master,
varied every now and then with a reference to the fugues or toccatas of
a quite-forgotten composer.

If the poem be still intelligible, take a pen and remove carefully all
the necessary particles.


HOW TO WRITE A MODERN PRE-RAPHAELITE POEM.

Take a packet of fine selected early English, containing no words but
such as are obsolete and unintelligible. Pour this into about double
the quantity of entirely new English, which must have never been used
before, and which you must compose yourself, fresh as it is wanted. Mix
these together thoroughly till they assume a colour quite different from
any tongue that was ever spoken, and the material will be ready for use.

Determine the number of stanzas of which your poem shall consist, and
select a corresponding number of the most archaic or most peculiar words
in your vocabulary, allotting one of these to each stanza; and pour in
the other words round them, until the entire poem is filled in.

This kind of composition is usually cast in shapes. These, though not
numerous--amounting in all to something under a dozen--it would take too
long to describe minutely here: and a short visit to Mr. ----'s shop in
King street, where they are kept in stock, would explain the whole of
them. A favourite one, however, is the following, which is of very easy
construction. Take three damozels, dressed in straight night-gowns. Pull
their hair-pins out, and let their hair tumble all about their
shoulders. A few stars may be sprinkled into this with advantage. Place
an aureole about the head of each, and give each a lily in her hand,
about half the size of herself. Bend their necks all different ways, and
set them in a row before a stone wall, with an apple-tree between each
and some large flowers at their feet. Trees and flowers of the right
sort are very plentiful in church windows. When you have arranged all
these objects rightly, take a cast of them in the softest part of your
brain, and pour in your word-composition as above described.

This kind of poem is much improved by what is called a burden. This
consists of a few jingling words, generally of an archaic character,
about which we have only to be careful that they have no reference to
the subject of the poem they are to ornament. They are inserted without
variation between the stanzas.

In conclusion we would remark to beginners that this sort of composition
must be attempted only in a perfectly vacant atmosphere; so that no
grains of common-sense may injure the work whilst in progress.


HOW TO WRITE A NARRATIVE POEM LIKE MR. MORRIS.

Take about sixty pages-full of the same word-mixture as that described
in the preceding; and dilute it with a double quantity of mild modern
Anglo-Saxon. Pour this composition into two vessels of equal size, and
into one of these empty a small mythological story. If this does not put
your readers to sleep soon enough, add to it the rest of the language,
in the remaining vessel.


HOW TO WRITE A SATANIC POEM LIKE THE LATE LORD BYRON.

    (_This recipe is inserted for the benefit of those poets who desire
    to attain what is called originality. This is only to be got by
    following some model of a past generation, which has ceased to be
    made use of by the public at large. We do not however recommend this
    course, feeling sure that all writers in the end will derive far
    more real satisfaction from producing fashionable, than original
    verses; which two things it is impossible to do at one and the same
    time._)

Take a couple of fine deadly sins; and let them hang before your eyes
until they become racy. Then take them down, dissect them, and stew them
for some time in a solution of weak remorse; after which they are to be
devilled with mock-despair.


HOW TO WRITE A PATRIOTIC POEM LIKE MR. SWINBURNE.

Take one blaspheming patriot, who has been hung or buried for some time,
together with the oppressed country belonging to him. Soak these in a
quantity of rotten sentiment, till they are completely sodden; and in
the mean while get ready an indefinite number of Christian kings and
priests. Kick these till they are nearly dead; add copiously broken
fragments of the Catholic church, and mix all together thoroughly. Place
them in a heap upon the oppressed country; season plentifully with very
coarse expressions; and on the top carefully arrange your patriot,
garnished with laurel or with parsley; surround with artificial hopes
for the future, which are never meant to be tasted. This kind of poem is
cooked in verbiage, flavoured with Liberty, the taste of which is much
heightened by the introduction of a few high gods, and the game of
Fortune. The amount of verbiage which Liberty is capable of flavouring,
is practically infinite.




CONCLUSION.


We regret to have to offer this work to the public in its present
incomplete state, the whole of that part treating of the most recent
section of modern poetry, _viz._, the blasphemous and the obscene, being
entirely wanting. It was found necessary to issue this from an eminent
publishing firm in Holywell street, Strand, where by an unforeseen
casualty, the whole of the first edition was seized by the police, and
is at present in the hands of the Society for the Suppression of Vice.
We incline however to trust that this loss will have but little effect;
as indecency and profanity are things in which, even to the dullest,
external instruction is a luxury, rather than a necessity. Those of our
readers, who, either from sense, self-respect, or other circumstances,
are in need of a special training in these subjects, will find excellent
professors of them in any public-house, during the late hours of the
evening; where the whole sum and substance of the fieriest school of
modern poetry is delivered nightly; needing only a little dressing and
flavouring with artificial English to turn it into very excellent
verse.





End of Project Gutenberg's Every Man His Own Poet, by Newdigate Prizeman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERY MAN HIS OWN POET ***

***** This file should be named 24083.txt or 24083.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/0/8/24083/

Produced by K. Nordquist, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
