The Project Gutenberg eBook, Beyond the Marshes, by Ralph Connor


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Beyond the Marshes


Author: Ralph Connor



Release Date: March 1, 2008  [eBook #24724]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEYOND THE MARSHES***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



BEYOND THE MARSHES

by

RALPH CONNOR

Author of "Black Rock" and "The Sky Pilot"







The Westminster Company Limited
Publishers
Toronto

Entered according to Act of the Parliament of Canada, in the year one
thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight, by The Westminster Company,
Limited, at the Department of Agriculture.




Have you ever caught the scent of the clover as you were whirled away
by the train beyond the city on a summer's day and sped through the
rich pasture lands?  And do you remember how you stepped forth at the
first halting-place to secure a sprig of the sweet, homely flower that
had spoken to you so eloquently in its own language, and how you
pressed it in your book?  Does not its perfume remain with you till
this day?  And every now and then a fragrance is wafted to our inner
senses as we read some simple story which is to us as a breath of the
clover, bringing us a message of sweetness and beauty, and going
straight to our hearts with the power that belongs to the secrets which
lie hidden at our lifers core.

And this sweet prairie idyll is surely one of those fragrant messages
which lays its hold on us as we pause for a moment in the midst of our
fevered lives and anxious thoughts, and step across the threshold of
that chamber where we must needs put our shoes from off our feet, for
the place whereon we stand is holy ground.  And as we press on again to
life's duties, may we bear with us something of the precious perfume
diffused by plants which are divine in their origin and which must be
divine in their influence.

ISHBEL ABERDEEN


[Transcriber's note: "ISHBEL" is correct.  It is not "ISABEL",
misspelled.]




BEYOND THE MARSHES


The missionary of the Bonjour field found me standing bag in hand upon
the railway platform watching my train steam away to the east.  He is
glad to see me.  I am of his own kind, and there are so few of his kind
about that his welcome is strong and warm.  He is brown and spare and
tough-looking.  For six months he has driven along the pitching trails
and corduroy roads, drenched by rains, scorched by suns, and pursued by
the flies.  As to the flies there is something to be said.  They add
much to the missionary's burden, and furnish unequaled opportunity for
the exercise of the Christian graces of patience and self-control.  In
early spring they appear, and throughout the whole summer they continue
in varying forms, but in unvarying persistence and ferocity.  There are
marsh flies, the bulldogs, "which take the piece right out," the gray
wings, the blue devils (local name), which doubtless take several
pieces right out, the mosquitoes, unsleeping, unmerciful, unspeakable,
the sand flies, which go right in and disappear, and the black flies.

"When do _they_ go away?" I asked a native.

"Oh, them black fellows go away on snow-shoes."

These each and all have taken a nip and a suck from the missionary as
he pushed on by night and by day through their savage territory.  I
glance at him, and sure enough they seem to have got all the juice out
of him, but they have left the sinew and the bone.  His nerve, too, is
all there, and his heart is sound and "under his ribs," which one of
his admiring flock considers the right spot.

It is Saturday afternoon, and we are to drive to the farthest of his
three stations to be ready for the Communion Service there, at
half-past ten to-morrow morning.

"Where does it lie?" I ask.

"Oh, away beyond the Marshes," was the answer.  Every one evidently
knows where the Great Marshes are.

But first we must drink a delicious cup of tea from a brave young
Scotchwoman, who has learned the trick of making a home for her husband
and babies amid the limitations of Canadian wilds, little like the
Edinburgh home where she herself was a baby, and which she left not so
very long ago.

Then we must take a look at the new manse of which the missionary feels
he has the right to be modestly proud, for it is mostly the work of his
own hand.  He, like his great Master, is a carpenter, and day and night
in the pauses of his preaching and visiting and studying, he has
wrought at it, getting such help as he can, till there it stands, among
the trees, the little cottage manse, announcing to all that the mission
has come to stay.  The _front room_, with writing-desk, book-shelf,
table, all of the missionary's making, does for reception and dining
room, study, and parlor.  Behind it is the kitchen, with ingenious
cupboards; and opening off from this the bedroom, five by seven, with
bedstead and washstand, both home-made, and both nailed fast to the
wall.  Altogether a snug little, tight little house, going a long way
to content one with being a bachelor.

And now we hitch up Golddust, and are off through the glorious yellow
light and purple haze of this September afternoon.  Golddust is the
missionary's horse, and evidently the missionary's weakness.  His name,
and as his owner thinks his speed, his spirit, and other
characteristics, he inherits from his sire, Old Golddust of Western
racing fame.  Old Golddust, if he has transmitted his characteristics,
must have been a horse of singular modesty, for his son continues
resolutely unwilling throughout this drive to make any display of his
nobler qualities.  By an extraordinary piece of good fortune, due to an
evil but unfair report of Golddust in his young days, "they didn't know
how to handle him." the missionary had bought him for twenty-five
dollars!  One result of the deal has been an unlimited confidence on
the part of the missionary in his own horse-dealing instinct.  It is
quite true that Golddust has not always shown his present mild and
trustful disposition.  Indeed, the missionary goes on to tell how,
being loaned for a day to a brother missionary up west, the horse had
returned in the evening much excited, but not much the worse, with a
pair of shafts dangling at his heels.  The missionary brother did not
appear till the day following, and then in a shocking bad temper.  "He
was a Methodist brother, and didn't understand horses"; and the happy,
far-away look in the face of his present owner led me to doubt whether
that day's exploit had lowered Golddust in his estimation.

Meantime we are drinking deep of the delights of this mellow afternoon.
On either side of our trail lie yellow harvest fields, narrow, like
those of eastern Canada, and set in frames of green poplar bluffs that
rustle and shimmer under the softly going wind.  Then on through
_scrub_ we go, bumping over roots and pitching through holes, till we
suddenly push out from the scrub, and before us lie the Marshes.  There
they sweep for miles away, with their different grasses waving and
whispering under the steady blowing breeze, first the red-top, then as
the soil grows wet the blue-joint and the swamp grass, and out of the
standing water the dark green reeds, and farthest in the tall, wild
cane bowing its stately, tasseled head.  These red-top and blue-joint
reaches are the hay-lands of the settlers about.

Skirting the edge of the Marshes, we push again through straggling
scrub, then past more marshes, and into woods where we follow a winding
trail till it leads us into a little clearing.  In the center of the
clearing stands a cluster of log buildings--stables of different kinds,
milk-house, the old shanty, and at a little distance the new house, all
looking snug and trim.  Through the bars we drive into the yard filled
with cattle, for the milking time is on.

A shy lad of ten, with sun-burned, freckled face and good blue eyes,
comes forward and is greeted as "Donald" by the missionary.

"Hello, Donald, how are you?" I ask, opening the conversation.  Donald
looks at me and is inaudible, meanwhile unhitching Golddust with
marvelous rapidity.

"How many cattle have you, Donald?" I venture again.

Donald evidently considered this a reasonable question, for he answers
in delicious Scotch:

"Abou-e-t the-r-r-h-ty."

What a pity we can find no spelling to reproduce that combination of
guttural and aspirate and the inimitable inflection of voice.  It is so
delightful that I ask him again, and again the answer comes with even
more emphasis upon guttural and aspirate, and an added curve to the
inflection:

"Abou-e-t the-r-r-h-ty."

My heart goes out to him, and watching his neat, quick work with
Golddust, I begin to understand the look of thrift about the yard.  It
is the mark of the "weel daein" Scot.

We go up to the door of the new log house.  Before the door are two
broad, flat stones washed clean.  "Scotch again," I say to myself.  Had
I not seen them in many a Scotch village in front of the little stone
cottages, thatched and decked with the climbing rose!

The door is opened by Mrs. McPhail.  That is not her name, of course.
I am not going to outrage the shy modesty of that little woman by
putting her name in bold print for all the world to see.  A dear little
woman she is, bowed somewhat with the burden of her life, but though
her sweet face is worn and thin, it is very bright, and now it is aglow
with welcome to her friend the missionary.  She welcomes me, too, but
with a gentle reserve.  She is ready enough to give of her heart's
wealth, but only to those she has learned to trust.  And my friend has
gained a full reward for his six months' work in that he has won this
woman's willing trust.  When the flush called up by the greeting dies,
I see how pale she is, and I wonder how the winds and frosts and fierce
suns have left so little trace upon the face of a Manitoba farmer's
wife.  I understand this later, but not now.

When she was a girl, her hair was thick and fair, but now it is white
and thin, and is drawn smoothly back and fastened in a decent little
knot behind.  Her eyes, once bright and blue, are blue still, but
faded, for tears, salt and hot, have washed out the color.  She wears a
flannel dress, simple and neat; and the collar at the neck and the
lace-edged kerchief at the breast and the tidy daintiness of all about
her make her a picture of one who had been in her youth "a weel
brocht-up lass."

Her house is her mirror.  The newly plastered, log-built walls are
snow-white, the pine floor snow-white, and when the cloth is spread for
tea, it, too, is snow-white.  Upon the wall hangs a row of graduated
pewter platter covers.  How pathetically incongruous are they on the
walls of this Canadian log house!  But they shine.  The table and the
chairs shine.  The spoons and knives and glasses and dishes shine,
glitter.  The whole kitchen is spotless, from the white window blinds
to the white floor, and there is a glitter on every side, from the
pathetic pewter covers on the wall to the old silver teaspoons upon the
table.

Mr. McPhail comes in, a small man with a quiet, husky voice and a
self-respecting manner.  His eye is clear and dark blue, and has a look
of intellect in it.  When he speaks he has a way of looking straight
into you with a steady, thoughtful gaze.  A man would find it equally
difficult to doubt or to deceive him.  The pioneer life has bowed his
body and subdued his spirit, but the whole mass of his trials and the
full weight of his burdens have not broken his heart's courage, nor
soured its sweetness, nor dimmed his hope in God.

We are invited to tea with an air of apologetic cordiality.  The food
is fit for princes--home-made bread white and flaky, butter yellow and
sweet, eggs just from the nest, and cream.  There is cream enough for
your tea, for fruit, and to drink!  Cake there is, too, and other
dainties; but not for me.  No cake nor dainty can tempt me from this
bread and butter.  Queen Victoria has not better this night.  I much
doubt if she has as good!  God bless her!

At the head and foot of the table sit the father and mother, and
Alexander, Jean, and Donald, with the missionary and myself, make up
the company.  The children take their tea in silence but for a
whispered request now and then, or a reply to some low-toned direction
from the mother.  They listen interested in their elders' talk, and
hugely amused at the jokes.  There is no pert interjection of smart
sayings, so awful in ill-trained children of ill-bred parents.  They
have learned that ancient and almost forgotten doctrine that children
should be seen.  I tell my best stories and make my pet jokes just to
see them laugh.  They laugh, as they do everything else, with a gentle
reserve; and occasionally Jean, a girl of fifteen, shy like the rest,
pulls herself up with a blush lest she has been unduly moved to
laughter.  The mother presides over all with a quiet efficiency, taking
keen, intelligent interest in the conversation, now and then putting a
revealing question, all the while keeping a watchful eye upon the
visitors' plates lest they should come near being empty.

The talk goes back to the old times.  But these people talk with
difficulty when their theme is themselves.  But my interest and
questions draw their story from them.

Fifteen years ago the father and mother left the cozy Glasgow home and
the busy life of that busy city, and came over sea and land with their
little girl and baby boy to Winnipeg.  There they lived for two years,
till with the land-yearning in their hearts they came out from the town
to this far-back spot away beyond the Marshes.  Here they cut out of
the forest their home, and here they have lived amid the quiet, cool
woods ever since, remote from the bustle and heat of the great world.

"Why to this place instead of to any other?" I ask.

"There was the hay from the Marshes to be sold, and the wood, too,"
answered the little man.  "But," he went on, "I could not make much out
of the wood, and I was too old to learn, so I gave it up, and went into
Winnipeg to work at my trade.  And, indeed," he added cheerfully, "I
made very good wages of it."

I look at him and think of the day when he gave up the fight with the
wood, and came in beaten to tell his wife how he must go to the city.
I know she smiled at him, her heart going down the while, and cheered
him, though she was like to despair at the thought of the lonely
winter.  Ah, the pathos of it!  Did God help them that day?  Ay, and
for many a day after.  And may He forgive all people whose lives
overflow with plenty of everything, and who fret their souls for petty
ills.

Through the winter the snow piled up round the shanty where lived the
little fair-haired woman and her little girl of nine years and two
babies now, thinking, talking, dreaming, weeping, waiting for the
spring and the home-coming of the father.  One of the horses died, and
the other was sold.  Their places were taken by oxen.  "And the oxen
are really very good; I like to work with the oxen," says the little
man, with heroic Scotch philosophy and invincible content.  He cannot
have the best; he will make the best of what he can have.  Again, may
God forgive us who fling down tools because they are not the best, and
refuse to work, and fret instead.

Those days are all gone, but they are not yet passed out of the life of
this family.  They have left their stamp on heart and character of
these steadfast, gentle people, for they are a part of all that they
have met.

After tea I am told that I have not yet seen Katie, and the manner of
telling makes me feel that there is something in store for me.  And so
there is.  I am taken across a narrow hall and into another room,
spotless as the kitchen, the same white walls, white floor, and dainty
curtains.  This is Katie's room, and there upon a bed lies Katie
herself.  I have come into the heart of the home.

Katie is the eldest of the family.  She is the little girl of nine that
stayed through the long winter with the mother, and helped her with the
babies inside and the beasts outside, and was the cheer and comfort of
the house, while the father was away in Winnipeg, brave little girl
that she was.  She is now twenty-four, and for the last nine years she
has suffered from a mysterious and painful illness, and now for
eighteen months she has lain upon her bed and she cannot rise.  We all
have in us the beast feeling that shrinks from the weak and wounded;
but when I look at Katie there is no shrinking in me.  Her face has not
a sign of fretful weakness.  It seems as if it had caught the glitter
of the home, of the pewter covers, and the old silver teaspoons.  It is
bright.  That is its characteristic.  The broad brow is smooth, and the
mouth, though showing the lines of suffering--what control these lines
suggest!--is firm and content.  The dark eyes look out from under their
straight black brows with a friendly searching.  "Come near," they say;
"are you to be trusted?" and you know you are being found out.  But
they are kindly eyes and full of peace, with none of that look in them
that shows when the heart is anxious or sore.  The face, the mouth, the
eyes, tell the same tale of a soul that has left its storms behind and
has made the haven, though not without sign of the rough weather
without.

There is no sick-room feeling here.  The coverlet, the sheets, the
night-dress, with frills at the breast and wrists--everything about
Katie is sweet and fresh.  Every morning of her life she is sponged and
dressed and "freshed up a bit" by her mother's loving hands.  It takes
an hour to do it, and there are many household cares; but what an hour
that is!  What talk, what gentle, tearful jokes, what tender touches!
The hour is one of sacrament to them both, for He is always there in
whose presence they are reverent and glad.

We "take the books," and I am asked to be priest.  One needs his holy
garments in a sanctuary like this.  After the evening worship is over I
talk with Katie.

"Don't you feel the time long?  Don't you grow weary sometimes?"

"No!  Oh, no!" with slight surprise.  "I am content."

"But surely you get lonely--blue now and then?"

"Lonely?" with the brightest of smiles.  "Oh, no!  They are all here."

Heaven forgive me!  I had thought she perhaps might have wanted some of
the world's cheerful distraction.

"But was it always so?  Didn't you fret at the first?" I persisted.

"No, not at _the first_."

"That means that bad times came afterwards?"

"Yes," she answers slowly, and a faint red comes up in her cheek as if
from shame.  "After the first six months I found it pretty hard."

I wait, not sure what thoughts I have brought to her, and then she goes
on:

"It was hard to see my mother tired with the work, and Jean could not
get to school"; and she could go no further.

"But that all passed away?" I asked, after a pause.

"Oh, yes!" and her smile says much.  It was the memory of her triumph
that brought her smile, and it illumined her face.

My words came slowly.  I could not comfort where comfort was not
needed.  I could not pity, facing a smile like that; and it seemed hard
to rejoice over one whose days were often full of pain.  But it came to
me to say:

"He has done much for you; and you are doing much for Him."

"Yes: He has done much for me."  But she would go no further.  Her
service seemed small to her, but to me it seemed great and high.  We,
in our full blood and unbroken life, have our work, our common work,
but this high work is not for us--we are not good enough.  This He
keeps for those His love makes pure by pain.  This would almost make
one content to suffer.

Next morning we all went to the little log school, where the Communion
service was to be held--all but the father and Katie.

"You have done me much good," I could not but say before I left; "and
you are a blessing in your home."

The color rose in her pale cheek, but she only said:

"I am glad you were sent to us."

Then I came away, humbly and softly, feeling as if I had been in a holy
place, where I was not worthy to stand.  And a holy place it will ever
be to me--the white room, the spotless white room, lit by the glory of
that bright, sweet, patient face.  At the Table that day the mother's
face had the same glory--the glory of those that overcome, the
reflection of the glory to follow.  Happy, blessed home!  The snows may
pile up into the bluff and the blizzards sweep over the whistling reeds
of the Marshes, but nothing can chill the love or dim the hopes that
warm and brighten the hearts in the little log house Beyond the
Marshes, for they have their source from that high place where love
never faileth and hopes never disappoint.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEYOND THE MARSHES***


******* This file should be named 24724.txt or 24724.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/7/2/24724



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

