The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Pirate's Pocket Book, by Dion Clayton
Calthrop


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Pirate's Pocket Book


Author: Dion Clayton Calthrop



Release Date: March 8, 2008  [eBook #24783]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIRATE'S POCKET BOOK***


E-text prepared by Emmy and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 24783-h.htm or 24783-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/7/8/24783/24783-h/24783-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/7/8/24783/24783-h.zip)





THE PIRATE'S POCKET BOOK

by

DION CLAYTON CALTHROP







[Illustration]


Sisley's Ltd.
Makers Of Beautiful Books
London




            To
            GEORGE,
            BARBARA
            and
            JAMES
            BYAM SHAW

        _with my love_.       1907.




THE
PIRATE'S POCKET BOOK

THIS book you hold in your hand belonged once to a very celebrated
Pirate.

He was so celebrated that the newspapers--of that time--always said nice
things about him, and always knew what he was doing before he did
himself. As he was a very truthful man, he did the things, so that the
editors might not get into trouble.

Which was kind.

By which I do not mean that he was always kind.

[Illustration: MAP of Tomb's Island (_very exciting_).]

Nobody knew how old he was. Some said that he was so old that he had
never been born.

Some said that he must be young or he could not be so wicked.

So you see there were two opinions about him.

There are always two opinions about a celebrated man.

If you look at him you will see that he dressed to please himself.

[Illustration: Supposed birthplace of Tomb family. Family of Bone still
living in the cottage.]

He wore a nice hat--but you have noticed that; and he had a roving eye.

By which I do not mean his eye walked about like this, but that he
looked around him a good deal.

[Illustration]

If you are thinking of becoming a Pirate--and there is plenty of room at
the top of every profession--you will have to look about a good deal,
because you will have enemies.

[Illustration: _He dreams of other worlds to conquer._]

Tom Tomb--that was not his name, but it was the way he signed other
people's cheques, and your father and mother will tell you that this is
a very mean trick--lived partly on an island, and partly on board the
_Inky Murk_.

[Illustration]

You will understand that I mean not with one foot on the island and one
on the boat, but sometimes on one and sometimes on the other.

[Illustration]

Now T. T. never robbed the poor.

[Illustration]

Because it was not worth his while.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

But any person who looked rich suffered accordingly.

[Illustration]

The _Inky Murk_ was the name of his boat. You can make one curiously
like it with two chairs and a rug.

[Illustration]

One day Tomb captured a young fellow--a very handsome lad too.

It was off a certain island where Tom Tomb had a neat cottage, in the
garden of which he grew flowers for a pastime.

[Illustration]

Because, of course, he needed a little time to himself in between his
tremendous fights.

[Illustration]

The young fellow was stealing flowers.

He was surprised to see Captain Tomb.

When I say he was surprised, you will see what I mean by the picture.

[Illustration]

"What cinderadustmat do you mean," yelled Tomb, in a voice like a
railway accident, "by stealing my flowers?"

"I thought they were wild," said the young fellow, taking his pipe from
his mouth.

[Illustration]

"Wild!" shrieked Tomb. "Wild!!" he bawled.

This last yell was so powerful that three of his buttons flew off his
coat.

The young fellow caught them neatly in his left hand, and presented them
to the Captain on bended knee.

[Illustration]

The neat act saved the lad's life.

"An honour to serve you, Captain Thomas Tomb," said he.

[Illustration]

"You know me?" asked Tomb, smiling upon the boy.

[Illustration]

"I thought it must be your face," said the lad boldly.

He was about to speak again, had not Tomb silenced him with a gesture.
He liked the lad.

Had he spoken again, Tomb would have silenced him for ever.

He was about to say that any other man with a face like that would have
died long ago, from wounded vanity.

[Illustration: From a very rare old print.]

"Would you care to be a Pirate, my youthful fellow?" said Tomb.

[Illustration]

The lad hesitated. "My father . . ." he began.

"Dead," said Tomb, in a hollow voice.

"My mother . . ."

"Dead," Tomb replied, in a monotonous whisper.

"My brother and sister . . ."

Tomb raised a sorrowful hand: his heart was touched.

"My family . . ." said the young man in despair.

"My poor boy," said Tomb, with tears in his eyes, "my poor, dear fellow,
I killed them all not an hour ago."

[Illustration]

"Then my sweetheart would object to my becoming a Pirate," said the lad,
weeping.

"Enough," said Tomb; "you are called from henceforth Dingy David. Now to
sea!"

[Illustration]

For ten years they plundered upon the Spanish Main, until they acquired
so much money that Bilge Island, Tomb's business address, smelt of
hoarded gold, and the beach glittered with jewels.

[Illustration]

Then both Tomb and David--I am keeping the secret of his real name to
the end--became tired of so much adventure.

They had sailed in many seas: the Spanish Main--commonly known as the
Dining-room Carpetwaters--the Kitchen Archipelago, the Drawing-room
Inland Sea, the Creek of Conservatory, and the Lake of Passages. They
had roamed the Wilderness of the High Street, the terrors of the Gardens
they knew, and the Gulf of Front Hall was common water.

So they retired for a breathing space and a wash to that Island where
the neat cottage stood and the geraniums grew.

[Illustration]

They moored the _Inky Murk_ to a low-growing pom-pom tree, and then,
stepping carefully, like those unaccustomed to dry land (or wet land
either, for the matter of that), they gazed upon each other in silence.

[Illustration]

No one, not even the most careful observer, would have recognised in the
two dusty figures, the once spruce forms of Captain Thomas Tomb and
Dingy David.

[Illustration]

"Home!" said the young fellow, throwing a diamond at a wave-crest. (When
I say "diamond"--they were always finding them in corners of their
pockets.)

"Home once more!"

"Cinderadustmat!" exclaimed Tomb. "Let me hear you, oh! let me hear you
say the word again!"

"Home," said the young fellow, gazing at the ripe ockapillies hanging
overhead.

[Illustration]

Mastering his ill-concealed emotion, T. T. rose and strode--(when I say
strode--T. T. never walked: he strolled, strutted, strode, or stepped,
invariably)--towards the house.

[Illustration]

Threw open the door!! xxxxxx! o! z! What a sight met his eyes!!

Dust, dust, dust--everywhere.

[Illustration]

Dust met his eye. (When I say that, I mean that he saw dust--over all
the simple cottage furniture he loved.)

He groaned three times.

The young man, who was idly chewing the stone of a cringet, turned and
saw, through the open door, dust, dust, dust.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Leaping to his feet, he rushed to the Captain's side.

"Captain," said he, "we must have a Charwoman."

(I say charwoman, meaning a woman who is paid to do work that other
servants are hired to do, but will not.)

[Illustration]

In less time than it takes to skin an acquadatoric, Dingy David was in
the rowing-boat making for the shore of the mainland.

[Illustration]

Sixty-eight hours of hard rowing, without a rest, brought the strong
young fellow to the coast.

It was night.

[Illustration: Pause--excited reader.]

A light burned in the window of the lonely cottage that stood upon the
shore.

[Illustration]

It was the work of a moment for Dingy David to seize upon the beautiful
maiden who was writing jam labels, by the light of a solitary candle.

Such are the lives of the humble.

[Illustration]

Without a glance at her face, he carried her at breakneck speed to the
boat--pushed off, and rowed like Hercules for the island.

[Illustration]

Exactly one hundred and thirty-six hours--which is five days sixteen
hours from the time he started--David brought the captive beauty and
laid her, senseless with fatigue, at the feet of Tom Tomb.

[Illustration]

"What have we here?" asked Tomb, pronouncing the H very clearly.

"A charwoman, sire," responded David; and, smiling, the lad fell
asleep.

[Illustration]

When he awoke the sun was shining and the day was warm.

One glance showed him that the cottage was a model of cleanliness.

(Pirates are sharp glancers.)

[Illustration]

A smell of breakfast smote his nostrils pleasantly.

It was the work of a moment to dash into the house, wash, shave,
and--there, upon a snowy bed, were laid the very clothes in which--long
years ago--he had been captured.

In another moment he was in them and dashing downstairs, doing up the
buttons as he went.

He flung himself, panting, into the breakfast-room.

[Illustration]

The glorious girl looked up from her bacon with a cry.

Tomb started to his feet.

The young man opened his mouth.

[Illustration]

"Ermyntrude!" he called.

"Wencheslaus!" she exclaimed.

For once Tomb's cool courage failed him.--He started back.

The sweethearts were in each other's arms.

[Illustration]

"Listen," said Tomb, when he regained his breath; and they, gazing into
each other's eyes, listened.

"Gaze elsewhere," said Tomb, "and I will unfold a tale."

In the heat of the moment he put his sleeve into the butter.

Ermyntrude sprang to his assistance. Tomb enfolded her in his embrace.

[Illustration]

"This lady is my daughter," he said, turning to Wencheslaus, who stood
amazed.

"I will not bother you with the story," said Tomb, "but five and forty
years ago I wooed and wed her lovely mother. Twenty-one years ago to-day
Ermyntrude was born, and her mother, after lingering two years, died.
Leaving the girl in the care of an honest fishwife (when I say honest, I
mean, as honest as her profession allowed), I roamed the seas as a
Pirate: sorrow made me merciless. Then, when I wished to return to my
daughter, I found that I had lost her address."

"Father!" said Ermyntrude.

"My daughter," he exclaimed, "I am a careless man!"

"And I?" said Wencheslaus--"what is the secret of my birth?"

Going up to him, Tomb, with one superb movement, bared the youth's arm.
Upon it was tattooed, in gold and purple, the crest of a noble family.

"As I thought!" exclaimed Tomb; then he removed his hat. "Lord
Wencheslaus of When-cheeselawn!"

"Then my father _was_ . . ." the youth began.

"The Duke of Thingamaroo," said Tomb, bowing low.

[Illustration]

A cry sounded from the cellars of the cottage.

Tomb again started.

"I had forgotten," said he. Then he put his hand into his pocket, and
drew forth this very book.

"Ten years ago," said he, consulting his notes, "I told you that I had
killed your family. It was not true."

"Not true?" said Lord Wencheslaus--for so we must now call him.

"Not strictly accurate," Tomb replied. "I immured them in these cellars,
with ten years' provisions."

With a noble gesture, he flung the key of the cellars upon the table.

"Release them, my Lord," he said.

[Illustration]

We draw a veil over the rapturous meeting.

[Illustration]

When the boat was loaded with the noble family, Lord Wencheslaus
(erstwhile Dingy David) and Ermyntrude Tomb stood hand in hand in front
of Captain Thomas Tomb.

"You must often come and see us, father," she said.

"My little Ermyntrude," he said, "you can bet your back hair your poor
old father will often come."

Lord W. wrung Tomb's hand: his emotion was too great for words.

They stepped into the boat and sailed away.

[Illustration]

As they touched the mainland they started.

Boom! boom!! came the sound of guns across the water.

Tom Tomb was at his old game.

[Illustration]


PRINTED BY NEILL AND COMPANY, LIMITED, EDINBURGH.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIRATE'S POCKET BOOK***


******* This file should be named 24783.txt or 24783.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/7/8/24783



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

