Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, December 1873, Vol. XIV. No. 6, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Nursery, December 1873, Vol. XIV. No. 6

Author: Various

Release Date: March 29, 2008 [EBook #24943]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NURSERY, DEC. 1873, VOL.XIV NO.6 ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





THE

NURSERY

_A Monthly Magazine_

FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

VOLUME XIV.--No. 2

        BOSTON:
        JOHN L. SHOREY, No. 36, BROMFIELD STREET.
        1873.




        Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1873, by

        JOHN L. SHOREY,

        In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.





        BOSTON:
        STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY RAND, AVERY, & CO.




[Illustration: CONTENTS.]


IN PROSE.

                                                    PAGE.

  Clear the Coast                                     161

  A Letter to Santa Claus                             165

  The Boy and the Nuts                                166

  Eddy's Thanksgiving                                 167

  Benny's Arithmetic Lesson                           170

  Grandpa's Boots                                     171

  What Jessie Cortrell did                            173

  The Balloon                                         178

  The Starling and the Sparrows                       181

  The Sprained Ankle                                  187


IN VERSE.

                                                    PAGE.

  Who is it?                                          164

  The Acorns                                          175

  Grandmother's Birthday                              176

  What the Cat said to the Monkey                     180

  The Tea-Party                                       185

[Illustration]





[Illustration: "CLEAR THE COAST."]




"CLEAR THE COAST!"


"[Illustration: C]LEAR the coast! clear the coast!" cried Albert and
Frank, as they came down hill swiftly on Frank's new sled.

"Look out for that woman!" cried little Harry, who was standing at the
top of the hill.

A poor German woman was crossing the road. She had a large basket full
of bundles, which she carried on her head. In her right hand she had an
umbrella and a tin pail, and on her arm another basket. Truly, seeing
that the roads were slippery, she had more than her share of burdens.

She tried to get out of the way; but Frank's new sled was such a swift
runner, that it came near striking her, and caused her to nearly lose
her balance, putting her at the same time into a great fright.

"You bad boys, you almost threw me down!" she exclaimed, when she
recovered from the start they had given her, and looked around to see if
she had dropped any of her bundles.

But down the hill they rushed on their sled, Frank losing his hat in
their descent, but little caring for that in his delight. The two boys,
after reaching the foot of the hill, turned, and began to drag their
sled up again.

"That woman," said Frank, "called us bad boys. Let us tell her that we
are not bad boys. We did not mean to run her down."

"Here comes Harry, running. What has he got to say?" asked Albert.

"I tell you what, boys," said Harry, "you'll be taken up if you run
people down in that way."

"Why didn't she clear the coast when I told her to?" said Albert.

"Why didn't you steer your sled out of the way?" returned Harry.

"I didn't hit her, did I?" said Albert.

"No; but you were trying to see how near you could come without hitting
her," replied Harry. "It's too bad to treat a poor old woman so!"

"So it was," said Frank. "What shall we do about it?"

"That's for Albert to say," exclaimed Harry.

"Well," replied Albert, "the right thing will be to offer to drag her
bundles for her on the sled."

"That's it!" said the other two boys.

By this time they had reached the place where the poor woman was moving
slowly along under her heavy burdens. She seemed very tired, and sighed
often as she picked her way timidly over the frozen snow.

"We are sorry we frightened you," said Albert. "We did not mean to do
any harm. Put your baskets on this sled, and we will drag them for you
as far as you want to go."

"Well, you are little gentlemen, after all," said the woman, "and I'm
sorry I was so vexed with you."

"You had cause," said Frank: "we were to blame."

Then she put her two baskets and the tin pail on the sled; and the three
boys escorted her to her home, where she thanked them heartily for the
way in which they had made amends for Albert's bad steering.

                                                  UNCLE CHARLES.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




WHO IS IT?


        SURELY a step on the carpet I hear,
        Some quiet mouse that is creeping so near.
        Two little feet mount the rung of my chair:
        True as I live, there is somebody there!
        Ten lily fingers are over my eyes,
        Trying to take me by sudden surprise;
        Then a voice, calling in merriest glee,
        "Who is it? Tell me, and you may go free."

        "Who is it? Leave me a moment to guess.
        Some one who loves me?" The voice answers, "Yes."
        "Some one who's fairer to me than the flowers,
        Brighter to me than the sunshiny hours?
        Darling, whose white little hands make me blind
        Unto all things that are dark and unkind;
        Sunshine and blossoms, and diamond and pearl,--
        Papa's own dear little, sweet little girl!"

                                                  GEORGE COOPER.

[Illustration]




A LETTER TO SANTA CLAUS.


THE little boy who got his aunt to write this letter for him wishes to
have it appear in "The Nursery," so that Santa Claus may be sure to read
it. When it is _printed_, the little boy says he can read it himself.
Here is the letter:--

        DEAR MR. SANTA CLAUS,--Please, sir, could you
        not bring me a team of goats next Christmas? I
        do want them so much! Other little boys no
        bigger than I am have a pair of goats to play
        with.

        When I ask my mother to get me a pair, she says
        she will see, but thinks I shall have to wait a
        little while. Now, dear Mr. Santa Claus, I do
        not feel as if I _could_ wait.

        Besides, ma's "little while" seems like a great
        while to me, and when I get older I shall have
        to go to school; but now I could play almost
        all the time with my little goats, if I had
        them. Oh, dear! I wish I had them now! I can
        hardly wait till Christmas.

        I will be very kind to them, and give them
        plenty to eat, and a good warm bed at night.
        Brother Charley says he will get me a wagon, if
        you, good Mr. Santa Claus, will give me the
        goats.

        Folks say, that, although you are an old man,
        you love little children; especially little
        boys with black eyes, and who obey their
        mother. Well, my eyes are very black; and I
        love my mother dearly, and try to obey her.

        My name is Francis Lincoln Noble: I live at
        214, South 8th Street, Williamsburgh, L.I. The
        house is quite high; but, dear Mr. Santa Claus,
        I think your nimble deer can climb to the top
        of it.

        You can put the little goats right down through
        the chimney in ma's room. I will take away the
        fireboard, so they can come out at the
        fireplace. Oh, how happy I shall be when I wake
        in the morning, and see them! I shall say,
        "Merry Christmas!" to everybody; and everybody
        will say, "Merry Christmas!" to me.

        But dear, good Mr. Santa Claus, if you cannot
        get to the top of the house to put them down
        the chimney, please to bring them up the
        front-steps, and tie them to the door-knob; and
        then blow your whistle, and I will run right
        down to the door; and, dear Mr. Santa Claus,
        could you not stop long enough for me to say,
        "Thank you!" for my mother says all good boys
        say, "Thank you!" when they receive a present?

                                                  FRANCIS LINCOLN NOBLE.




THE BOY AND THE NUTS.


A BOY once found some nuts in a jar. Like all boys, he was fond of nuts,
and was glad to hear that he might put his hand _once_ in the jar, and
have all the nuts he could then take out. He thrust his hand down the
neck of the jar, and took hold of all the nuts he could. When his hand
was quite full, he did his best to draw it out of the jar.

But the neck of the jar was small, and his hand was so full of nuts,
that he could not draw it out. He felt so sad, that tears fell from his
eyes. His friend who stood near told him to let go half the nuts. He did
so, and then drew out his hand with ease.

We shall find it so in life: men lose all, if they try to get too much.

                                                  T. C.

[Illustration]




EDDY'S THANKSGIVING.


LAST year Eddy spent Thanksgiving Day at his grandpa's. For a week
before the time came, he chattered about going. He wanted to take with
him his drum and his rocking-chair, and Frisk his dog. But mamma said he
would have plenty of playthings and playmates without them.

You would have thought so too, if you had seen the sleighs full of
uncles and aunts and cousins that came driving up to grandpa's door the
day before Thanksgiving; and, if you had heard the laughing and
shouting, you would have said they were as merry a set of people as ever
were got together.

Thanksgiving morning, grandpa said they must all go to church,--every
one of them, big and little,--except Aunt Susan, who had a bad cold. So
mamma dressed Eddy for church, and told him to be careful to keep
himself looking nice; for he was one of the worst boys to tear and soil
his clothes that you ever saw.

Eddy took a seat in the parlor, intending to be very careful; but pretty
soon he heard his cousins Harry and John talking in the kitchen, and
went out to see what was going on there.

[Illustration]

As he passed along, he saw Towzer, grandpa's great shaggy dog, on the
porch, and thought he must have a romp with him. He made Towzer sit up
and shake hands, and perform other tricks that had been taught him. Then
he thought Towzer would make a good horse.

So he straddled Towzer's back with his short fat legs, and told him to
"go 'long." But Towzer did not like to play horse, and tried to shake
Eddy off. Eddy held fast, and wriggled and shouted to make Towzer go.
All at once the dog gave a spring, and threw Eddy off into a puddle of
water.

Poor Eddy went into the house, muddy and dripping, and found that
everybody was ready to start for church. Of course, there was not time
to dress him again; so he had to stay with Aunt Susan.

He did not think that was very hard; for, after he was dressed clean
again, Aunt Susan gave him a cooky to eat, and a picture-book to look
at.

When he had got through with the book, she took him down cellar with her
to get some apples. Aunt Susan soon filled her pan, and started back;
but Eddy stopped to taste the apples in every barrel.

"Come, Eddy," called Aunt Susan from the head of the cellar-stairs.

"In a minute," answered Eddy, straining to reach the apples in a barrel
that was nearly empty. Just then he slipped, and fell into the barrel
head first, with his feet sticking up.

How he squealed! Aunt Susan's cold had made her so deaf, that she did
not hear him. He kept on squealing and kicking until the barrel tipped
over; and then he backed out of it, and went slowly up to the kitchen,
very red in the face.

He was pretty quiet after that until dinner was ready. After dinner the
children cracked nuts, and parched corn, and played merry games; and
Eddy had his share of all the fun. When he went to bed, his Aunt Susan
asked him whether he had had a good time.

"Splendid!" said Eddy.

"How did you like being thrown into the puddle?" said Aunt Susan.

"First rate!" said Eddy.

"Did you think it good fun to dive into the barrel?"

"Jolly!" said the little rogue. "I'd like to do it again."

                                                  M. F. BURLINGAME.




BENNY'S ARITHMETIC LESSON.


LITTLE BENNY has just begun to go to school.

Some boys as young and active as he is would rather play all day long
than to spend part of the time in the school-room; but he seems to like
it.

Almost every day he comes running home, saying, "I've learned something
more to-day;" and, after he has told us about it, we send him out of
doors with his little cousins, who live close by.

We know that all work and no play would make Benny a dull boy.

To-day he felt very proud, because he had been learning to add. He said
that he could say the first table.

I told him to begin, and I would tell him if he was right.

So he began; and this is the way it went on:--

        BENNY.--One and one are two.
        MAMMA.--That is very true.
        BENNY.--Two and one are three.
        MAMMA.--Nought could better be.
        BENNY.--Four and one are five.
        MAMMA.--True as I'm alive.
        BENNY.--Five and one are six.
        MAMMA.--That's a pretty fix.
        BENNY.--Six and one are seven.
        MAMMA.--Thought you'd say eleven.
        BENNY.--Seven and one are eight.
        MAMMA.--Bless your curly pate!
        BENNY.--Eight and one are nine.
        MAMMA.--Why, how very fine!
        BENNY.--Nine and one are ten.
        MAMMA.--Pretty good for Ben.

We had a good hearty laugh when we got through; for Benny's earnest way
of reciting pleased me, and he enjoyed the emphatic manner in which I
replied to his additions. How many of the little "Nursery" boys can say
the table that Benny did?

                                                  C. H.

[Illustration]




GRANDPA'S BOOTS.


HOW the stars did snap that December night! The moon was up too; and how
cold and white she looked!

And how busy Jack Frost was! No one saw him swing a hammer; no one heard
him drive a nail: but, by the time morning had come, he had laid right
across the ponds and the river a floor of ice smoother than any wooden
floor ever put down by the joiners of Norridgewock.

All the boys were out sliding. Ed Peet had come from over the river;
Fred Danforth was there from the tavern; and George Sawtelle came
running up from the big house under the willow. Others were there too,
slipping along on Jack Frost's floor.

Little Albert looked out of the window, and saw the boys at their play.
Why couldn't he go out too?

"Shall I go, mother?" he asked.

"Your slippers are too thin, Albert."

"Oh! I can put on grandpa's boots."

"Yes, you can go, but be careful. You are too young for such rough
sport."

Off scampered the eager feet, and on went the big boots. A smile must
have lighted up the mother's eyes as she heard her little boy tramping
over the floor in the heavy boots.

The boys were taking their turn at sliding. Away down at the end of the
line stood Albert. They were sliding carefully, not running too hard;
for a little way out the ice was thin. After a while, it was Albert's
turn. "I'll beat those big, clumsy boys," he thought.

Taking a long run, driving ahead with all his force, he shouted, "Now
see your grandpa go!" And, sure enough, grandpa's boots went and went,
out where the ice was thin, and down went Albert into the water! The
water was not deep, though. He was out again in a moment; and there he
stood, cold and dripping like an icicle in a January thaw.

I can hear the boys laughing, and I seem to see the smile lighting up
the mother's brown eyes still more merrily, when her little boy came
home. Albert never forgot it. In after-years he would say, "Whenever I
am inclined to show off, I think of grandpa's boots."

                                                  E. A. R.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




WHAT JESSIE CORTRELL DID.


POOR little Johnny Cortrell's eyes kept growing dimmer; and one day in
May-time they failed altogether, and Jessie, his sister, led him home
from school stone blind.

His father and mother were greatly distressed at this. Dr. James held a
candle to the poor blind eyes; but they never blinked. He said he was
not enough of an oculist to determine whether they could be cured; but
there was a doctor in Boston--Dr. Williamson, 33 Blank Street--who would
be able to pronounce with certainty.

Now, the Cortrells lived thirty-five miles away from Boston, and were
quite poor. The father did not see how he could afford the expense of
sending Johnny to Boston yet a while, but hoped to do it in the autumn.

Little Jessie overheard her parents talking on the subject, and made up
her mind to try and see what she could do. She thought she could not
wait three, four, or five months, to have Johnny cured: it ought to be
done at once.

The next day she told her plan to Johnny, and they made their
preparations; and one bright morning, when it was school-time, she and
Johnny stole out of the house hand in hand, quite unnoticed by any one.

They met a little girl named Jane Anderson; and by her Jessie sent the
following letter to her parents:--

        DEAR FATHER AND MOTHER,--I didn't ask you, for
        fear you would say No; but Johnny and I are
        going to Boston to see Dr. Williamson. I heard
        all the reasons why you couldn't take Johnny
        till fall, and I couldn't wait. 'Twon't hurt us
        to walk this nice spring weather; and I don't
        think any one will refuse to give a poor blind
        boy and his sister a place to sleep, or a bowl
        of bread and milk to eat. We shall ask our
        road, and we won't get lost. Our Father in
        heaven will go with us all the way.

Mr. Cortrell was much alarmed. "I must start after them, wife," said he.
"Those children on the road to Boston all alone! Jessie is crazy."

But Mrs. Cortrell said, "What if God put it into her heart, John?" And
so they concluded to do nothing about it.

Well, the children walked and walked, and now and then they got a drive;
and, on the third morning, Jessie led Johnny into Boston over the
Brighton road.

They found Dr. Williamson. He received them kindly. He examined Johnny's
eyes, and then said to Jessie, "I think there are nine chances in ten
that I can cure your brother."

Jessie bounded with joy. The good doctor accommodated them in his own
house while the cure was going on; and after not many days he sent the
children home in the cars, and, as he left them, placed a sealed
envelope in the hand of Jessie.

"My bill for your father: there is no haste about it," said he kindly;
and then he bade them good-by.

The journey was a short one. Happy enough were the parents to see their
dear children back again, and Johnny quite cured of his blindness.

Then Jessie handed her father the bill. "Whatever it is, I shall pay it
cheerfully," said he. He opened it, and read,--

   "For services rendered Johnny and Jessie Cortrell.
                                  "Received payment in full,
                                                    "CHARLES WILLIAMSON."

So Johnny got his eyes again, and the doctor's bill was settled; and
Jessie had done it all.[1]

[Illustration]

FOOTNOTE:

[1] From Bed-Time Stories, by Louise Chandler Moulton, published by
Roberts Brothers, Boston.




THE ACORNS.


        "TALL oaks from little acorns grow."
        Yes, darling children, that is so:
        Then plant your acorns; do not fear;
        And fruit will by and by appear.
        The line you learn to-day may be
        The very seed of Wisdom's tree.

                                                  EMILY CARTER.




GRANDMOTHER'S BIRTHDAY.


        GRANDMA'S birthday is to-day!
        This we all have come to say,
        Lest she should forget the time,
        Wondering at this joyful rhyme.

        Welcome, welcome, happy day!
        Love shed brightness on her way!
        And for her may many more
        Just such birthdays be in store!

        We have come with fruits and flowers,
        Tokens of this love of ours;
        But our love shall flourish bright
        When these flowers are faded quite.

        Take them, grandma, and be sure
        We are rich, though we are poor,--
        Rich in love, though poor in gold:
        So to greet you we make bold.

        Blessings be around your way!
        Love surround you every day!
        Pleasant thoughts be with you still,
        Gently going down the hill!

        And may your example bright
        Keep us always in the right!
        So, "Hurrah, hurrah!" we say:
        "Grandma's birthday is to-day!"

                                                  DORA BURNSIDE.

[Illustration]




THE BALLOON.


[Illustration]

A BALLOON was going up from Boston Common, and two children were out
upon a hill in the country watching for it. "There it is!" said Willy,
as he pointed to a black speck right over the State House.

[Illustration]

The speck seemed to grow larger every moment. "The balloon is coming
this way," said Willy. "I can see a man in it waving a flag." By and by
it seemed to be coming down on a hill close by where the children stood.
They ran to meet it, shouting as they went; but it was a great deal
farther off than they thought it was.

[Illustration]

A good many other people were looking at the balloon at the same time;
and it came down in a pasture where some children were picking berries.
When it got almost down, the man looked out and said, "Have you any
blueberries for sale?"

[Illustration]

The children held out their baskets, and said, "Yes, plenty of
them."--"Well, then," said the man, "I think this is a good place to
stop at."

                                                  W. O. C.

[Illustration]




WHAT THE CAT SAID TO THE MONKEY.


        YOU cowardly monkey, come out if you dare!
        I'll teach you my dear little kittens to scare.
        Because I had gone a few moments away,
        You thought that to plague them was good monkey play.

        But when I came back, just in season, I saw
        What was up, and I gave you a pat with my paw:
        It didn't set well, might I judge from your face.
        What ails your poor arm? and why that grimace?

        Now, here hangs my paw; and, if you're inclined
        To try it again, 'twill be ready, you'll find.
        And mark, Mr. Monkey, if up to your fun,
        I'll show, to your sorrow, I have more than one.

        So Velvetpaw, Whitefoot, and Darkey, don't fear!
        No monkey shall harm you while mother is near.
        The rascal who plagued you has found I am rough:
        Of my paw and my claw he has had quite enough.


[Illustration]




THE STARLING AND THE SPARROWS.


THE starling is a trim little bird, measuring from seven to eight inches
in length. He goes dressed in black, and his coat glistens like satin in
the sunlight. In autumn, however, after moulting, he looks as if
bedecked with white pearls.

This is his travelling-suit, and in it he prepares to take his flight
southward to a warmer region. He is a European bird; and so he goes from
Germany as far south as Spain, Italy, and Greece. Now and then he
ventures as far as Africa.

But, as soon as spring begins to appear, the starling is sure to come
back northward to his old haunts. He comes with merry songs and
chatterings, and seems determined that no one shall be sad while he is
about.

Flying to the topmost bough of some tree in the neighborhood of his old
home, he proclaims to all the world that the Good Fellow (as the Germans
call him) has come back, and that all the people may be glad
accordingly.

After this, his first business will be to see how it stands with his
summer lodgings; for he wants to be spared the trouble of finding a new
mansion if he can help it. Somewhere about, there is, perhaps, a
starling's tub or bucket, that some friends of his have placed on a tree
for his accommodation, in their garden or yard, after making a hole or
door by which he may enter.

But, dear me! what is his indignation, when he finds that a family of
saucy sparrows, going upon the old maxim of "might makes right," have
taken up their abode in his house, without so much as saying, "By your
leave"!

"Quit this!" cries the starling in tones that cannot be mistaken.

"Go away, you black rogue!" cries the sparrow. "I shall not quit this
nice house for you."

But the starling has a sharp bill, and he hits the poor sparrow with it.
Sparrow calls him all the hard names he can think of, and summons the
whole sparrow community to his assistance against the mean fellow who
has come to deprive him of his home.

The cries grow louder and wilder. Such an uproar of sparrows as there is
before the door! At last comes Madam Starling flying to the rescue; and
then the battle is quickly decided. The sparrows are driven off, and the
starlings remain in full possession.

[Illustration]

Madam Starling looks about with her clear, bright little eyes, and sees
that the troublesome sparrows have all gone away; and her faithful mate
lights on the topmost bough of a tree near by, and pours forth a song of
rejoicing and of triumph.

But soon the wind blows cold from the north. Ah! old Winter comes back a
moment or two just to see what Spring is about. The flakes descend on
their black coats; and the starlings come out from their little house,
and look about to see what's the matter.

Have they made a mistake? Oh, no! Soon the sun will be out. April has
come, and the snow will not last long. They first go to work, and clean
their little house, pitching out all the rubbish the sparrows have left
there.

Straw, feathers, and hay must now be got for a nice fresh nest. This
they soon make; and one day Madam Starling shows her mate five or six
clear blue eggs in the nest. For nearly sixteen days she must sit
brooding on these eggs; and then--what joy!--half a dozen bright little
starlings make their appearance.

But, dear me, how hungry they are! Father and mother have just as much
as they can do to feed them. The little ones seem to be crying all the
time for "more, more!" Will they never get enough?

In a few weeks the children grow so strong and sleek, that Papa Starling
says to them, "Now, boys and girls, you must learn to fly, and get your
own living. Come, tumble out!"

[Illustration]

So the young ones have to venture out; and soon they find they can pick
up worms and seeds enough for themselves. What joy to fly from tree to
tree! How pleasant to light among the green stalks and the flowers on
the warm summer days! The starlings have a merry time of it; and, when
winter comes, all they have to do is to fly southward.

No sooner are they gone than the sparrows again take possession of the
forsaken house, in great delight at having such a nice warm dwelling for
the winter.

                                                  ANNA LIVINGSTON.

[Illustration]




THE TEA-PARTY.


        THE dolls had a tea-party: wasn't it fun!
        In ribbons and laces they came, one by one.
        We girls set the table, and poured out the tea;
        And each of us held up a doll on our knee.

        You never saw children behave half so well:
        Why, nobody had any gossip to tell!
        And (can you believe it?) for badness, that day,
        No dolly was sent from the table away.

        One dolly, however, the proudest one there,
        Was driven almost to the verge of despair,
        Because she had met with a simple mishap,
        And upset the butter-plate into her lap.

        The cups and the saucers they shone lily-white:
        We helped all the dollies, they looked so polite.
        We had cake and jam from our own pantry-shelves:
        Of course, we did most of the eating ourselves.

        But housewives don't know when their cares may begin.
        The window was open, and pussy popped in:
        He jumped on the table; and what do you think?
        Down fell all the crockery there, in a wink.

        We picked up the pieces, with many a sigh;
        Our party broke up, and we all said good-by:
        Do come to our next one; but then we'll invite
        That very bad pussy to keep out of sight.

                                                  GEORGE COOPER.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE SPRAINED ANKLE.


HARRY has been a long, long time at the window, watching the boys as
they go past on their sleds. It is a bright afternoon, and they are
enjoying the coasting very much.

Harry draws a long sigh, which makes his mamma look up from her work,
and say,--

"I know it is hard for you, darling; but think what might have happened
to Johnny if you had not saved him."

Would you like to know what it is which keeps Harry in-doors while there
is so much fun outside?

Well, while he is counting the sleds as they go down the long hill in
front of the house, I will tell you.

It was on Saturday afternoon, a week ago. He was out coasting with the
other boys. Johnny Ware, a little fellow only five years old, was with
them.

Harry and several other boys were going very swiftly _down_ the hill as
Johnny was coming _up_.

"Get out of the way!" shouted one boy.

"Look out, Johnny, turn to the right!" cried another. But the little
fellow did not know which was _right_, and, being bewildered, stood
still. The sleds were almost upon him, and it seemed as if he _must_ be
run over, when Harry caught him, and threw him one side, but not in
season to save his own ankle.

It was badly sprained, and he had to be carried home. But when Harry
remembers the danger, and how near Johnny came to being run over, he
does not complain. He can even watch the boys cheerfully, and clap his
hands in joy as he hears their ringing laugh and merry shouts.

Johnny Ware is among them, but does not stay long. He comes into Harry's
house to warm his fingers. After standing by the stove a few minutes, he
comes to the window, and, slipping his little cold hand into Harry's,
says, "May I stay with you, Harry?"

Don't you think our little lame boy is happy now?

                                                  MARY MYRTLE.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note:

This issue was part of an omnibus. The original text for this issue did
not include a title page or table of contents. This was taken from the
July issue with the "No." added. The original table of contents covered
the second half of 1873. The remaining text of the table of contents can
be found in the rest of the year's issues.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery, December 1873, Vol. XIV.
No. 6, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NURSERY, DEC. 1873, VOL.XIV NO.6 ***

***** This file should be named 24943.txt or 24943.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/9/4/24943/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
