Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, October 1873, Vol. XIV. No. 4, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Nursery, October 1873, Vol. XIV. No. 4

Author: Various

Release Date: March 29, 2008 [EBook #24941]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NURSERY, OCT. 1873, VOL.XIV NO.4 ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net Music
by Linda Cantoni.





THE

NURSERY

_A Monthly Magazine_

FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

VOLUME XIV.--No. 2

        BOSTON:
        JOHN L. SHOREY, No. 36, BROMFIELD STREET.
        1873.




        Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1873, by

        JOHN L. SHOREY,

        In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.





        BOSTON:
        STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY RAND, AVERY, & CO.




[Illustration: CONTENTS.]


IN PROSE.

                                                    PAGE.

  Threading the Needle                                 97

  The Butter Song                                     100

  Our Pony                                            103

  Nelly's Kitten                                      105

  A Morning Ride                                      108

  Perils of the Sea                                   112

  In Honor of Rosa's Birthday                         114

  Walter's Disappointment                             116

  The Tide coming in                                  119

  Letter to George                                    122

  Peepy's Pet                                         124


IN VERSE.

                                                    PAGE.

  The Singing Mouse                                   101

  A Funny Little Grandma                              107

  Old Trim                                            110

  Our One-Year-Old                                    115

  The Boasting Boy                                    117

  Cakes and Pies                                      118

  Sunrise                                             121

  Song of the Monkey (_with music_)                   128

[Illustration: THREADING THE NEEDLE.]




THREADING THE NEEDLE.


"[Illustration: W]HERE is Lucy all this while?" asked Mrs. Ludlow of
Anna, the maid.

"I left her five minutes ago, trying to thread a needle," replied Anna.

"She is a long while about it," said Mrs. Ludlow. "Send her to me."

When Lucy entered the room, her mother asked her what she had been
about; and Lucy replied, "I have been teaching myself to thread a
needle."

"But you have been a long time about it," said mother.

"I will tell you why," continued Lucy. "When I went to walk with papa
yesterday, he saw me get over a stone-wall, which I did rather clumsily:
so he said, 'A thing that is worth doing at all is worth doing well. Let
me teach you how to get over a wall quickly and gracefully.'"

"So he gave you a lesson in getting over walls, did he?"

"Yes, mother: he kept me at it at least half an hour; and now I can get
over a wall as quickly and well as any boy."

"But what has getting over walls to do with threading a needle?"

"Only this: I thought I would apply papa's rule, and learn to do well
what I was trying to do. So I have been threading and unthreading the
needle, till now I can thread it easily."

"You have done well to heed your father's advice," said Mrs. Ludlow. "If
you do not see the importance of it now, you will see it often in your
life as you grow older."

It was not many months before Lucy comprehended how wise her father had
been in training his little girl. She was gathering violets in a field
one day, when she heard a trampling sound, and, looking round, saw a
fierce bull plunging and twisting himself about, and all the time
drawing nearer and nearer to her. Suddenly he made a rush towards her in
a straight line.

Not far off was a high stone-wall. It would once have seemed to Lucy a
hopeless attempt to try to get over it before the bull could reach her;
but now she felt confident she could do it: and she did it bravely.
Confidence in her ability to do it kept off all fear; and she did not
even tremble.

The bull came up, and roared lustily when he found she had escaped, and
was on the other side of the wall. But Lucy turned to him, and said,
"Keep your temper, old fellow! This child's father taught her how to get
over a stone-wall in double-quick time. You must learn to scale a wall
yourself, if you hope to catch _her_."

"Boo-oo-oo!" roared the bull, prancing up and down, but not knowing how
to get over.

"Why, what a sweet humor you are in to-day, sir!" said Lucy, walking
away, and arranging her bunch of violets for Cousin Susan as she went.

                                                  IDA FAY.

[Illustration]




THE BUTTER SONG.


WHEN I was a little boy, I often helped my mother when she was making
butter.

I liked to stand in the cool spring-house, and churn for a little while;
but I liked better to look out of the window, and watch the ducks
swimming in the creek, or the little shiners and sunfish darting back
and forth through the clear bright water.

Sometimes I would forget all about my work, and stand watching the
insects, ducks, and fishes, until some one would call me, and tell me to
go to work again.

One day I wanted to churn very fast; for my mother had told me that I
might take a swim in the creek when my work was done.

So I sang a little song that our German girl Bertha had taught me. She
called it the "Butter Song;" and here it is:--

            Come, butter, come!
          Little Harry at the gate
        For his buttered bread does wait:
            Come, butter, come!

            Come, butter, come!
          Fish for Lent, eggs for Easter,
        Butter for all days, butter, come faster:
          Come, butter, come!

I thought then, as Bertha told me, that if I sang that song a hundred
and eleven times, and didn't stop churning once while singing it, the
butter would soon be made. I believe so yet; but I think now, that the
_steady work_ had more to do with it than the song had.

                                                  S.

[Illustration]




THE SINGING MOUSE.


        HAVE you ever heard of singing mice? There are
        such creatures, you must know, or you will not
        believe what my verses will tell you. Yes,
        indeed: it was only the other day that I heard
        of one that was kept in a little cage, like
        those used for squirrels, and sang so
        delightfully that her owner used to have her by
        his bedside to charm him to sleep. She was a
        wood-mouse. Wood-mice are the best singers.
        Whether the one about which you shall hear came
        from the woods or not, I cannot say; nor how
        she happened to be in my friend C.'s house: but
        there she certainly was; and this is the story
        of what she did there. I call it,


SERENADE.

        A certain friend William I have, who's so nice,
        He's charming to every one,--even to mice.

        You ask how I know it? Well, listen: I'll tell
        Of something which proves it, that lately befell.

        One night, when young William was snugly in bed,
        A very queer notion came into his head.

        He woke from his slumbers, quite sure that he heard
        The musical warbling of some little bird.

        He listened a moment: all silent, and then
        The sweet little songster was singing again.

        A lamp, dimly burning, gave light in the room:
        Will raised his head softly, and peered through the gloom.

        The door was wide open; and there, on the sill
        (It's true, on my word: let them doubt it who will),

        A mite of a mousie sat singing away
        As sweetly as bobolink on a June day.

        Erect on her haunches, her head in the air;
        That Pussy might catch her she seemed not to care,

        But sang till her sweet serenade was quite done;
        Then ran away swiftly as mousie could run.

        Now, said I not truly, that Willy's so nice,
        He's charming to every one,--even to mice?

                                                  S. C. R.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




OUR PONY.


WE have a pony whose name is Duke. He was very skittish when we first
had him. There are four of us children who ride him,--Mamie, Winnie,
Arthur, and myself. We have another little sister, Florence; but she is
not old enough to ride, being only five years old.

Winnie is a nice little rider. Duke was Mamie's birthday present. We
were all very much pleased when he came. We danced round him, and
clapped our hands. Mamma wanted to surprise us: so, while we were at
dinner, she had the pony brought up and put in the barn.

After dinner we went out to play; and Winnie saw the whip and the
saddles, and then she suspected something. So she began looking around
in the stalls. There she found the pony, and then came running in to
mamma to ask if it was really ours. Mamma said, Yes.

Then we were very much pleased, and said we would ride him. Winnie rode
him up to the house first; then Mamie wanted to ride, so she got on the
boys' saddle. Duke would not stand still for her; and, when she got on,
he went galloping down to the barn. Her hat flew off, and she was very
much frightened. She kept calling out, "Stop him!" but he would not stop
until he reached the barn. Duke was frightened too, because we shouted
at him.

Mamie is thirteen, but is more afraid to ride than Winnie, who is only
seven. Mamie asks if boys always ride better than girls. I say, "No!
Look at Winnie." Once we tied Duke to the swing; and then he got his
nose pulled by getting the rope twisted round it. Sometimes we have a
good frolic with him in the pasture. He never kicks us.

Mamie loves to feed Duke; but she wants Arthur to hold him carefully by
the bridle while she does it. As for Winnie, she loves to gallop over
the hills and far away. Sometimes she lets me ride behind her. Duke
seems to love the bold Winnie, and will do whatever she tells him to.

                                                  TILDEN.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




NELLY'S KITTEN.


NELLY'S kitten was the handsomest kitten that ever was. So her little
mistress thought. Nelly made a great pet of her, and brought her up with
great care; and, when she had become a well-grown cat, Nelly gave her
the name of "Pussy Gray."

One morning while Nelly was being dressed, her sister told her there was
something nice down stairs, and asked her to guess what it was. "I guess
it's pickled limes," said Nelly; for she dearly loved pickled limes. But
her sister said "No."--"Then I guess it's kittens," said Nelly; and so
it was.

Out in the back-room, in a barrel of shavings, were two little bunches
of fur; and, when Nelly took them out and put them on the floor, they
looked as though they were all legs and mouths. Their eyes were shut
tight, and their little pink mouths were wide open.

But, in a week or two, the eyes came open, and the little kitties saw
their feet and tails for the first time. Then they stood upon their
feet, and played with their tails till they found their mother had one
that was bigger and longer; and then they played with their mother's
tail whenever she forgot to tuck it away and put her paw on it.

The kittens were always in somebody's way. When Nelly's mamma sat down
in the big rocking-chair for a little rest, the first time she rocked
back, "Mew, mew, mew!" would be heard, and away would scamper a little
kit.

When Nelly's sister walked across the room in the dark, she was sure to
hit her foot against a little soft ball, and "Oh, dear! there's one of
the kittens," she would say.

If mamma went out to work in the kitchen, there would be a scampering
from under her feet; and the kittens would be right before her. If she
went to the closet to get any thing, she was sure to knock one of the
kits over as she came out. When she was making pies, something would
come up her dress; and, before she could stop it, there would be a
kitten on her shoulder ready to fall into the pie.

One day, after mamma had stepped on kittens, and fallen over kittens,
till her patience was all gone, she said she believed she must have the
kittens drowned, they were so much in the way. Pussy Gray, their mother,
was in the room, and heard what was said. She at once went out of the
door, calling the kittens after her.

That night they didn't come back, nor the next day, nor the next; and,
now that they were really gone, mamma began to feel badly. So she
searched all through the garden, calling "Kitty, kitty;" but though she
looked down the cellar-stairs, and under the back-doorsteps, and
everywhere she could think of, no kitten came.

                                                  MATTIE.

[Illustration]




A FUNNY LITTLE GRANDMA.


        CRADLED on a rose-leaf
        By her mother-miller,
        In her tiny egg slept
        Baby caterpillar,

        Till the sunbeams coaxed her
        From her cradle cosey,
        To her pretty chamber,
        Velvet soft and rosy.

        Dew and honey drinking
        As from fairy chalice,
        A merry life she led
        In that rosy palace.

        Till at length she wove a
        Bed of cotton-down,
        Where she slept to waken,
        Dressed in satin brown.

        Once more in the sunshine,
        Oh! how sweet to roam,
        And on satin pinions
        Seek her flowery home!

        She had joined the noble
        Family of millers,
        And last I heard was grandmamma
        To six small caterpillars.

                                                  CLARA BROUGHTON.

[Illustration]




A MORNING RIDE.


MAUD is spending her vacation among the woods and mountains of Maine,
where she went with her father and mother about two weeks ago.

One very pleasant morning papa said, "I think we had better take a ride
this morning." So Maud was called in to get ready; and Hannah, the good
white horse, was harnessed into the buggy.

The buggy had but one seat: so mamma found a nice box, and folded her
shawl and put on it; and that made a good place for the little girl,
between her father and mother; and they all started on their ride.

They went along a shady road near the river, and soon they saw some
geese. Several of them were swimming in the water, and one or two were
on the bank. One of these had a sort of frame around its neck, and was
standing on one leg.

Maud said, "Why, see that poor goose! It has only one leg; and they have
put that frame on so it can walk better." But a few minutes after she
looked again, and the goose was standing very comfortably on both feet.
So it really had two, but had been curling up one of them quite out of
sight.

[Illustration]

After riding some time, they came to a ferry,--a place for crossing the
Androscoggin River; and papa drove through a pleasant field down to the
bank of the river. Here they saw a man cutting grass, and asked him
about the ferry-boat. He came up and took a horn that hung on a post,
and blew a blast, which the ferry-boy on the other side of the river
heard.

When the boy heard it, he began to unfasten his boat, and pull it over;
and Maud and her father and mother waited, sitting in the buggy, until
the boy brought his boat close to the shore, so that they could drive on
to it easily.

Then papa said, "Are you all ready?" and the boy answered, "Yes, sir;"
and Hannah walked on the boat and stood perfectly still, while the boy
kept pulling a strong rope, until he drew the boat, with the horse and
buggy and people, safely over to the other side. Then they drove up the
bank of the river, and came to a gate, which a little girl opened.

[Illustration]

Next they came to a very pleasant wood,--so pleasant that papa stopped
Hannah in the shade, and said she might rest a little; and mamma and
Maud got out of the buggy, and picked the young boxberry-leaves, and the
red berries, and pulled long vines of evergreen, and gathered moss.

When papa thought it was time to go, he said, "All aboard!" and they got
in, and he drove on. They had not gone far when Maud asked if she might
drive. So papa handed her the reins; and Hannah seemed to go on just as
well as ever.

After Maud had been driving a little while, her father said he thought
she had better give the reins to him. This she did, and they went to the
village, stopped at the post-office, and then drove swiftly home in
season for dinner.

                                                  H.

        BETHEL, ME.

[Illustration]




OLD TRIM.


        HERE'S brave old Trim: I once with him
          Was walking near the docks;
        We heard a cry, both Trim and I,--
          The cry that always shocks.

        "Help! boat, ahoy! See, there's a boy:
          Make haste, he's going down."
        "There! watch him, Trim! in after him!
          We must not let him drown."

        Through foam and splash Trim's quick eyes flash:
          He strikes out to the place;
        And round and round, with eager bound,
          He watches for a trace.

        A little hand comes paddling up,
          A face so wild and wan:
        "Ah, Trim, he's there! Make haste, take care;
          And save him if you can!"

        Oh! brave and bold, he seizes hold;
          His teeth are firmly set:
        Now bear him near; there is no fear:
          The boy is breathing yet.

        "Bravo, good Trim!" They welcome him,
          And clasp him round for joy;
        Then homeward bear, with tender care,
          The pale, half-conscious boy.

        O faithful Trim! "Would I sell him?"
          Inquired a curious elf:
        "What, sell," I cried, "a friend so tried!
          I'd rather sell myself."

                                                  GEO. BENNETT.

[Illustration]




PERILS OF THE SEA.


EDWIN had a present of a ship, sent to him from England; and he named
it, after the giver, "The Uncle George." It was a splendid ship. It had
three masts, as a ship ought to have, and was rigged in complete style.

One fine day last month, Edwin took his ship down to the Frog Pond on
Boston Common, and set her afloat. On the opposite side of the pond he
saw four boys sailing their boats, and a tall boy carrying a sloop, and
followed by his small brother.

A sloop, you know, has but one mast. None of these boys had a ship with
three masts, like "The Uncle George." Edwin felt a little proud when he
saw his good ship catch the wind in her sails, and go plunging up and
down over the pond.

But, dear me, think of the risks of ship-owners! Consider, too, that
Edwin's ship was not insured. What, then, was his dismay, when, as she
got into the middle of the Atlantic Ocean (for so Edwin called the
pond), a flaw of wind threw her on her beam-ends, and sent her masts
down under water till she foundered, sank, and disappeared.

There was a shout from the owners of vessels on the other side of the
Atlantic Ocean. "What a pity!" exclaimed the boy with a dog.

"What's her name?" asked the tall boy.

"The Uncle George!" shouted back Edwin.

"Any insurance on her?" inquired a boy waving his hat.

"What do you mean by insurance?" asked Edwin.

"Go and look in your dictionary," said the boy with his hat off.

Then the tall boy repeated these lines:--

        "A land-breeze shook her shrouds, and she was overset;
         Down went 'The Royal George' with all her crew complete."

[Illustration: PERILS OF THE SEA.]

Edwin was half disposed to cry; but then he thought that crying was no
way to get out of trouble. He took a survey of the Atlantic Ocean, and
wondered how deep it was where his ship wend down.

Then taking off his shoes and stockings, and rolling up his pantaloons,
he waded in, and succeeded, with the aid of a long stick, in saving "The
Uncle George."

"Hurrah! Well done, little one!" shouted a boy on the other side. The
tall boy again launched into poetry, and cried out,--

        "Weigh the vessel up, once dreaded by our foes!
         Her timbers yet are sound; and she may float again,
         Full charged with England's thunder, and plough the distant main."

                                                  ALFRED SELWYN.




IN HONOR OF ROSA'S BIRTHDAY


[Illustration]

_Charles._--Am I right madam? is not this Miss Rosa's birthday?

_Mary._--Yes, sir. My little girl is two years old to-day.

_Charles._--So I understood; and I have brought her a birthday present.
Here it is,--the largest rose I could find in all the land. Do me the
honor to accept it.

_Mary._--With pleasure, sir, I accept it for Rosa; but, if I may trust
my eyes, this is a sunflower, not a rose.

_Charles._--Excuse me madam, in Doll-land they told me it was a rose.

_Mary._--Ah! they sometimes forget names in Doll-land. I am obliged to
you, sir, all the same. You are very polite.

_Charles._--I ought to be polite, madam; for my sister Helen goes to
dancing-school. I will bid you good-morning, madam.

_Mary._--Good-morning, sir. Call again some fine day.

_Charles._--I shall call without waiting for a fine day, madam. It is
always a fine day when I am with you.

[Illustration]




OUR ONE-YEAR-OLD.


        ALL the people love her,
          For she is our darling;
        Good and sweet and bright is she,
          Never cross nor snarling.

        Bob, the savage bull-dog,
          Lamb-like waits upon her;
        Hens and geese and turtle-doves
          Come to do her honor.

        "Bless her!" says the raven,
          "Oh! you cannot match her;"
        Swallows fly about her head,
          Kittens do not scratch her.

        For she is so gentle,
          All the folks obey her;
        Even little tom-tit comes
          His respects to pay her.

                                                  FROM THE GERMAN.

[Illustration]




WALTER'S DISAPPOINTMENT.


"HERE is the last white rose in my garden," said Laura to her brother
Walter; "and you shall have it if you will be a good boy."

"I don't want a white rose," said Walter; "and, if I can't go with Jim
Bacon and the other fellows on the pond, I'll not be a good boy: I'll
make myself as disagreeable as I can."

"Why, Walter, what a threat!" said Laura, laughing; "but you are a good
deal like the minister's dog Bunkum, who barks terribly, but never
bites."

"See what I get for being a good boy!" replied Walter. "The first time a
chance for a little fun comes along, then it's, 'O Walter! you and the
other boys are too young to be trusted alone on the water.'"

Hardly had Walter given utterance to these words, when there were cries
from the roadside near by; and men and women were seen running towards
the pond. What could be the matter?

It soon was made known what the matter was. The little fellows in the
boat had upset it; and five of them were floundering about in the water.
Fortunately no life was lost. All were saved, but not until all were wet
through to the skin.

"Now, Walter," said Laura, "are you going to fret, and make yourself
disagreeable, because you did not get a ducking with the other boys?"

"Sister," said Walter, with a smile, "I think I will accept that
beautiful white rose you offered me just now."

                                                  DORA BURNSIDE.




THE BOASTING BOY.


   I KNEW a boy in our town, whose name was Billy Hood:
   He had a sword all made of tin, a musket made of wood.
   His drum would always let you know when Billy Hood was coming;
   For all the neighbors used to say, "I wish he'd stop that drumming."

   Now, very brave this Billy was,--at least, so Billy thought;
   And he was not afraid,--not he,--of any thing that fought.
   "With this good sword and gun," said he, "I'll fight until I die:
   Let man or beast come on! Who fears? Not Billy Hood! Not I!"

   But ah! one day this Billy went where six old geese were straying,
   And on his noisy drum began somewhat too loudly playing:
   An old goose chased him from the field; and Billy, screaming, ran,
   Till on the kitchen floor he sank,--that valiant little man!

                                                  UNCLE CHARLES.

[Illustration]




CAKES AND PIES.


        IN the dough! In the dough!
        This is the way we make it go:
        Roll it, roll it, smooth and thin;
        Pound it with the rolling-pin;
        Cut with thimbles, and it makes
        Just the nicest dolly cakes.

        Dolly, now, must have a pie:
        We will make it, you and I.
        Here's a cunning little tin!
        Roll and roll the pie-crust thin;
        Spread it smoothly now within;
        Lay some bits of apple in,
        Cover nicely; let it bake:
        That's the way our pies we make.

        Dolly may not eat it all;
        Then, if playmates chance to call,
        We will give them a surprise
        With our little cakes and pies.
        All we make is good to eat;
        For our hands are clean and sweet;
        And we have such handy ways.
        Our dear mother often says,
        That she thinks, by all the looks,
        We shall soon be famous cooks.

                                                  EMEROY HAYWARD.

[Illustration]




THE TIDE COMING IN.


JULIA and Rose were on a visit to their uncle, who lived near the
seaside. They came from Ohio, and did not know about the ebb and flow of
the tide of the ocean. They ran down on the sandy beach, and seated
themselves on a rock.

Their cousin Rodney was not far off, engaged in fishing for perch. All
at once there was a loud cry from Julia, the elder of the two sisters.
The water had crept up all round the rock on which they sat, thus
forming an island of it; and they did not know what to make of it.

"The water has changed its place," shouted Rose.

Rodney was alarmed, and began to blame himself for neglecting, in his
eagerness to catch a few fish, the little girls under his charge.

He took off his shoes and stockings, rolled up his pantaloons, and ran
into the water over the sandy bottom to the rock. Taking Rose in his
arms, he told Julia to follow.

"But I shall wet my nice boots," said Julia.

"Then, wait on the rock," said Rodney, "while I carry Rose, and set her
down on dry land. I will then come for you, and carry you pickback to
the shore."

"No, Cousin Rodney," said Julia: "I think I will not ride pickback. I
should be too heavy a load. I must not mind wetting my boots and
stockings."

"Then, place your hand on my shoulder, and come along," said Rodney.
"The tide is gaming on us very fast."

"I don't know what you mean by the tide," said Julia.

"Why, cousin," said Rodney, "you must know that the tides are the rise
and fall of the waters of the ocean. It will be high tide an hour from
now; then the water will cover all these rocks you see around us. After
that, the water will sink and go back till we can see the rocks again,
and walk a long way on the sand; then it will be low tide. But we must
not stay here talking: the water will soon be too deep for us."

So Rodney took Rose in his arms, and Julia placed her left hand on his
right shoulder; and in this way they went through the water to the dry
part of the beach.

"We must look out for this sly tide the next time," said little Rose as
she ran to tell papa of their adventure.

                                                  UNCLE CHARLES.

[Illustration]




SUNRISE.


        COME and see the sunrise,
          Children, come and see;
        Wake from slumber early,
          Wake, and come with me.
        Where the high rock towers,
          We will take our stand,
        And behold the sunshine
          Kindling all the land.

        You shall hear the birdies
          Sing their morning lay;
        You shall feel the freshness
          Of the new-born day;
        You shall see the flowers
          Opening to the beams,
        Flooding all the tree-tops,
          Flashing on the streams.

                                                  EMILY CARTER.




LETTER TO GEORGE.--No. 2.


DEAR GEORGE,--When I sat by the door last evening, a great toad hopped
up on the door-step. A bug flew along, and he caught it. He looks very
ugly; but he will not hurt you.

[Illustration]

The dog Prince sits and watches the little new chickens every day. I
suppose he wonders what they are. He knows it is wrong to touch them,
because I have told him so.

[Illustration]

But he thought he would like to just smell of one: so he put his nose
close to the little soft bunch, and smelt of it. But the chicken's
mother put her head out of the coop, and pecked him so that he cried.

[Illustration]

Prince found a bone, and hid it in the ground. But he was afraid the pig
would find it: so he dug it up, and carried it behind the wagon, in the
wagon-house.

[Illustration]

The colt is very cunning; but he is naughty. One day the clothes were
hung out on the line to dry. The colt got in the yard, and tore the
clothes all in pieces with his teeth. He ought to know better.

                                                  W. O. C.

[Illustration]




PEEPY'S PET.


THERE was a little girl who was called Peepy; but why she was called so
I do not know: perhaps it was because, when a baby, she used to peep
from behind a curtain or a door, and cry, "Peep-O!"

She was a good little girl; but, when she was five years old, her mother
had to go to Europe for her health, and Peepy was sent to board in the
family of a farmer whose name was Miller.

One day Mr. Miller made her a present of a bright silver quarter of a
dollar. Peepy had been taught to sew by Susan Miller; and so Peepy put
her work-box on a chair in her little room, and sat down and made a
little bag in which to keep the bright silver coin.

Then she took a walk near the grove, and saw two boys who had caught a
robin, and were playing with it. They had tied a string to its legs;
and, when the poor bird tried to fly away, they pulled it back again,
and laughed at its struggles.

[Illustration]

At last the little robin was so tired and frightened, that it lay on the
ground, panting, with its feathers ruffled, and its beak wide open, and
its eyes half closed. It seemed ready to die. Then the rude, cruel boys
pulled the string to make it fly again.

"Please don't be so cruel," said little Peepy. "How can you be so
cruel?" And she ran to the poor bird, and took it up very gently.

"You let our bird alone!" one of the boys cried out. But Peepy still
held it, and was ready to cry when she felt its little heart beating
with fear.

"Do give it to me, please," said Peepy. "I will thank you for it very
much." But the boys laughed at her, and told her roughly to let the bird
alone. "We caught the bird, and the bird is ours," said one of them.

"Will you sell me the bird?" asked Peepy, taking her bright quarter of a
dollar out of its bag, and offering it.

[Illustration]

"Ah! now you talk sensibly," said the larger of the boys. "Yes: we'll
sell it."

So Peepy parted with her money, but kept the precious bird. The boys ran
off, knowing they had done a mean thing, and fearing some man might come
along, and inquire into it.

Peepy took the bird home; and Mrs. Miller told her she had done right,
and helped her to mend an old cage into which they could put the poor
little bruised bird. Soon it took food from their hands, and grew quite
tame.

Peepy named it Bella, and kept it in her chamber where she could hear it
sing. Bella loved Peepy, and would fly about the room, and light on her
head, and play with her curls.

But as summer came on, and the weather grew warm and pleasant, Peepy
thought to herself, "Bella loves me, and is grateful for all my care;
but liberty is as sweet to birds as to little girls. I will not
selfishly keep this bird in prison. I will take it into the grove, and
set it free."

[Illustration]

So Peepy took it into the grove, and set it free; and Bella lighted on a
bough, and sang the sweetest song you ever heard. It then flew singing
round Peepy's head, as if to say, "Thank you! thank you a thousand
times, you dear little girl!" If Bella's song could have been translated
into words, I think they would have been these:--

              "Darling little Peepy,
               When you're sad or sleepy,
        I will come and sing you a merry, merry song:
               So do not be grieving
               At this tender leaving;
        I shall not forget you, dear, for Oh! love is strong."

Peepy went home rather sad with her empty cage. But what was her joy the
next day, to see Bella on the window-sill! She opened the window, Bella
flew in, and they had a nice frolic. Then, when the dinner-bell rang,
the little bird flew off. Peepy was happy to think it had not forgotten
her.

                                                  IDA FAY.

[Illustration: Song of the Monkey]




SONG OF THE MONKEY.

[Illustration: Music]

        Words by MARIAN DOUGLAS.      Music by T. CRAMPTON.

        My master grinds an organ,
          And holds me by a chain;
        And when the money I pick up,
          You laugh and shout again;
        But though I dance and caper,
          Still I feel at heart forlorn
        I wish I were in monkey-land,
          The place where I was born;
        I wish I were in monkey-land,
          The place where I was born.

        2 There cocoanuts are growing
            Around the palm-tree's crown:
          I used to climb and pick them off,
            And hear them--crack!--come down.
          There all day long the purple figs
            Are falling, I declare:
          How pleasant 'tis in monkey-land!
            Oh, would that I were there!

        3 On some tall tree's top branches
            The fleecy clouds would sail
          Just over me: I wish that I
            Were swinging by my tail!
          I'd swing and swing so merrily,
            How happy I would be!
          But oh! a travelling monkey's life
            Is very hard for me.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

This issue was part of an omnibus. The original text for this issue did
not include a title page or table of contents. This was taken from the
July issue with the "No." added. The original table of contents covered
the second half of 1873. The remaining text of the table of contents can
be found in the rest of the year's issues.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery, October 1873, Vol. XIV.
No. 4, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NURSERY, OCT. 1873, VOL.XIV NO.4 ***

***** This file should be named 24941.txt or 24941.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/9/4/24941/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net Music
by Linda Cantoni.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
