The Project Gutenberg EBook of Girl Scouts, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Girl Scouts
       Their Works, Ways and Plays

Author: Unknown

Release Date: April 4, 2008 [EBook #24987]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GIRL SCOUTS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Cline St. Charleskindt and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was made using scans of public domain works put
online by Harvard University Library's Open Collections
Program, Women Working 1800 - 1930)









GIRL SCOUTS

THEIR WORKS, WAYS AND PLAYS

"_Be Prepared_"

[Illustration: Cover]

[Illustration: Girl Scout Logo]

GIRL SCOUTS
Incorporated
NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS
189 Lexington Avenue
New York City

_Series No. 5_




GIRL SCOUTS


MOTTO

"_Be Prepared_"


[Illustration: Girl Scout Logo]


SLOGAN

"_Do A Good Turn Daily_"


PROMISE

          On My Honor, I Will Try:
    To do my duty to God and to my Country
    To help other people at all times
    To obey the Scout Laws


LAWS

       I A Girl Scout's Honor is to be trusted.

      II A Girl Scout is loyal.

     III A Girl Scout's Duty is to be useful and to help others.

      IV A Girl Scout is a friend to all, and a sister to every
           other Girl Scout.

       V A Girl Scout is Courteous.

      VI A Girl Scout is a friend to Animals.

     VII A Girl Scout obeys Orders.

    VIII A Girl Scout is Cheerful.

      IX A Girl Scout is Thrifty.

       X A Girl Scout is Clean in Thought, Word and Deed.




GIRL SCOUTS

Their Works, Ways and Plays


The Girl Scouts, a National organization, is open to any girl who
expresses her desire to join and voluntarily accepts the Promise and
the Laws. The object of the Girl Scouts is to bring to all girls the
opportunity for group experience, outdoor life, and to learn through
work, but more by play, to serve their community. Patterned after the
Girl Guides of England, the sister organization of the Boy Scouts, the
Girl Scouts has developed a method of self-government and a variety of
activities that appear to be well suited to the desires of the girls
as the 60,000 registered Scouts and the 5,000 new applicants each
month testify.


Activities

The activities of the Girl Scouts may be grouped under five headings
corresponding to five phases of women's life today:

      I. The Home-maker.
     II. The Producer.
    III. The Consumer.
     IV. The Citizen.
      V. The Human Being.


I. _Woman's most ancient way of service--the home-maker, the nurse,
and the mother._ The program provides incentives for practicing
woman's world-old arts by requiring an elementary proficiency in
cooking, housekeeping, first aid, and the rules of healthful living
for any Girl Scout passing beyond the Tenderfoot stage. Of the forty
odd subjects for which Proficiency Badges are given, more than
one-fourth are in subjects directly related to the services of woman
in the home, as mother, nurse or homekeeper. Into this work so often
distasteful because solitary is brought the sense of comradeship. This
is effected partly by having much of the actual training done in
groups. Another element is the public recognition, and rewarding of
skill in this, woman's most elementary service to the world, usually
taken for granted and ignored.

The spirit of play infused into the simplest and most repetitious of
household tasks banishes drudgery. "Give us, oh give us," says
Carlyle, "a man who sings at his work. He will do more in the same
time, he will do it better, he will persevere longer. Wondrous is the
strength of cheerfulness; altogether past comprehension its power of
endurance."


II. _Woman, the producer._ Handicrafts of many sorts enter into the
program of the Girl Scouts. In camping girls must know how to set up
tents, build lean-tos, and construct fire-places. They must also know
how to make knots of various sorts to use for bandages, tying parcels,
hitching, and so forth. Among the productive occupations in which
Proficiency Badges are awarded are bee-keeping, dairying and general
farming, gardening, weaving and needlework.


III. _Woman, the consumer._ One of the features in modern economics
which is only beginning to be recognized is the fact that women form
the consuming public. There are very few purchases, even for men's own
use, which women do not have a hand in selecting. Practically the
entire burden of household buying in all departments falls on the
woman. In France this has long been recognized and the women of the
middle classes are the buying partners and bookkeepers in their
husbands' business. In America the test of a good husband is that he
brings home his pay envelope unopened, a tacit recognition that the
mother controls spending. The Girl Scouts encourage thrifty habits and
learning economy of buying in all of its activities. One of the ten
Scout Laws is that "A Girl Scout is Thrifty."


IV. _Woman, the citizen._ The basic organization of the Girl Scouts
into the self-governing unit of a Patrol is in itself an excellent
means of political training. Patrols and Troops conduct their own
meetings and the Scouts learn the elements of parliamentary law.
Working together in groups they realize the necessity for democratic
decisions. They also come to have community interests of an impersonal
sort. This is perhaps the greatest single contribution of the Scouts
toward the training of girls for citizenship. Little boys play
together and not only play together, but with men and boys of all
ages. The interest of baseball is not confined to any one age. The
rules of the game are the same for all, and the smallest boy's
judgment on the skill of the players may be as valid as that of the
oldest fan. Girls have had in the past no such common interests. Their
games have been either solitary or in very small groups in activities
largely of a personal character. If women are to be effective in
modern political society, they must have from very earliest youth
gregarious interests and occupations.


V. _Woman, the human being._ Political economy was for a long time
known as the "dead science" and was quite ineffective socially. This
was largely because it attempted to split man, the human being, into
theoretical units such as "the producer," or "the consumer." In the
same way many organizations for women have died because they have not
remembered that woman is first of all a human being. Thus nearly all
institutions for women, even those supposedly purely educational in
character, have existed to shelter her from the world, or to segregate
her, or have been designed to make her into a good servant or to
"finish" her for society. The activities of the Girl Scouts have been
selected on quite a different plan. They have not been designed for
women as women, but for women as human beings. Real work may be
followed with a great deal of enjoyment provided it is creative and
awakens the instinct of workmanship. But it is when at play that a
human being realizes his own nature the most fully. So dancing, sports
of all kinds, hiking, camping, boating, athletics and story-telling
are encouraged not only as a means of recreation and for physical
development, but are made a basic part of the Girl Scout program.


Methods

The activities of the Girl Scouts are, of course, not peculiar to this
organization. Every one of them is provided for elsewhere, in schools,
clubs, and societies. But the way in which they are combined and
co-ordinated about certain basic principles is peculiar to the Girl
Scouts.

In the first place all these activities have a common motive which is
preparation for a fuller life for the individual, not only in her
personal, but in her social relations. It is believed that the habits
formed and the concrete information acquired in these activities both
contribute to the girls being ready to meet intelligently most of the
situations that are likely to arise in their later life. This concept
is expressed in the Girl Scouts Motto--"Be Prepared."

The method of preparation followed is that found in nature whereby
young animals and birds _play_ at doing all the things they will need
to do well when they are grown and must feed and fend for themselves
and their babies.

To play any game one must know the rules, so the Girl Scouts have Laws
that they believe cover most of the needs of the Game of Life.

    The Girl Scouts Laws are ten:

       I A Girl Scout's Honor is to be trusted.

      II A Girl Scout is loyal.

     III A Girl Scout's Duty is to be useful and to help others.

      IV A Girl Scout is a friend to all, and a sister to every
           other Girl Scout.

       V A Girl Scout is Courteous.

      VI A Girl Scout is a friend to Animals.

     VII A Girl Scout obeys Orders.

    VIII A Girl Scout is Cheerful.

      IX A Girl Scout is Thrifty.

       X A Girl Scout is Clean in Thought, Word and Deed.

These Laws are known by all Girl Scouts, but the _Promise_ to obey
them is made only after they are understood and voluntarily accepted.
The Promise summarizes the Laws and is:

          On My Honor, I Will Try:
    To be true to God and my country
    To help others at all times
    To obey the Scout Laws

The heart of the Laws is helpfulness and so the Scouts have a
_Slogan_: Do a Good Turn Daily. By following this in letter and spirit
helpfulness becomes second nature.

Because the Girl Scouts are citizens they know and respect the meaning
of the flag, and one of the first things they learn is the Pledge:

I pledge allegiance to my flag, and to the republic for which it
stands; one nation indivisible, with Liberty and Justice for all.


_Organization and Drill._ Some observers have criticized the Girl
Scout organization because of its apparent military character. It is
true that the girls wear a uniform of khaki, and are grouped in
Patrols, corresponding to the "fours" in the Army; that they salute,
and learn simple forms of drill and signalling. But the reason they do
this is because the military organization happens to be the oldest
form of organization in the world, and it works. It is the best way
men have found of getting a number of persons to work together.
Following directions given to a group is quite a different matter from
doing something alone, and most of us need special training in this. A
group of eight has been found to work the best because it is the
largest number that can be handled by a person just beginning to be a
leader, and moreover elementary qualities of leadership seem to exist
in just about the proportion of one in eight. It is probably on this
account that children take so kindly to the form--rather than because
of any glamor of the army, though this must be admitted as a factor.
In actual practice the drill and signalling take up a very small
portion of the program, and are nowhere followed as ends in
themselves, but only as a means to an end.


_The Uniform._ The uniform is simple, durable and allows freedom of
action. It is of khaki because this has been found to be the best
wearing fabric and color. It is not easily torn and does not readily
soil. Wearing it gives the girls a sense of belonging to a larger
group, such as it is hard to get in any other way. It keeps constantly
before them the fact that they represent a community to whose laws
they have voluntarily subscribed and whose honor they uphold. It is
well, too, to have an _impersonal_ costume if for no other reason than
to counteract the tendency of girls to concentrate upon their personal
appearance. To have a neat, simple, useful garb is a novel experience
to many an over-dressed doll who has been taught to measure all worth
by extravagance of appearance.


Organization

_Scouts of Different Ages._ The original Girl Scout program was
designed mainly with the needs of the young adolescent in mind and the
age was fixed from 10 to 18 years. But the little girls wanted to come
in and so a separate division was made for them called the Brownies or
Junior Scouts. Then the older girls and women wanted to join and as
time went on the original Girl Scouts grew up, but not out of, the
Scout movement, and programs are being made for Senior Scouts who are
eighteen and over. The three age groups seem to be natural ones and
each has its own methods and activities. The larger number of Girl
Scouts belong to the middle adolescent group.

All Scouts are organized in the same way and all are enrolled with the
National Girl Scout organization.


_Patrol._ Eight girls form a Patrol which is the working unit. The
eight select from their own group a Patrol Leader who has charge of
the activities for a month or any period of time the Patrol may
designate. The Patrol Leader has immediate responsibilities for the
activities of the eight. It is desirable to have each girl of a Patrol
serve as a leader at some time or other.


_Troop._ One or more Patrols constitute a Troop which is the
administrative unit recognized by the National organization.


_Captain._ The Troop is under the direction of a Captain who must be
at least twenty-one years of age and whose qualification as a leader
of young girls is passed upon by National Headquarters before she is
commissioned.


_Lieutenant._ A Captain may have one or more Lieutenants. The
Lieutenant must be at least eighteen years of age and her commission
is likewise subject to control by National Headquarters.

Captains and Lieutenants may be organized into associations in any
given locality.


_Scout Classes._ There are three classes of Girl Scouts, the youngest
being the "Tenderfoot," the name given by frontiersmen to the man from
the city who is not hardened to the rough life out of doors. Even the
Tenderfoot, however, has to know _some_ things including the Promise,
Laws, Slogan and Motto, how to salute, and the respect due to the
flag, and making some useful knots.

The "Second Class" Scout has been a Tenderfoot for at least one month,
and can pass a test of distinctly greater difficulty, including a good
deal about cooking and housekeeping, animals and birds, flowers and
trees, some important first aid things, and the laws of health.

The highest is the "First Class" Scout and is to be attained only by a
young person of considerable accomplishment. She must be able to find
her way about city or country without any of the usual aids, using
only the compass and her developed judgment of distance and direction.
She must also be able to communicate and receive messages in two
ways--by signalling in Semaphore and the General Service Codes which
is the code used for telegraphing and wireless, and which can be used
in several ways. She must have shown proficiency in Home Nursing,
Child Care, and Housekeeping and in addition in either Laundering,
Cooking, Needlework or Gardening. She must also be an all round out
doors person, familiar with camping, and able to lead in this, or be a
good skater or a naturalist, or be able to swim. Not only must she
know all these different things but she must also have trained a
Tenderfoot, and served her community.


_Proficiency Badges._ After a Girl Scout has attained to First Class
there are still other worlds to conquer as the badges she has earned
on the way are only a few of the many kinds still to be worked toward.
There are at present no less than forty-six kinds of subjects in which
a Scout may achieve, and more are being added daily. Just to mention a
few: a Girl Scout may be an Astronomer, a Bee keeper, a Dairy-maid, or
a Dancer, an Electrician, a Geologist, a Horsewoman, an Interpreter, a
Motorist or a Musician, a Scribe, a Swimmer or accomplished in Thrift.
Each subject has its own badge and when earned this is sewn into the
uniform.


_Council._ There may also be, and this is desirable, a Council
composed of women and men representing all the best interests of the
community: parents, schools, religious denominations of all sorts,
business, producers, women's clubs, and other social and philanthropic
organizations. The Council acts as the link between the Girl Scouts
and the community. It has the same relation to the separate Troops
that the school board has to the schools, that is; it guides and
decides upon policies and standards, interprets the Scouts to the
community and the community to the Scouts. It does not do the
executive or teaching work--that belongs to the Captains, Lieutenants
and Patrol Leaders.

Another of the functions of the Council is to interest public spirited
women and men, particularly artists and scientists in Girl Scout work
and get them to act as referees in awarding Merit Badges for
proficiency in the many lines encouraged for Girl Scouts.

But the community's resources of wisdom are not only in the schools
and museums, and laboratories and studios--these are mostly to be
found only in large cities. It is a poor place that does not have one
or more wise old persons--a farmer learned in nature ways, a retired
sailor stocked with sea lore, or a mother of men who knows life as
perhaps no one else can. The wise council will know where to find
these natural teachers and see that the children go to their schools.

Another prime function of the Council is the raising of funds and to
make available such other material equipment as camp sites, meeting
places for the Troops, etc. The Captain should turn to the Council for
help in arranging and directing rallies, dances, fairs, pageants and
other devices for entertainment or securing money.


_National Organization._ The central governing body of the Girl Scouts
is the National Council made up of elected delegates from all local
groups. The National Council works through an Executive Board, which
conducts National Headquarters in New York. The National Director is
in charge of Headquarters and has direct administrative responsibility
for the work of the whole organization with the general divisions of
Field, Business, Publication and Education.




"_Be Prepared_"

[Illustration: Girl Scout Logo]


Officers, National Headquarters Girl Scouts, Inc.

  _Honorary President_
  MRS. WOODROW WILSON

  _President_
  MRS. JULIETTE LOW

  _First Vice-President_
  MRS. ARTHUR O. CHOATE

  _Second Vice-President_
  MRS. HERBERT HOOVER

  _Treasurer_
  DUNLEVY MILBANK

  _Chairman, Executive Board_
  MRS. V. EVERIT MACY

  _Director_
  MRS. JANE DEETER RIPPIN

  _Executive Board_
  MRS. SELDEN BACON
  MRS. NICHOLAS F. BRADY
  MISS ELLEN M. CASSATT
  MRS. ARTHUR O. CHOATE
  MR. FRANCIS P. DODGE
  MISS EMMA R. HALL
  MRS. JULIETTE LOW
  MRS. V. EVERIT MACY
  MRS. SNOWDEN MARSHALL
  MRS. ROBERT G. MEAD
  MR. DUNLEVY MILBANK
  MISS LLEWELLYN PARSONS
  MRS. HAROLD I. PRATT
  MRS. THEODORE H. PRICE
  MRS. W. N. ROTHSCHILD
  DR. JAMES E. RUSSELL
  MRS. GEORGE W. STEVENS
  MRS. JAMES J. STORROW
  MRS. PERCY WILLIAMS




[Illustration: Girl Scout Logo]




  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | Transcriber's Note:                                          |
  |                                                              |
  | Two variations of the Girl Scout Promise appear in the       |
  | original text. Both wordings have been retained in this      |
  | e-text. "Girl Scouts Motto" and "Girl Scouts Laws" have      |
  | been retained without apostrophes, as in the original.       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Girl Scouts, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GIRL SCOUTS ***

***** This file should be named 24987.txt or 24987.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/9/8/24987/

Produced by David Edwards, Cline St. Charleskindt and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was made using scans of public domain works put
online by Harvard University Library's Open Collections
Program, Women Working 1800 - 1930)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
