The Project Gutenberg EBook of Susani, by Louis Becke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Susani
       1901

Author: Louis Becke

Release Date: April 19, 2008 [EBook #25109]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUSANI ***




Produced by David Widger





SUSANI

From "The Tapu Of Banderah and Other Stories"

By Louis Becke

C. Arthur Pearson Ltd.

1901

A few weeks ago I was reading a charmingly written book by a lady (the
wife of a distinguished savant) who had spent three months on Funafuti,
one of the lagoon islands of the Ellice Group. Now the place and the
brown people of whom she wrote were once very familiar to me, and her
warm and generous sympathy for a dying race stirred me greatly, and when
I came across the name "Funafala," old, forgotten memories awoke once
more, and I heard the sough of the trade wind through the palms and the
lapping of the lagoon waters upon the lonely beaches of Funafala, as
Senior, the mate of the _Venus_, and myself watched the last sleep of
Susani.

Funafala is one of the many islands which encircle Funafuti lagoon with
a belt of living green, and to Funafala--"the island of the pandanus
palm"--Senior and I had come with a party of natives from the village on
the main island to spend a week's idleness. Fifty years ago, long before
the first missionary ship sailed into the lagoon, five or six hundred
people dwelt on Funafala in peace and plenty--now it holds but their
bones, for they were doomed to fade and vanish before the breath of the
white man and his civilisation and "benefits," which to the brown people
mean death, and as the years went by, the remnant of the people
on Funafala and the other islets betook themselves to the main
island--after which the lagoon is named--for there the whale-ships
and trading schooners came to anchor, and there they live to this day,
smitten with disease and fated to disappear altogether within another
thirty years, and be no more known to man except in the dry pages of a
book written by some learned ethnologist.

But twice every year the people of Funafuti betake themselves to
Funafala to gather the cocoa-nuts, which in the silent groves ripen and
fall and lie undisturbed from month to month; then for a week or ten
days, as the men husk the nuts, the women and children fish in the
daytime among the pools and runnels of the inner reef, and at night with
flaring torches of palm-leaf they stand amid the sweeping surf on
the outer side of the narrow islet, and with net and spear fill their
baskets with blue and yellow crayfish. Then when all the work is done,
the canoes are filled with the husked cocoanuts, and with laughter and
song--for they are yet a merry-hearted though vanishing people--they
return to the village, and for another six months Funafala is left to
the ceaseless call of the restless sea upon the outer reef, and the
hoarse cry of the soaring frigate birds.

One afternoon Senior and myself, accompanied by a young,
powerfully-built native named Suka, were returning to the temporary
village on Funafala--a collection of rude huts thatched with palm
leaves--from a fishing excursion on the outer reef, when we were
overtaken by a series of sudden squalls and downpours of rain. We were
then walking along the weather shore of the island, which was strewn
with loose slabs of coral stone, pure white in colour and giving forth a
clear, resonant sound to the slightest disturbing movement On our right
hand was a scrub of _puka_ trees, which afforded no shelter from the
torrential rain; on our left the ocean, whose huge, leaping billows
crashed and thundered upon the black, shelving reef, and sent swirling
waves of whitened foam up to our feet.

For some minutes we continued to force our way against the storm, when
Suka, who was leading, called out to us that a little distance on along
the beach there was a cluster of _papa_ (coral rocks), in the recesses
of which we could obtain shelter. Even as he spoke the rain ceased for
a space, and we saw, some hundreds of yards before us, the spot of which
he had spoken--a number of jagged, tumbled-together coral boulders which
some violent convulsion of the sea had torn away from the barrier reef
and hurled upon the shore, where, in the course of years, kindly Nature
had sent out a tender hand and covered them with a thick growth of a
creeper peculiar to the low-lying atolls of the mid-Pacific, and hidden
their rugged outlines under a mantle of vivid green.

As we drew near, the bright, tropic sun shone out for a while, and the
furious wind died away, seeming to gather fresh strength for another
sweeping onslaught from the darkened weather horizon.

"Quick," said Suka, pointing to the rocks, "'tis bad to be smitten with
such rain as this. Let us rest in the _papa_ till the storm be over."

Following our all but naked guide, who sprang from stone to stone with
the surefootedness of a mountain goat, we soon reached the cluster of
rocks, the bases of which were embedded in the now hard and stiffened
sand, and almost at the same moment another heavy rain squall swept down
and blurred sea and sky and land alike.

Bidding us to follow, Suka began to clamber up the side of the highest
of the boulders, on the seaward face of which, he said, was a small
cave, used in the olden days as a sleeping place by fishermen and
sea-bird catchers. Suddenly, when half-way up, he stopped and turned to
us, and with a smile on his face, held up his hand and bade us listen.
Some one was singing.

"It is Susani," he whispered, "she did not sleep in the village last
night. She comes to this place sometimes to sing to the sea. Come, she
is not afraid of white men."

Grasping the thick masses of green vine called _At At_ which hung from
the summit of the rock, we at last reached the foot of the cave, and
looking up we saw seated at the entrance a young native girl of about
twelve years of age. Even though we were so near to her she seemed
utterly unconscious of our presence, and still sang in a low, soft voice
some island chant, the words of which were strange to both my companion
and myself although we were well acquainted with nearly all the
_Tokelauan_ dialects.

Very quietly we stood awaiting till she turned her face towards us,
but her eyes were bent seaward upon the driving sheets of rain, and the
tumbling surf which thrashed upon the shore.

"Wait," said Suka in a low voice; "she will see us soon. 'Tis best not
to disturb her. She is afflicted of God and seeth many things."

Her song ceased, and then Suka, stepping forward, touched her gently
upon the arm. She looked up and smiled into his face, and then she let
her full, dark eyes rest upon the strangers who stood behind, then again
she turned to Suka in mute, inquiring wonder.

He bent down and placed his cheek against hers, "Be not afraid, Susani;
they be good friends. And see, little one, sit thee further back within
the cave, for the driving rain beats in here at the mouth and thy feet
are wet and cold."

She rose without a word and stood whilst the kindly-hearted native
unrolled an old mat which lay at the end of the cave and spread it out
in the centre.

"Come, Susani, dear one," he said gravely, and his usually harsh and
guttural voice sounded soft and tender. "Come, sit thee here, and then
in a little while shall I get wood and make a fire so that we may eat.
Hast eaten to-day, little one?"

She shook her head; a faint smile parted her lips, and then her strange,
mournful eyes for a moment again sought ours as she seated herself on
the mat Suka beckoned us to approach and sit near her, himself sitting a
little apart and to one side.

"Susani," he said, bending forward and speaking slowly and carefully,
"_fealofani tau lima i taka soa_" ("give your hand to my friends ").

The girl held out her left hand, and Senior and I each took it in turn
gently within our own, and uttered the native greeting of "_Fakaalofa_."

"She can talk," said Suka, "but not much. Sometimes for many days no
word will come from her lips. It is then she leaveth the village and
walks about in the forest or along the beaches when others sleep. But
no harm can come to her, for she is _tausi mau te Atua_.{*} And be not
vexed in that she gave thee her left hand, for, see----"

     * In God's special keeping.

He touched the girl's right arm, and we now saw that it hung limp and
helpless upon her smooth, bared thigh.

"Was she born thus?" asked Senior, as he placed his strong, rough hand
upon her head and stroked her thick, wavy hair, which fell like a mantle
over her shoulders and back.

"Nay, she was born a strong child, and her mother and father were
without blemish, and good to look upon--the man was as thick as me" (he
touched his own brawny chest), "but as she grew and began to talk, the
bone in her right arm began to perish. And then the hand of God fell
upon her mother and father, and they died. But let me go get wood and
broil some fish, for she hath not eaten." Then he bent forward and
said--

"Dost fear to stay here, Susani, with the white men?"

She looked at us in turn, and then said slowly--

"Nay, I have no fear, Suka."

"Poor little beggar!" said Senior pityingly.

Ten minutes later Suka had returned with an armful of dry wood and some
young drinking cocoanuts. Fish we had in plenty, and in our bags were
some biscuits, brought from the schooner. As Senior and I tended the
fire, Suka wrapped four silvery sea mullet in leaves, and then when it
had burnt down to a heap of glowing coals he laid them in the centre and
watched them carefully, speaking every now and then to the child, who
seemed scarcely to heed, as she gazed at Senior's long, yellow beard,
and his bright, blue eyes set in his honest, sun-tanned face. Then, when
the fish were cooked, Suka turned them out of their coverings and placed
them on broad, freshly plucked _puka_ leaves, and Senior brought the
hard ship biscuits, and, putting one beside a fish, brought it to the
child and bade her eat.

She put out her left hand timidly, and took it from him, her strange
eyes still fixed wonderingly upon his face. Then she looked at Suka, and
Suka, with an apologetic cough, placed one hand over his eyes and bent
his head--for he was a deacon, and to eat food without giving thanks
would be a terrible thing to do, at least in the presence of white men,
who, of course, never neglected to do so.

The child, hungry as she must have been, ate her food with a dainty
grace, though she had but one hand to use, and our little attentions to
her every now and then seemed at first to increase her natural shyness
and timidity. But when the rude meal was finished, and my companion and
myself filled our pipes and sat in the front of the cave, she came with
Suka and nestled up against his burly figure as he rolled a cigarette of
strong, black tobacco in dried banana leaf. The rain had ceased, but the
fronds of the coco-palms along the lonely shore swayed and beat together
with the wind, which still blew strongly, though the sun was now shining
brightly upon the white horses of the heaving sea.

For nearly half an hour we sat thus, watching the roll and curl of
the tumbling seas upon the reef and the swift flight of a flock of
savage-eyed frigate birds which swept to and fro, now high in air,
now low down, with wing touching wave, in search of their prey, and
listening to the song of the wind among the trees. Then Suka, without
speaking, smiled, and pointed to the girl. She had pillowed her head
upon his naked bosom and closed her long-lashed eyes in slumber.

"She will sleep long," he said. "Will it vex thee if I stay here with
her till she awakens? See, the sky is clear and the rain hath ceased,
and ye need but walk along the beach till----"

"We will wait, Suka," I answered; "we will wait till she awakens, and
then return to the village together. How comes it that one so young and
tender is left to wander about alone?"

Suka pressed his lips to the forehead of the sleeping girl. "No harm can
come to her. God hath afflicted, but yet doth He protect her. And she
walketh with Him and His Son Christ, else had she perished long ago, for
sometimes she will leave us and wander for many days in the forest or
along the shore, eating but little and drinking nothing, for she cannot
open a cocoanut with her one hand, and there are no streams of fresh,
sweet water here as there be in the fair land of Samoa. And yet God is
with her always, always, and she feeleth hunger and thirst but little."

Senior placed his hand on mine and gripped it so firmly that I looked
at him with astonishment He was a cold, self-contained man, making no
friends, never talking about himself, doing his duty as mate of the
_Venus_ as a seaman should do it, and never giving any one--even myself,
with whom he was more open than any other man--any encouragement to ask
him why he, a highly educated and intelligent man, had left civilisation
to waste his years as a wanderer in the South Seas. Still grasping my
hand, he turned to me and spoke with quivering lips--

"' She walketh with God! 'Did you hear that? Did you look into her eyes
and not see in them what fools would call insanity, and what I _know_
is a knowledge of God above and Christ and the world beyond. 'God has
afflicted her,' so this simple-minded native, whom many men in their
unthinking moments would call a canting, naked kanaka, says; but God has
_not_ afflicted her. He has blessed her, for in her eyes there is that
which tells me better than all the deadly-dull sermons of the highly
cultured and fashionable cleric, who patters about the Higher Life, or
the ranting Salvationist who bawls in the streets of Melbourne or Sydney
about the Blood of the Lamb, that there _is_ peace beyond for all....
'God has afflicted this poor child!' Would that He might so afflict
me physically as He has afflicted her--if He but gave me that inner
knowledge of Himself which so shines out and is glorified in her face."

His voice, rising in his excitement, nearly awakened her; so Suka, with
outstretched hand, enjoined silence.

"She sleeps, dear friends."

A year had come and gone, and the _Venus_ again lay at anchor in the
broad lagoon of Funafuti. Suka had come aboard whilst the schooner was
beating up to the anchorage, and said that there had been much sickness
on the island, that many people had died, and that Susani with other
children was _tali mate_ (nearly dead). Could we give them some
medicine? for it was a strong sickness this, and even the "thick"{*} man
or woman withered and died from it. Soon they would all be dead.

     * I.e., strong, stout.

Alas! we could not help them much, for our medicine chest was long since
depleted of the only drug that would have been of service. At every
island in the group from Nanomea southwards we had found many of the
people suffering and dying from a malignant type of fever introduced
by an Hawaiian labour vessel. Then an additional misfortune followed--a
heavy gale, almost of hurricane force, had set in from the westward
and destroyed countless thousands of cocoanut trees, so that with the
exception of fish, food was very scarce.

We sent Suka on shore in the boat at once with a few mats of rice and
bags of biscuit--all the provisions we could spare. Then as soon as
the vessel was anchored the captain, Senior, and myself followed. The
resident native teacher met us on the beach, his yellow face and gaunt
frame showing that he, too, had been attacked. Many of the people, he
told us, had gone to the temporary village on Funafala, where a little
more food could be obtained than on the main island, the groves of palms
there not having suffered so severely from the gale. Among those who had
gone were Susani and the family who had adopted her, and we heard with
sorrow that there was no hope of the child living, for that morning
some natives had arrived from Funafala with the news that nearly all the
young children were dead, and those remaining were not expected to live
beyond another day or two.

After spending an hour with the teacher, and watching him distribute the
rice and biscuit among his sick and starving people, we returned to
the ship with the intention of sailing down to Funafala in the boat and
taking the natives there some provisions. The teacher thanked us warmly,
but declined to come with us, saying that he could not leave the many
for the few, "for," he added sadly, "who will read the service over
those who die? As you sail down the lagoon you will meet canoes coming
up from Funafala bringing the dead. I cannot go there to bury them."

It was nearly midnight when we put off from the schooner's side, but
with Suka as pilot we ran quickly down to the island. A few natives met
us as we stepped on shore, and to these we gave the provisions we had
brought, telling them to divide them equally. Then with Suka leading,
and carrying a lighted torch made from the spathe of the cocoanut tree,
we made our way through the darkened forest to the house in which Susani
and her people were living. It was situated on the verge of the shore,
on the weather side of the narrow island, so as to be exposed to the
cooling breath of the trade wind, and consisted merely of a roof of
thatch with open sides, and the ground within covered with coarse mats,
upon which we saw were lying three figures.

Making as little noise as possible Suka called out a name, and a man
threw off his sleeping mat and came out; it was Susani's adopted father.

"No," he said in his simple manner, in answer to our inquiries, "Susani
is not yet dead, but she will die at dawn when the tide is low. 'Tis now
her last sleep."

Stepping very softly inside the house so as not to disturb her, we sat
down to wait her awakening. Suka crouched near us, smoking his pipe in
silence, and watching the sleeping girl to see if she moved.

Just as the weird cries of the tropic birds heralded the approach of
dawn, the woman who lay beside Susani rose and looked into her face.
Then she bade us come nearer.

"She is awake."

The child knew us at once, even in that imperfect light, for the moment
Senior and myself stood up she tried to raise herself into a sitting
posture; in an instant Suka sprang to her aid and pillowed her head upon
his knees; weak as she was, she put out her hand to us, and then let it
lie in the mate's broad palm, her deep, mysterious eyes resting upon
his face with a strange look of happiness shining in them. Presently her
lips moved, and we all bent over her to listen; it was but one word--

"_Fakaalofa!_"{*}

     * "My love to you."

She never spoke again, but lay breathing softly, and as the sun shot
blood red from the sea and showed the deathly pallor of her face, poor
Suka gave way, and his stalwart bosom was shaken with the grief he tried
in vain to suppress. Once more she raised her thin, weak hand as if she
sought to touch his face; he took it tremblingly and placed it against
his cheek; in another moment she had ceased to breathe.

As I walked slowly along the beach to the boat I looked back; the White
Man and the Brown were kneeling together over the little mat-shrouded
figure.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Susani, by Louis Becke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUSANI ***

***** This file should be named 25109.txt or 25109.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/1/0/25109/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
