The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sarreo, by Louis Becke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sarreo
       1901

Author: Louis Becke

Release Date: April 19, 2008 [EBook #25107]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SARREO ***




Produced by David Widger








SARREO

From "The Tapu Of Banderah and Other Stories"

By Louis Becke

C. Arthur Pearson Ltd.

1901

"Well, there's niggers an' niggers, some just as good as any white man,"
said Mr. Thomas Potter as he, the second mate of the island-trading
barque _Reconnaisance_, and Denison the supercargo, walked her short,
stumpy poop one night, "though when I was before the mast I couldn't
stand one of 'em bunking too close to me--not for a long time. But after
awhile I found out that a Kanaka or a Maori is better than the usual run
of the paint-scrubbing Jack Dog who calls himself a sailorman
nowadays. Why, I've never seen a native sailor yet as was dirty in
his habits--they're too fond o' the water. Look at these Rotumah chaps
aboard here--if there's a calm they'll jump overboard and take a swim
instead of turning in when it's their watch below. Bah, white sailors
ain't worth feeding in this Island trade--lazy, dirty, useless brutes; a
Kanaka is worth three of any one of 'em. Did you notice that photograph
in my cabin--that one showing a ship's company standing on deck?"

"Yes, I did," replied Denison.

"Well, that's the crew of the _Fanny Long_, and amongst 'em is a fellow
I'm goin' to tell you about--a chap named Sarreo. We had that picture
taken in Hobart after we had come back from a sperm whaling cruise. We
had been very lucky, and the skipper and owners had all our photographs
taken in a group. I was second mate, and this Sarreo was one of the
boatsteerers. Him and me had been shipmates before, once in the old
_Meteor_ barque, nigger-catching for the Fiji planters, and once in a
New Bedford sperm whaler, and he had taken a bit of a liking to me, so
whenever I got a new ship he generally shipped too.

"Well, I was tired of whaling; I had two ribs broke on that cruise in
the _Fanny Lang_, by a boat being stove in by a whale. So after I had
got my money I walked out of the office, thinking of going to Sydney by
the steamboat, when up comes Sarreo.

"'Got your dollars, Sarreo?' I says.

"'Yes,' he answers. 'What you goin' to do now, Mr. Potter?'

"'Going to Sydney to look for another ship.'

"'All right,' he says quietly. 'I come too. I don' want to go whalin' no
more.'

"Sure enough, when I went on board the steamer there he was for'ard
sitting on his chest, smoking his pipe, an' waiting for me.

"In Sydney there was a fine big lump of a schooner just fitting out
for a trading cruise to the Solomon Islands, and I happened to know the
skipper, who worked it for me with the owners and I got the berth of
chief mate; and Sarreo (who used to come every day to the place I was
staying at to ask me not to forget him) was shipped as an A.B.

"What sort of a looking man? Well, he was a short, square-built chap,
with a chest like a working bullock. He was rather darker than a Samoan
or a Tahiti man, owing to a seafaring life, and had straight, black
hair. He only spoke as a rule when he was spoken to, and kept himself
pretty much aloof from the rest of the hands, though he wasn't by any
means sulky."

"Where did he hail from?" Denison inquired.

"Ah, now you're asking, sir. There was a beast of a supercargo--I beg
pardon, sir, for forgetting myself--a reg'lar flash, bullying pig of
a fellow, with us that trip. He put on as many airs as if he owned
the whole blooming Pacific. Well, one day he was straightening up his
trade-room, and calls for a couple of hands to help, and the skipper
sent Sarreo and another native sailor to him. We were then lying at
anchor in Marau Sound, in the Solomons, and the sun was hot enough to
blister the gates o' hell, and presently the supercargo comes on deck
and slings his fat, ugly carcase into a deck chair under the awning and
says--

"'That's a smart fellow, that Sarreo, Potter. Where does he come from?'

"Now I didn't know, and said so; so Mr. Supercargo grunts and says
that he'd ask him himself. Presently up comes Sarreo and the other
native--they were going for'ard for their dinner.

"'Here, I say you,' said the supercargo to Sarreo, touching him on the
calf of the leg with his foot as he was passing, 'what island you belong
to, eh?'

"Sarreo turned like lightning, and I caught a sight of his face. He had
dark, deep-set eyes and they seemed to spit fire at the fat brute in the
chair, and his two brown hands shut tight; but he said nothing, not a
blessed word, only looked as if all the rest of his body was turned to
stone. He stood like that for about ten seconds or so, then he bent his
head close to the other man's face and put his two clenched fists out
behind him.

"'Here, Sarreo,' I says, collaring him by one arm, 'what's all these
gymnastics? What's the matter?'

"He pushed me aside as if I was a feather, then he straightens himself
up sudden, and, lookin' at the supercargo, spits on the deck at his
feet.

"'You dog,' he says, 'when we get ashore I will fight you!'

"'Warby,' that was the supercargo's name, was no cur, whatever else he
was, but though he seemed mighty sick when he heard Sarreo call him a
dog, he jumped up at once.

"'You damned Kanaka swine! You're drunk! You've been sneaking a bottle
of gin in the trade-room, an' I'll give you a pounding,' he says.

"Then before any one could interfere they were at it, and in less than
a couple of minutes Sarreo had the supercargo by the throat, lifted him
off his feet, and dashes him down on the poop. He lay there stunned, an'
I tell you, mister, I was mighty pleased, for we all hated him for his
beastly bullyin' ways, and his foul talk. So none of us rushed at him
too violently to pick him up. Presently up comes the skipper and orders
me to put Sarreo in irons, though I could see he didn't half like doing
it. But it had to be done, and I had to do it However, Sarreo held out
his hands to me as quiet as a lamb, and I led him for'ard and told him
to keep a stiff upper lip; the captain, I knew, would let him loose
again the next morning. He nodded his head quietly and said, 'All right,
Mr Potter. But when we get ashore _I mus' kill that man_.'

"'Why, Sarreo,' I said, 'you mustn't talk like that, you've nearly
cracked his skull as it is. Don't you go on that tack, or it'll be worse
for you.'

"He nods again. 'I know. But I have been look for that man for more'n
five year.'

"'Why, do you know him?'

"'Yes, I know him _now_. When I see him roll up his shirt-sleeve in the
trade-room, an' I see some tattoo mark on his arm, I know him.'

"Of course I asked him what the supercargo had done to him, but he
wouldn't tell me any more. So, telling one of the hands to give him
his pipe and tobacco, I went aft again and told the skipper that there
seemed to be an old grudge between the two men.

"'Like enough/ says the skipper. 'That fellow Warby is the two ends and
bight of a howling blackguard. He was only appointed to this ship at the
last moment, or else I would have bucked against his coming aboard. He's
got a bad name.'

"Warby lay in his bunk for the rest of the day, but in the evening he
came on deck and said to the skipper roughly--

"'What are you going to do with that damned nigger?'

"' Keep him in irons for a day or two, I suppose. What more can I do?'

"Warby looked at him for a moment, then he says, with a sneer, that in
some ships the captain would have tied such a fellow up and given him
six dozen.

"'No doubt,' says the skipper, looking him full in his ugly face, 'no
doubt, especially in the sort of ships you've sailed in. But nothing
like that is going to happen aboard this hooker.'

"The supercargo muttered something under his breath and turned away.
Next morning, however, when we were at breakfast, he asked the captain
how long he meant to keep Sarreo in irons.

"'Till after breakfast'

"Warby jumped up in a rage and said that he protested against such a man
being given his liberty. 'Why, he'll murder me,' he says at last with a
white look in his face.

"The skipper laughed. 'You make too much of the business, Mr. Warby.
Why, he is one of the best and quietest men aboard. If you hadn't kicked
him and then swore at him, he wouldn't have tackled you. And I'm not
going to keep him in irons--that's flat.'

"After breakfast I went up for'ard to take the irons off Sarreo. He was
sitting against the windlass and smoking.

"'Here, Sarreo,' I said, 'I've come to take off your bracelets; but you
must promise not to have any more rows with the supercargo; if you won't
promise, then the captain says he'll have to keep you in irons until we
get to Fiji, and then send you to jail.'

"He promised, and from the quiet, soft manner in which he spoke, I felt
sure he was over his burst of passion, and was feeling a bit funky over
it. However, he turned-to very quietly, and was soon sent ashore with
a watering party, he being in charge of the boat which was manned by
native sailors. When he came back with the first lot of casks he told me
that the bush around the watering-place was full of pigeons. As soon as
the captain heard this he said he would go ashore and shoot some, and
Mr. Warby said he would like to join him.

"So off they went--skipper, supercargo, and Sarreo and his boat's crew.
We on board soon heard the two guns firing, and were smacking our chops
at the thought of pigeon stew for supper. I did not expect to see them
back until about supper-time, knowing that the boat had to tow the casks
off to the ship, which lay about half a mile from the beach. But about
four o'clock I saw the boat pushing off in a deuce of a hurry, and
then pull like mad for the ship. Knowing that there was no danger from
natives at that part of the island, I couldn't make it out, but in a few
minutes the boat dashes up alongside, and looking over the side I saw
that Sarreo was sitting beside the captain, in between him and Mr.
Warby; his eyes were closed, and I thought he was dead at first.

"We had him lifted up on deck and then carried into the cabin in a brace
of shakes, and I saw that he had a bullet wound in his shoulder; the
ball had gone clean through. Then the skipper, who was never much of a
talker, told me that Mr. Warby had shot the man accidentally. Of course
I looked at Warby. His face was very pale, but his eyes met mine without
flinching.

"It didn't take the captain long to dress the wound, and half an hour
later, when I came below again, Sarreo was sitting up on some cushions
in the transoms smoking one of the captain's Manilas, and looking as if
nothing had happened. He smiled when he saw me and put out his hand.

"'I'm all right, Mr. Potter,' he said; 'not going to die this time.'

"I was just about to ask him how the thing happened, when
Robertson--that was our skipper's name--called me into his room. He was
as solemn as a judge. Closing his cabin door, he said, 'Sarreo will get
over it all right, but the business is an ugly one; to cut it short, I
believe that it was no accident, but that Warby tried to murder the poor
fellow.'

"Then he told me what had occurred. Leaving the rest of the boat's crew
to fill the water casks, they set out to shoot pigeons; Sarreo went with
them to pick up and carry the birds. About an hour later they saw a wild
boar rush by them. Robertson fired both barrels at it and wounded it,
but it didn't stop. Warby had one barrel empty. He at once loaded with
ball, and the three men gave chase, Sarreo leading, Warby following him
close. On reaching some high grass at the river bank Sarreo plunged into
it; then, a few seconds later, Robertson heard Warby call out that he
saw the animal lying down, and fired. The captain was a short distance
behind, but he and Warby reached the spot together, and there, sure
enough, lying in the long grass, was the wounded boar, and Sarreo
beside it, with the blood pouring from his shoulder. He was sitting up,
supporting himself on his left hand. The skipper assisted him to his
feet, and Warby tried to help, but Sarreo turned on him and cursed him,
and said that he (Warby) had tried to murder him. The supercargo swore
that he had not seen him when he fired, but further talk was cut short
by Sarreo going faint through loss of blood, so they carried him to the
boat.

"That was the story so far, and Robertson asked me what I thought of it.

"Now I had been shipmates with Sarreo off and on for a matter of five
or six years, and I never knew him to tell a lie; but at the same time I
couldn't think Warby would be such a brute as to try and murder the
man in cold blood. The skipper, however, took a very black view of the
matter, and told me that if we met a man-of-war he would put Warby in
irons, signal for a boat, and hand him over on a charge of attempted
murder. Then we went out into the main cabin and sat down, and Robertson
told the steward to call the supercargo.

"Warby came below at once. He gave a quick glance at Sarreo, then at
the skipper and myself, and sat down quietly. In less than a minute the
captain told him of his suspicions and what he intended doing if we met
a man-of-war.

"I thought Warby would bluster and blaspheme in his usual way; but he
didn't. He listened in silence. Then he rose and put his hands on the
cabin table, and said--

"'Before God, I swear to you both that I am innocent I did not fire at
that man; I did not even see him again after he disappeared into the
grass--as the Almighty is my judge, I did not... I did mean to take it
out of Sarreo for nearly breaking my skull the other day; but then
I remembered afterwards that he had cause to hate me, and I was only
waiting for a chance to ask him to make it up. And I say again that I
am no cowardly murderer; when I fired, I fired at the boar or what I
honestly thought was the boar, struggling in the grass. You can put me
in irons now if you like; or shut me up in my cabin. I'm not going to
sit down at the same table with men who suspect me of attempted murder.'

"There was something in his voice which made us believe him, and then he
took a couple of turns up and down the cabin deck, and stepped up to the
wounded man.

"'Sarreo, I did you a bad turn a long time ago; but I'm sorry for it
now--I have been sorry for it ever since. But I did not know where to
find you, and I would not have known you yesterday if you hadn't looked
into my face and spoken. It's ten years since that day, Sarreo.'

"The wounded man looked up, searching-like, into Warby's face all the
time he was speaking; then his big black eyes drooped again, but he made
no answer. So then Warby went on again, talking to the lot of us.

"'I was supercargo on the _Manola_ brig, and Sarreo here was one of the
hands. One day, in Apia harbour, a bag of dollars was stolen out of my
cabin. The steward next morning said he had seen Sarreo ashore at one
of the dance houses spending money very freely. The captain and I burst
open his chest, and we found about twenty Mexican dollars among his
clothes. Now, in the bag which had been stolen there were nearly five
hundred Mexican dollars. Sarreo swore he had not stolen the money and
that all the money he had spent on shore was five dollars, which he had
brought with him from San Francisco. But the skipper and I believed he
was the thief, and to make him own up and tell us where the rest of the
dollars were, we flogged him. Then we put him in irons and kept him
in irons for a week. He still swore he had not taken the money, and I,
believing he was lying, gave him another thrashing on my own account.
That night he got overboard and swam ashore, and we gave the money up
for lost Well, about a week after this, when the steward was ashore, the
mate and I decided to make a thorough search of _his_ cabin. We found
nothing there, but we did in the pantry--we found the missing bag of
dollars, all but the twenty which he had put into Sarreo's chest--stowed
away in the bottom of half a barrel of flour."

"As soon as Sarreo heard this, the poor fellow almost began to cry, and
said, 'I told you, Mr. Warby, I no steal that money.'

"'No, Sarreo, I know you didn't--that is, I knew it when the steward
owned up to stealing it; and told us afterward that he took twenty
dollars out of the bag, and, seeing your chest lying open in the
deck-house, he slipped in when no one was about and put the money among
the clothes at the bottom.'

"Sarreo sighed, pleased-like, and then his brown face lit up.

"The big supercargo came a bit nearer to him, and then held out his
hand.

"'Look here, Sarreo! The day before yesterday I was wrong, but you got
my blood up; and I am sorry, very sorry, for the wrong I did you on
board the _Manola_; but so help me God, Sarreo, I _did not_ fire at
you.'

"Sarreo's eyes seemed to look right through the white man; then they
turned towards the skipper and me.

"'Ibelieve you, Mr. Warby,' said the skipper, coming up and shaking
hands with the supercargo.

"And I believed him too, for he looked terribly distressed and cut up,
so I shook hands with him too.

"Then Sarreo put out his big brown tattooed hand.

"'And me too, Mr. Warby.'

"The supercargo pressed it gently, so as not to hurt Sarreo's shoulder,
then he almost ran past us on deck.

"Well, from that time out, that man Warby changed, and he looked after
Sarreo all the time he was laid up, as if he had been his own brother
instead of a Kanaka chap before the mast.

"After leaving Marau Sound we stood to the northward, being bound to
Bougainville Island. It took us more than a month to get there, and by
that time Sarreo was as well and strong as ever he was, and me and the
skipper had got quite chummy with the supercargo, for we found out that
he had a lot of good points about him. You see, mister, ten or twelve
years ago the Solomon Group was the place to show what a man was made
of--as far as that goes it's not much altered since. If you don't die
of fever you're pretty sure to get knocked on the head and go down the
nigger's gullets--and this chap Warby had rare pluck. He never ran a
boat's crew into danger, but would take any risks himself, and
somehow we had cruised right up from Marau Sound to the north end of
Bougainville without losing a man, or having more than a few arrows or
shots fired at the boats.

"Just when we were about to brace up to round Bouka Island, and being
about three miles off the land, we sighted the hull of a vessel ashore
on the beach of a small bay. We stood in for a mile or so and saw that
there was a native village at the head of the bay, and that the vessel
was a schooner of about a hundred tons. There were no signs of any boats
and she seemed to be stripped of both running and standing gear.

"We manned and armed two boats--one, with Mr. Warby in charge, being
the landing-party; and the other as a covering boat in case the natives
attacked. I had charge of the second boat and had four white sailors;
Warby had Sarreo and four other natives. The skipper told us to have a
good look at the vessel, then try and learn what the natives on shore
had to say about her, and then come off and report.

"We pulled right in to the wreck as close as we could get, for it was
low tide. Then Warby and I got out and walked over to it. We found that
she was stripped of everything of value, even the chain-plates having
been cut out, the decks were torn up and partly burnt, and the anchors
and cables were gone; in fact, she was nothing but a shell.

"'Been looted by the niggers,' I said to Warby. 'Hope the poor chaps
that manned her got away in the boat; better for 'em to have been
drowned than be eaten by these beggars about here.'

"'We'll soon see,' said he. 'It's my opinion they did get away safely.
Look over there, Potter, at those niggers waiting for us on the beach;
now if they had cut off this vessel they would have bolted into the
bush, or begun firing at us. Come on.'

"We walked back to the boats and then pulled over to the village, which
was about eight hundred yards away, Warby's boat, of course, going
first. About thirty or forty natives came down to the water's edge and
waited. They were all armed with bows, spears, and clubs, but seemed
friendly.

"However, Warby jumped boldly out on to the beach, and telling his crew
to keep her afloat in case he had to run for it, he went up to the crowd
of niggers and shook hands with some of them; I and my chaps in the
covering boat keeping our rifles out of view, but quite ready.

"In about five minutes Warby sang out to me that it was all right. The
vessel, the natives told him, had parted her cables, gone ashore and
bilged on the reef in the night; and the hands being too frightened to
come ashore, had gone away next morning in two boats. Then he told me to
wait a few minutes, as he was going to the chief's house to look at the
copper and other gear that the natives had taken from the schooner, and
very likely he would buy it. First of all, though, he told Sarreo to
pass him out a 12 lb. case of tobacco as a present for the chief.

"He took the case from Sarreo and handed it to the chief, and then
off they went--he in the middle of thirty or forty murderous-looking
savages; but he had done the same thing so often before that we did not
feel any particular alarm.

"We lay there, backed stern on to the beach, for about five minutes,
looking at the house into which he had gone with the natives. Suddenly
we saw him burst out of the house and fall on his knees, trying to draw
his revolver; but in another moment he was being tomahawked and clubbed
by a mob of yelling devils! Poor chap, he must have died very quickly.

"We opened fire at once and they disappeared like magic, and then from
every bush, tree, and rock they began firing at us in the boats with
both muskets and arrows. One of my men was hit, and then, before I
could stop him, Sarreo had jumped out of his boat and was running up the
beach, rifle in hand, to where Mr. Warby's body was lying.

"He got there, I think, without being hit, just as a big native ran at
him with a tomahawk. He hadn't time to put his Snider to his shoulder;
but that nigger gave his last jump anyway, for I saw the rifle go off
and the nigger topple over. In another five seconds he had lifted the
supercargo up, thrown him over his left shoulder, and was running down
to the boats.

"By this time, me and two of my crew had jumped out of the boat and ran
to meet him, firing as we went. We had just reached him when down he
went on to his face in the sand--a bullet had smashed his hip.

"Dropping our rifles, we picked him and Mr. Warby's body up, and by
God's mercy managed to tumble into the boat together and push off,
covered by the fire from the ship, which carried two six-pounders.

"Sarreo lived two days--he died the same morning that we were getting
ready to take Warby's body ashore to bury on a little island between
Bouka and Bougainville. So we made only one trip ashore. Poor chap! He
had a good, simple heart, and almost his last words were that he 'was
glad Mr. Warby wasn't eaten.'

*****

"Ah, as you say, Mr. Denison, the rotten South Seas ain't no place for a
white man. Good-night."








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sarreo, by Louis Becke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SARREO ***

***** This file should be named 25107.txt or 25107.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/1/0/25107/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
