The Project Gutenberg EBook of Careless Kate, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Careless Kate
       A Story for Little Folks

Author: Oliver Optic

Release Date: May 11, 2008 [EBook #25427]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARELESS KATE ***




Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









  CARELESS KATE.

  A STORY FOR LITTLE FOLKS.

  BY

  OLIVER OPTIC,

  AUTHOR OF "YOUNG AMERICA ABROAD," "THE ARMY AND NAVY SERIES," "THE
  WOODVILLE STORIES," "THE STARRY FLAG SERIES," "THE BOAT CLUB STORIES,"
  "THE LAKE SHORE SERIES," "THE UPWARD AND ONWARD SERIES," "THE YACHT CLUB
  SERIES," "THE GREAT WESTERN SERIES," ETC.


  BOSTON 1889 LEE AND SHEPARD PUBLISHERS 10 MILK STREET NEXT "OLD SOUTH
  MEETING HOUSE"

  NEW YORK CHARLES T. DILLINGHAM

  718 AND 720 BROADWAY

  Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1862, by WILLIAM T.
  ADAMS. In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
  Massachusetts.

  S. J. PARKHILL & CO., PRINTERS, 222 FRANKLIN STREET, BOSTON.


       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: CARELESS KATE.]




CARELESS KATE.




I.


"Kate!" said Mrs. Lamb to her daughter, who was playing in the garden,
in front of the house.

"What do you want, mother?" replied the little girl, without even
lifting her eyes from the ground, in which she was planting a marigold.

I don't think any of my young readers regard this as a proper answer for
a little girl to make to her mother; and I hope none of them ever speak
to their parents in this manner.

"Come into the house. I want you," added her mother.

But Kate did not go till she got ready. She was not in the habit of
minding her mother at once, and without asking any improper questions
as, all good children do, or ought to do, at least.

When she stepped out of the bed of flowers, in which she had been at
work, instead of looking to see where she put her feet, she kept her
eyes fixed on the place where she had just planted the marigold.

"Look before you leap" is a good motto for everybody--for children, as
well as for men and women. If Kate had thought of it, perhaps she would
have saved herself and her mother a great deal of trouble.

She did not mind where she stepped, and put her foot upon a beautiful,
sweet-scented peony, which had just come out of the ground. She broke
the stem short off, and crushed the root all in pieces.

Now, this flower was very highly prized by Mrs. Lamb, for she had
brought it from a great distance, and it was the only one of the kind
in Riverdale at that time.

Kate was very fond of flowers herself, and when she saw the mischief she
had done, she cried with anger and vexation. She would not have spoiled
this peony for a great deal, for she had looked forward with much
pleasure to the time when it should bud and blossom, and fill the garden
with its fragrance.

"What is the matter with you, Kate?" called her mother, from the house,
when she heard Kate crying.

"I did not mean to do it, mother," sobbed the poor girl.

"Didn't mean to do what, Kate?" said her mother, rushing into the garden
to find out what mischief had been done.

Mrs. Lamb was very angry when she saw that the peony was spoiled; and
she took Kate by the arm, and shook her. I don't think this shaking did
any good; but it was a great trial to her to see her favorite flower
destroyed.

"You careless girl!" said Mrs. Lamb.

"I didn't mean to, mother," replied Kate.

"But you were careless, as you always are. Will you never learn to be
careful? You walk about the flower beds as though they were solid
rocks."

"I did not mean to tread upon it," was all that poor Kate could say.

It was very true that she did not mean to spoil the peony; but it was
almost as bad to ruin it by being careless. Children ought to understand
that not meaning to do wrong is not a good excuse, when the wrong might
have been prevented by being careful.

Suppose the captain of a ship should run his vessel on the rocks, and
lose a dozen lives, by being careless; do you think people would be
willing to trust him with another vessel afterwards?

Suppose the engineer should neglect to keep watch of the boiler, and it
should burst; would not people blame him? Would they think it a good
excuse if he said he did not mean to let it burst?

If the man who has the keeping of a powder house should smoke a pipe in
it, and twenty persons should be killed by his carelessness, do you
think it would be enough for him to say he did not intend to kill them?

When we go on the water in a sailing vessel or a steamer; when we ride
on a railroad, in a stage, or wagon, our lives depend on the carefulness
with which the vessel, railroad, or carriage is managed. People don't
excuse them, when lives are lost, because they did not mean to kill
anybody.

You are liable to lose your life every day by the carelessness of some
one. The house in which you are to sleep on a cold winter's night may be
burned down by the neglect of those who take care of the fires.

The careless use of a lamp might destroy many lives and much property.
If you play with fire, though you do not mean any harm, you may burn the
house in which you live, and perhaps destroy the lives of your friends.

A little carelessness may produce dreadful results. The want of thought
for a few moments may do more mischief than you can repair in a whole
lifetime.

Kate Lamb was not a bad girl at heart. She loved her parents and her
friends as much as any little girl; but she often gave them a great deal
of trouble and sadness by her carelessness.

She was so thoughtless that she had come to be called "Careless Kate."
It was a bad fault; and it sometimes led her to commit worse ones, as my
story will show.

"Now, Kate, come into the house; and next time, when I call, come at
once," said her mother. "If you had minded me, perhaps my flower would
not have been spoiled."

"I will be more careful next time, mother," replied Kate.

"I hope you will. I think you have done sufficient mischief by being
careless, and I hope you will soon begin to do better."

"I will try, mother."

Very likely she meant to try, just then, while she was smarting under
her mother's rebuke, and while she was still sad at the loss of the
flower; but she had promised to do better so many times, that her mother
could hardly believe her again.

"I want you to carry this quart of milk down in the meadow to poor Mrs.
O'Brien," said Mrs. Lamb, as she handed her a tin kettle. "And you must
go quick, for it is almost dark now."

"It won't take me long, mother."

"But you must be very careful, and not spill any of the milk."

"I will be very careful."

"Mrs. O'Brien is sick, and has two small children. This milk is for
their supper."

"That is the woman whose husband was killed on the railroad last
summer--isn't it, mother?"

"Yes; and she is very poor. She is sick now, and not able to work. The
neighbors have all sent milk to her for her children, and a great many
other things. Now go just as fast as you can, but be very careful and
not spill the milk."

[Illustration: MRS. O'BRIEN AND HER CHILDREN.]




II.


Kate put on her bonnet, and taking the pail of milk, hastened towards
the house of the poor sick woman. But she had gone but a little way when
she met Fanny Flynn, who was an idle girl, and very fond of mischief.

"Where are you going, Kate?" asked Fanny.

"I am going down to Mrs. O'Brien's with some milk."

"Give me a drink--will you?

"I can't; it is for the poor widow's children. I suppose they won't have
any supper till they get this milk."

"Yes, they will. I won't drink but a little of it."

"No, I can't give you any. It would not be right for me to do so."

"Pooh! You needn't pretend to be so good all at once. You are no better
than I am."

"I didn't say I was. Only I shall not give you any of this milk, when it
is for the poor woman's children; so you needn't ask me," replied Kate,
with a great deal of spirit.

Some people think, when they do any thing that is right, they ought to
make a great parade over it; but this only shows that they are not much
in the habit of doing right, and they wish to get all the credit they
can for it.

It was so with Kate. She ought to have been content with merely doing
her duty, without "talking large" about it. Fanny felt that she was just
as good as Kate, and she was angry when the latter made a needless show
of her intention to do what she believed to be right.

"I don't want it," said Fanny.

"What did you ask me for it for, then? You wanted to make me do
something that was wrong."

[Illustration: FANNY AND KATE.]

"You are not always so nice," sneered Fanny.

"I don't mean to do wrong, anyhow, as some folks do."

"Do you mean me?"

"No matter whom I mean."

Fanny was so angry that she walked up to Kate and pulled her "shaker"
down over her face. She also used some naughty words when she did so,
which I will not repeat.

Kate, in her turn, was very angry with the saucy girl, and wanted to
"pay" her for what she had done. But Fanny did not wait for any reply,
and ran away just as fast as she could.

It would have been much better for Kate if she had let her go; but she
was so angry she could not do this; she wanted to strike back again.
Without thinking of the milk in the pail, she started to run after the
naughty girl.

For a few moments she ran with all her might, and had nearly caught
Fanny, when a stone tripped her up, and she fell upon the ground.

Then she thought of the milk, and tried to save it; but the cover of the
kettle came off, and it was all spilled on the ground.

The fall did not hurt her, but the laugh with which her misfortune was
greeted by Fanny roused a very wicked spirit in her heart, and dropping
the pail, which she had picked up, she pursued her.

But the naughty girl had the start of her, and though she followed her a
good way she could not overtake her. Then she stopped in the path, and
cried with anger and vexation. The thought of the milk which had been
spilled, was, after all, the worst part of the affair.

Walking back to the place where the accident had happened, she picked
up the pail again, and began to think what she should do. It was of no
use now for her to go to Mrs. O'Brien's. She had no milk for the
children's supper.

What would her mother say to her if she should return home and tell her
she had spilled all the milk? She had told her to be careful, and she
felt that she had been very careless.

It was not necessary that she should chase the naughty girl, whatever
she said; and she could not help seeing that she had been very careless.
While she was thinking about it, Ben Tinker came along. He lived in the
next house to Mr. Lamb, and the children were well acquainted with each
other.

"What is the matter with you, Kate?" asked Ben, when he saw that her
eyes were red, and her face was wet with tears.

"I have just spilled a pailful of milk on the ground," sobbed Kate.

"O, well, it's no use to cry for spilled milk," laughed Ben.

"I was carrying it to Mrs. O'Brien."

"No matter; she will get along very well without it."

"That ugly Fanny Flynn struck me on the head, and that's what made me
spill the milk."

"Didn't you hit her back?"

"I couldn't catch her; she ran away. I was chasing her when I fell down
and spilled the milk."

"You can catch her some time; when you do, give it to her."

But Kate had got over her anger, and heartily wished she had not
attempted to catch Fanny. Besides, she very well knew that Ben was
giving her bad advice.

That passage from the New Testament, "If any man smite thee on the one
cheek, turn to him the other also," came to her mind, and she felt how
wicked it was to harbor a desire for revenge.

The loss of the milk, and what would follow when she went home, gave her
more trouble than the injury she had received from the naughty girl.

"I don't know what I shall do," said she, beginning to cry again, as she
thought of her mother.

"Do? you can't do any thing--can you? The milk is gone, and all you have
to do is to go home," replied Ben.

"What will my mother say?"

"No matter what she says, if she don't whip you or send you to bed
without your supper."

"She won't whip me, and I have been to supper."

"Then what are you crying about?"

"Mother says I am very careless; and I know I am," whined Kate.

"Don't be a baby, Kate."

"I spoiled a flower this afternoon, and mother scolded me and shook me
for it. She told me to be very careful with this milk, and now I have
spilled the whole of it."

"Well, if you feel so bad, why need you tell her any thing about it?"

"About what?" asked Kate, looking up into his face, for she did not
quite understand him.

"You needn't tell her you spilled the milk. She will never find it out."

"But she will ask me."

"What if she does? Can't you tell her you gave the milk to the old
woman, and that she was very much obliged to her for sending it?"

"I can do that," said Kate.

She did not like the plan, but it seemed to her just then that any thing
would be better than telling her mother that she had spilled the milk;
and, wicked as it was, she resolved to do it.

[Illustration: CRYING FOR SPILLED MILK.]




III.


Kate did not think of the poor woman and her hungry children when she
made up her mind to tell her mother such a monstrous lie.

She did not think how very wicked it was to deceive her mother, just to
escape, perhaps, a severe rebuke for her carelessness.

She felt all the time that she was doing wrong, but she tried so hard
to cover it up, that her conscience was not permitted to do its whole
duty.

When we are tempted to do wrong, something within us tells us not to do
it; but we often struggle to get rid of this feeling, and if we succeed
the first time, it is easier the next time. And the more we do wrong,
the easier it becomes to put down the little voice within us.

It was so with Kate. She had told falsehoods before, or it would not
have been so easy for her to do it this time. If we do not take care of
our consciences, as we do of our caps and bonnets, they are soon
spoiled.

Did you ever notice that one of the wheels on your little wagon, when it
becomes loose, soon wears out? The more it sags over on one side, the
weaker it grows. While the wheel stands up straight, it does not seem
to wear out at all.

It is just so with your conscience--your power to tell right from wrong.
While you keep it up straight, it works well, and never wears out. But
when it gets a little out of order, it grows worse very fast, and is not
of much more value than a lighthouse without any light in it.

Kate's conscience had begun to sag over on one side. It was growing
weak, and did not remind her of her wrong deeds with force enough to
make itself heeded. If she could only escape the reproof of her mother,
she did not care.

Thus moved by the wicked counsel of Ben Tinker, she hastened home. She
tried to look as if nothing had happened, but her eyes were still very
red from crying; and her mother wanted to know what had made her cry.

"Fanny Flynn struck me, and pulled my 'shaker' over my face," replied
Kate.

"What did she do that for?"

"She asked me to give her a drink of the milk, and because I wouldn't,
she struck me," answered Kate, placing her pail upon the kitchen table.

"She is a naughty girl, and I will go and see her mother about it. What
did she say to you?"

"She asked me for a drink of the milk."

"What did you answer?"

"I told her it was for Mrs. O'Brien's children, and that it wouldn't be
right for me to give it to her, and I would not."

"Well, I will see to that. I think it is a pity if I can't send one of
my children out on an errand of charity without her being treated in
this manner. She shall suffer for it."

"She is a naughty girl, mother; and I never mean to speak to her again
as long as I live," said Kate, with much apparent earnestness.

"You did right not to give her any of the milk, and I am glad you did
not. I am happy that my daughter has been brave enough to do right, and
even to suffer for doing it. You are a good girl, Kate."

"I meant to be, mother."

"What did Mrs. O'Brien say when you gave her the milk?" continued Mrs.
Lamb.

"She said she was much obliged to you," replied Kate, not daring to look
her mother in the face.

"Did you see the children?"

"Yes, mother."

Mrs. Lamb was going to ask more questions about the family, but
something called her attention away, and Kate was saved from telling
more falsehoods.

She took a book and tried to read, but she could not, for she did not
feel like a good girl. The little voice within told her how wicked she
had been, and she began to wish that she had not deceived her mother.

While she sat with the book in her hand, her father came home; and her
mother told him what Fanny Flynn had done. He was very angry when he had
heard the story, and asked Kate a great many questions about the affair.

"You did well, Kate, and I am glad you were so brave and so smart,"
said Mr. Lamb.

"Of course I could not give her any of the milk when it was for the
poor widow's hungry children."

"You did right, Kate," repeated her father. "The poor children might
have had to go to bed hungry if you had given up the milk to that bad
girl."

"I know it, father."

"Only think what a sad thing it would have been if the poor little ones
had been sent hungry and crying to bed. That Fanny Flynn must be taken
care of. When little girls get to be so bold as that, it is high time
something was done."

"I think so, too, father."

"It is time for you to go to bed now, Kate," said her mother.

"I am ready, mother, for I am tired as I can be."

Kate was glad to get away from her father and mother, for while they
were praising her for her good conduct, she knew very well that she did
not deserve it.

What would her parents think if they knew that she had spilled all the
milk on the ground? What would they say to her if they found out that
she had told them so many lies?

The more she thought of her conduct, the more she felt that she had done
wrong. She now saw that, if she had returned home and told her mother
the truth, she would have excused the fault, and sent another pail of
milk to the poor sick woman's hungry children.

She wished she had done so, for it would have been a great deal better
to be scolded for her carelessness than to feel as guilty as she now
felt. She was sure that it was far better to suffer a great deal than to
do even a little wrong.

She was not satisfied either that her mother would have scolded her, if
she had stated the whole truth to her--that Fanny Flynn had made her
spill the milk.

She went to bed; but when her mother bade her good night, and took the
lamp in her hand, she begged her to leave it, for she did not like to be
alone in the dark.

It seemed just as though a wicked spirit was tormenting her; and though
she was in the habit of going to sleep without a light, the darkness was
terrible to her at this time. She did not even wish to be left alone,
but she dared not ask her mother to stay with her.

When Mrs. Lamb had gone out, Kate covered her face wholly under the
bedclothes, and shut her eyes as close as she could, trying in this
manner to go to sleep. But her guilty conscience gave her no rest.

Then she opened her eyes, and looked around the room; but every thing in
the chamber seemed to mock and reproach her. Again and again she shut
her eyes, and tried to sleep.

The little voice within would speak now, in the silence of her chamber.
She had never felt so bad before; perhaps because she had never been so
wicked before. Do you want to know why she suffered so much? It was
because she could not keep from her mind those hungry, crying children.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: KATE TELLS THE WHOLE STORY.]




IV.


Poor Kate! She had certainly never been so wicked in her life before.
The words of her father still lingered in her ears, and she could almost
hear the moans of those hungry, crying children.

She had never been sent to bed in her life without her supper, and it
looked like a dreadful thing to her--perhaps even more dreadful than it
really was.

If there had been nothing but the falsehoods she had told, she might
have gone to sleep; but it was sad to think that she had deprived the
poor children of their supper, and sent them hungry to bed. This seemed
to be the most wicked part of her conduct.

I do not know how many times she turned over in the bed, nor how many
times she pulled the clothes over her eyes to shut out the sad picture
of those hungry and crying children that would come up before her, in
spite of all she could do to prevent it.

She tried to think of other things--of the scene with Fanny; of her
school; of a picnic party she had attended on the first of May; of
almost every thing, indeed; but it did no good. The poor children could
not be banished from her mind.

Kate had been sick with the measels, with the scarlet fever, and the
mumps; and she remembered how bad she felt at these times; but it seemed
to her now that she would rather have all these diseases at once than
suffer from a guilty conscience.

When she was sick, her mother bent over her and pitied her, and did all
she could to ease her pain; and even when she was burning with fever,
and racked with pain, she felt happier than she did now.

She could not inform her mother how bad she felt, for that would expose
her guilt. She heard the clock strike nine, and every moment appeared to
her like an hour. Those poor little children constantly haunted her;
whether her eyes were open or shut, still she saw them crying, and heard
them moaning, and begging their sick mother to give them some supper.

O, Kate! how severely was she punished for the sin she had committed!
Her mother and her father had praised her, but still she was unhappy.

Slowly, very slowly, the time passed away, and she heard the clock
strike ten. She could endure her sufferings no longer; and she burst
into tears, sobbing and moaning as if her heart would break.

For some time she cried; but as her distress increased, she sobbed and
moaned so loud that her father and mother, who were in the adjoining
room, heard her, and hastened into the room to find out what ailed her.

"What is the matter, my child?" anxiously asked her mother. "Haven't you
been asleep since you went to bed?"

"No, mother," sobbed Kate.

"What ails you? Are you sick?"

"No, mother."

"What are you crying for, then?"

"O mother!"

"Why, what ails you, child? Have you been frightened?"

"No, mother."

"Tell us what ails you, Kate," added her father.

Both of her parents were greatly alarmed about her, for they loved
their little girl very much; and they knew that something must ail her,
or she would not have lain awake so long, or have cried so bitterly.

"Can't you tell us what ails you, Kate?" inquired her mother, very
tenderly.

"I have been very naughty, mother," replied Kate, almost choking with
emotion.

"Naughty, child?"

"Yes, mother."

"I thought you had been very good," added Mr. Lamb.

"No, I have not; I have been very wicked, and you will never forgive
me."

"Why, what have you done, Kate? How strange you act, my child!"

"I can't help it, mother. If you will forgive me this time, I will never
be so wicked again while I live."

"Tell us all about it, Kate, and we will forgive you," said her father,
very kindly.

The poor girl sobbed so that she could not speak for some time, for the
tenderness of her parents made her feel a great deal worse than if they
had scolded her severely.

"What have you done, Kate?" repeated Mrs. Lamb.

"I didn't carry the milk to Mrs. O'Brien, mother," gasped the poor
penitent, as she uncovered her eyes, and looked up in the face of her
parents to notice the effect of her confession upon them.

"Didn't carry it to her?" was the exclamation of her father and mother
at the same time.

"No; I spilled it on the ground."

"Why, Kate! what did you do that for?"

"I couldn't help it--I mean I was careless. When Fanny Flynn struck me,
I ran after her. My foot tripped, and I fell, and spilled all the
milk."

"Why didn't you tell me so, Kate?"

"I didn't dare to tell you; I was afraid you would scold at me, as you
did for spoiling the peony."

Kate felt a little better now that she had confessed her fault, and she
was able to look her parents in the face.

"Why, Kate, if you had only told me, I should not have scolded you. You
may have been careless, but it was all the fault of Fanny Flynn."

"No, mother; I was careless. I forgot all about the milk, I was so
angry."

"And so the poor children had no supper, after all," added Mr. Lamb.

"O father! It was what you said about them that made me feel so bad. I
am sure I shall never be so very wicked again. Let me carry them some
milk now."

"What are you talking about? It is after ten o'clock, my child."

"No matter, father; I am not afraid to go in the dark, if I can only
carry them their supper."

"No, no, Kate. I will carry them the milk, though it is rather late, and
probably they are all asleep by this time."

"But will you forgive me, father and mother?"

"Freely, my child; you have suffered severely already for your fault,
and I hope it will be a lesson to you which will last as long as you
live," said her father.

"It will," said Kate, earnestly.

Both her parents kissed her, in token of their forgiveness; and Mr. Lamb
put on his coat, while Mrs. Lamb went to the cellar for a pail of milk,
with which he soon left the house on his errand of kindness and charity.

Kate felt a great deal better then, and before her father returned, she
was fast asleep. Mr. Lamb found the poor woman still up. The children
had had bread and water, but no milk, for their supper, and she was very
glad to have some for them when they waked up in the night. And she was
very grateful to Mr. Lamb for thinking of her at that hour, and thanked
God for giving her such kind and thoughtful friends.

From that time, Kate was a better girl, and tried hard to reform her
life and character. She tried so hard, and succeeded so well, that she
very soon lost the name of "Careless Kate."

[Illustration: KATE A BETTER GIRL.]

Mr. Lamb went to see Fanny Flynn's parents the next day, and they
promised to punish her for her conduct. After that Kate did not provoke
her, and they never had any more trouble.

Now my readers have seen that Kate's fault led her into falsehood and
deception, which are worse than carelessness; and I hope they will all
learn to be careful and truthful.




NOTHING TO DO.


   "My kitty is purring
     Upon the hearth rug
   Rolled up in a bundle
     Just like a great bug.
   I wonder what kitty
     Is thinking about;
   What makes her so happy
     I cannot find out.

   "She has no hard lessons
     To bother her brain,
   No spelling and reading
     To study in vain;
   She ought to be happy
     With nothing to do
   But play all the morning--
     And I should be, too."

   Thus Nellie kept thinking,
     And spoke out her thought.
   The words which she uttered
     Her mother's ear caught.
   "You wish to be idle
     Like kitty, dear, there,
   And play all the morning,
     Or sleep in your chair?"

   "I don't like my lessons;
     I think 'tis a pity
   I can't be as happy
     As dear little kitty.
   That ugly old spelling
     I never can learn!
   O, into a kitty
     I wish I could turn!"

   "I am not a fairy,"
     Her mother replied;
   "To me all the power
     Of magic's denied;
   But you may be idle
     From morning till night,
   And see if 'do nothing'
     Will set your case right."

   "O, shall I do nothing
     But play all day long,
   And sing with my kitty
     A holiday song?
   How happy, and merry,
     And joyous 'twill be
   To have no hard lessons--
     From study be free!"

   "Do what will best please you;
     Be idle all day;
   Recite no more lessons;
     Do nothing but play."
   Then Nellie, rejoicing,
     Flew out of the room;
   Played _hide_, _horse_, and _dolly_.
     And rode on the broom.

   But long before dinner
     Poor Nell had "played out,"
   And studied, and studied,
     And wandered about,
   To find some new pleasure,
     Some game, or some play,
   To use up the hours,
     And end that long day;--

   And long before evening
     Was cross as a bear--
   Just like the McFlimsey
     With "nothing to wear."
   And tired of nothing,
     And tired of play,
   No day was so tedious
     As that idle day.

   "O mother! my lessons
     I think I will get,
   And then I can play
     As I never played yet.
   I do not feel happy
     With nothing to do;
   I cannot endure it
     Another day through."

   "I thought so, my Nellie;
     To make your play sweet
   You must work, and be useful
     To those whom you meet.
   The idle are never
     So happy as they
   Who work for themselves
     Or for others each day."


       *       *       *       *       *

RIVERDALE STORIES.

BY OLIVER OPTIC.

Twelve volumes. Profusely Illustrated by BILLINGS.


   1. LITTLE MERCHANT.
   2. YOUNG VOYAGERS.
   3. CHRISTMAS GIFT.
   4. DOLLY AND I.
   5. UNCLE BEN.
   6. BIRTHDAY PARTY.
   7. PROUD AND LAZY.
   8. CARELESS KATE.
   9. ROBINSON CRUSOE, JR.
   10. THE PICNIC PARTY.
   11. THE GOLD THIMBLE.
   12. THE DO-SOMETHINGS.


LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON.

THE RIVERDALE BOOKS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Careless Kate, by Oliver Optic

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARELESS KATE ***

***** This file should be named 25427.txt or 25427.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/4/2/25427/

Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
