The Project Gutenberg EBook of How the Fairy Violet Lost and Won Her Wings, by 
Marianne L. B. Ker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: How the Fairy Violet Lost and Won Her Wings

Author: Marianne L. B. Ker

Illustrator: J. A. Martin

Release Date: May 12, 2008 [EBook #25453]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAIRY VIOLET LOST AND WON WINGS ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was made using scans of public domain works in the
International Children's Digital Library.)








[Illustration: _The Fairy Violet's introduction to the Fire-King._]




  HOW THE FAIRY VIOLET
     LOST AND WON
      HER WINGS.

BY MARIANNE L. B. KER.

_Author of "Eva's Victory," "Sybil Grey," &c._

ILLUSTRATED BY J. A. MARTIN.

[Illustration]

          LONDON:
          GRIFFITH AND FARRAN, ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD.

          1872.




HOW THE FAIRY VIOLET

LOST AND WON HER WINGS.


The Fairy Violet lived in the heart of a beautiful forest, where,
through the glad spring months, the sun shone softly, and the bright
flowers bloomed, and now and then the gentle rain fell in silver drops
that made every green thing on which they rested fresher and more
beautiful still. At the foot of a stately oak nestled a clump of
violets, and it was there the wee fairy made her home. She wore a robe
of deep violet, and her wings, which were of the most delicate gauze,
glistened like dew-drops in the sun. All day long she was busy at work
tending her flowers, bathing them in the fresh morning dew, painting
them anew with her delicate fairy brush, or loosening the clay when it
pressed too heavily upon their fragile roots; and at night she joined
the elves in their merry dance upon the greensward. She was not alone in
the great forest; near her were many of her sister fairies, all old
friends and playmates. There was the Fairy Primrose in a gown of pale
yellow, and Cowslip, who wore a robe of the same colour, but of a deeper
shade. There was the graceful Bluebell, and the wild Anemone, the
delicate Woodsorrel, and the Yellow Kingcup. The Fairy Bluebell wore a
robe the colour of the sky on a calm summer's day, Anemone and
Woodsorrel were clad in pure white, while Kingcup wore a gown of bright
amber. One day, as the Fairy Violet was resting from the noonday heat on
the open leaves of her favourite flower, a noisy troop of boys, just set
free from school, came dashing at full speed through the forest. "Hallo!
there is a nest in that tree," cried one, and he trod ruthlessly on the
violets as he sprang up the trunk of the ancient oak. The Fairy Violet
was thrown to the ground, with a shock that left her for a time stunned
and motionless. When she recovered, the boys were gone, and the flower
in which she had been resting lay crushed and dying on the ground.
Filled with tender pity at the sight, Fairy Violet hastened to tend her
wounded charge, taking no thought for her own injuries. "Dear Violet, be
comforted," she whispered softly, as she raised the drooping flower from
the ground; "I will try to make you well." Then she took her fairy
goblet and fetched a few drops of dew from a shady place which the sun
had not yet reached, to revive the fainting flower, and bound up the
broken stem with a single thread of her golden hair. But it was all in
vain, and the fairy, after wrapping an acorn in soft moss, and placing
it for a pillow beneath the head of the fast fading Violet, left it to
try her skill on the other flowers. A faint fragrance from the dying
flower thanked her, as she turned sadly away to pursue her labour of
love. It was not till she had raised and comforted all the drooping
flowers and bound up their wounds, that the Fairy Violet thought of
herself. Then she discovered that her delicate gossamer wings were
gone! Evidently they had been caught on a crooked stick as she fell to
the ground and torn violently off, for there the remnants now hung,
shrivelled and useless, flapping in the breeze. At this sight the
hapless fairy threw herself by the side of the now withered Violet, and
wept bitterly. When spring and the spring flowers were gone, and their
work was ended, Violet and her sister fairies had been wont to spread
their wings and fly back to fairy-land, to report to the Queen what they
had done, and to receive from her reward or blame, according as they had
performed their task well or ill. Now this happy prospect was over for
poor Violet. "I shall never see fairy-land again!" she murmured, and
wept anew at the thought.

The violets whom she had tended so lovingly were very sorry for her
grief, and shook their heads gently in the breeze, till their fragrance
filled the air, and stole softly round the weeping fairy. But though
they comforted, they could not help her. Presently she rose, and glided
swiftly through the tall grass, till she reached the flower where the
blue robed fairy was resting after her day's work.

"Oh, sister Blue Bell," she cried, "I have lost my wings! Where shall I
get another pair, that I may fly back to fairy-land with you and my
sisters when our work is done?" Then Bluebell shook her head
sorrowfully, till all her sweet bells chimed--"I am sorry! I am sorry!"
but she could not help her sister Violet.

"Perhaps Cowslip will know," she suggested.

But Cowslip bade her try what Woodsorrel would say, and Woodsorrel
thought perhaps Kingcup might know, so Violet went about from one to
another, till she was ready to cry again with vexation.

Then all the fairies gathered round her and tried to comfort her.

"Let us ask the owl that sits in the hollow oak," said the gentle
Anenome, gliding to Violet's side; "he must be very wise, for he never
smiles, and seldom speaks more than three words at a time."

So that night, when the moon lit her silver lamp in the sky, instead of
dancing, as was their wont, with the elves upon the greensward, they all
repaired to the hollow oak to seek an audience of the owl. They had to
repeat their errand two or three times before he understood it, for the
owl was as slow of understanding as he was of speech, and then, having
nodded his head solemnly for five minutes, and winked and blinked for
quite ten, he said solemnly:--

"Try the King of the Fire Spirits!"

After which he relapsed into silence, and obstinately refused to say any
more. Then the Fairy Violet bade farewell to all her friends, and set
out on her journey to the King of the Fire Spirits. She had a long way
to go, for the Fire-King held his court in the very centre of the earth,
and she might have lost herself in the dark passages had not the
glowworm lent her his lamp. She had saved him once when a hungry bird
would have carried him off in her beak, and from that time the glowworm
had loved the gentle fairy, and always burned brightest when she was by.

The Fairy Violet travelled very quickly, scarcely touching her feet to
the ground, but passing onward with a swift gliding motion that was very
beautiful; still it was three days and three nights before she reached
the kingdom of the Fire Spirits, for she had four thousand miles to go.

Had she not been a fairy, she must have been scorched to death as she
entered the Fire-King's domain, for the streets were paved with molten
iron, and flames kept bursting forth in all directions, in which she
could perceive strange wild figures, some leaping to and fro in mad
fantastic glee, playing at ball with lumps of burning coal; others
manufacturing volcanic fire in their monstrous furnaces.

They ceased their employment when they saw Violet, and came and knelt
before her in wondering admiration. She looked so beautiful as she came
floating towards them in her soft violet robe, with her fair hair
rippling in golden waves to her very feet, that they thought she must be
an angel who had strayed down from among the bright stars to their
gloomy dwelling-place, for they had never seen a fairy before.

They were moved with compassion when they heard her sad tale, and at
once led her before their King, who was seated on a throne of molten
gold, with red and yellow flames curling up and arching over him for a
canopy, and a crown of fire on his head. He looked rather fierce, but
received Violet very graciously, and at once ordered his head blacksmith
to make the little fairy a new pair of wings. Violet was a little
startled when she found that these were made of fire, and were to be
fastened on her shoulders with bands of liquid gold, but the King
assured her that they were the very best of their kind.

"There is nothing so powerful as fire," he cried, with a fierce exultant
laugh; waving his fiery sceptre in the burning atmosphere so wildly,
that though Violet thought he had been very kind to her, and bade him a
very grateful farewell, she was yet not at all sorry to be safely out of
his domains.

How fresh and green the earth looked as she emerged from the dark
caverns that led to the Fire-King's palace, and rested her hot feet on
the cool grass! But when eager to tell her friends of her success, she
began to try the Fire-King's present, a general cry of dismay and terror
broke forth.

"Sister Violet, you are killing our flowers," cried the fairies,
reproachfully.

"Oh, I am burning! I am burning!" shrieked the grass.

"Cruel fairy! you have killed us!" murmured the insects, as, with
scorched wings, they fell helpless to the ground.

"Alas!" said Violet weeping, "I am bringing death and destruction
wherever I go. I will fly back to fairy-land before I work more
mischief."

But the birds looked down from their nests wild with terror at the
thought.

"You will kill us if you fly up here with your burning wings," they
chirped piteously. "You will scorch us to death," shouted the trees,
tossing their heads angrily in the breeze.

"Ah, gentle fairy, have pity on us!" cooed the dove; "did I not comfort
you when your pet violet died?"

"Have I not sung to you at night when you were weary with dancing?"
warbled the nightingale.

"Have we not sheltered you from the fierce heat of the sun, and the
beating of the pitiless rain?" rustled the trees, indignantly.

"Heartless!" muttered the wind, rushing rudely past her; "to injure
those who love you so much."

"I shall never see fairy-land again!" murmured Violet. But she had too
gentle a heart to persist, so she sadly retraced her steps, and bade the
Fire-King take back his fatal gift.

That evening, she and her sister fairies went to the owl and told him of
the ill success of her mission. The owl heard her to the end with great
gravity, and then said, severely: "Of course! Anyone with any sense
would have known that wings forged by the Fire Spirits _must_ burn
everything they touched."

Violet would have liked to remind him that it was _he_ who bade her go
to the King of the Fire Spirits, but he looked so very severe, as he sat
blinking solemnly in the moonlight, that she was afraid, and only said,
humbly--

"Please what shall I do now?"

"Go to the King of the Snow Spirits, of course!" said the owl, rather
crossly, for he wanted to go to sleep; "if fire is too hot, you had
better try snow."

"Alas! what shall I do?" said Violet, very sadly. "The Snow-King lives
far off by the North Pole, and I have no wings to bear me to him over
the seas."

Then a gentle fluttering was heard in the trees, and a sea-bird alighted
at Violet's feet.

"Beautiful fairy," he sang, softly, "do you not remember now, three
springs ago, when the trees were clothing themselves anew in their green
raiment, and the flowers were springing up among the fresh grass, you
bound up my leg, which the hunter had wounded with his cruel gun; and
fed me daily with luscious fruits, and gave me to drink of sparkling dew
till I recovered? I vowed then that I would one day repay you, and now
my chance has come. Mount on my back, sweet Violet, and I will carry you
to the Snow-King."

Then Violet thanked him joyfully, and seated herself on his back; and
the sea-bird flew away with her far over the hills and vales, and
pleasant fields, and beyond the great ocean till he reached the palace
of the Snow-King.

The Palace was built of blocks of ice, filled in with snow, and arched
over with a graceful snowdrift for a roof; while lofty colonnades of
snow, supported by pillars of ice, led the way to the audience chamber,
which glistened with diamonds and crystals of the most sparkling
brilliancy. The Snow-King wore on his head a crown of ice-diamonds,
while from his shoulders hung gracefully a pure white cloak, fringed
with glittering icicles and fastened at the neck with a crystal brooch.

Violet shivered a little as she entered this coldly beautiful palace,
for she was accustomed to bask all day long in the warm sunshine, and
had never trod on anything colder than the soft grass; but she quickly
recovered herself, and gliding with a swift graceful movement to the
foot of the Snow-King's throne, she bent on one knee before him, and
told him for what she had come.

Then the Snow-King looked kindly upon the little fairy, and raised her
gently with his ice-cold hands.

"Beautiful fairy," he said, "you are the first of your race who ever
visited my kingdom, and never have I seen aught so radiantly lovely
before. Your wish is granted, I only would it were twice as costly;"
and, turning to the snow-spirits, who were gathering lovingly round the
bright being who had ventured so boldly into their ice-bound regions,
he bade them mould wings of the purest and most delicate snow for their
fairy visitant. Then the King lay back on his throne, and looked at the
sweet modest face of the little fairy, and at her graceful form, with
the bright hair rippling in sunny waves over the violet robe, till,
moved by some sudden impulse, he came and knelt down at Violet's feet.

"Sweet fairy," he said, as Violet turned her wondering eyes upon him, "I
have long ruled as monarch among my Snow-Spirits, and I have been very
proud of the cold splendour of my palace, with its glittering crystals
and pillars of ice, and I have laughed when the Fire-King has taunted me
from afar with its lack of warmth and colour, for I cared not for
either; but now it seems to me that the bright gleam of your golden
hair, and the warm glow of your violet robe, are far more beautiful than
my ice-diamonds and sparkling crystals, and that my palace will be very
bleak and desolate when you have gone. Stay with us, gentle fairy, and
be my queen!"

Then all the Snow-Spirits gathered eagerly round Violet, and cried,
"Stay with us, and be our Queen!"

Violet shivered as their icy-breath blew upon her, and her hand grew
cold in the Snow-King's frozen clasp; but she turned to him, and said,
very gently, for she was sorry to give him pain, "I cannot leave my
beautiful fairy-land to become your Queen. I should pine away in your
beautiful ice-palace, for I love the warm sunshine and the bright
flowers, and the soft breath of balmy spring, and this cold air would
kill me. So do not ask me again, noble King, for I cannot say yes, and
it grieves me to say no."

Then the Snow-King urged her no more, but went back to his throne, and
watched her with such sad, wistful eyes, that Violet's heart ached, and
she was glad when they brought her the wings that she might fly away.

They were very beautiful, made of soft feathery snow, and fastened to
her shoulders with crystal buckles.

Violet knelt down and kissed the King's hand, thanking him gratefully
for his kindness, and praying him to forgive her any pain she had caused
him; and then flew away side by side with her faithful bird. The
Snow-King watched her till the bright sheen of her hair, and the soft
flutter of her wings could no longer be seen, and then turned back, sad
and lonely, to his palace.

But Violet was very happy; "I shall see fairy-land again; bright,
beautiful fairy-land!" she sang softly to herself over and over.

But when the frozen seas were past, and she was hovering once more above
the land, the sun shone full upon her, the snow-wings melted away, and
she fell helplessly to the ground.

"Dear Violet, are you hurt?" asked the Fairy Anenome, by whose side she
had fallen. But Violet could not speak. She hid her face in Anenome's
white robe, and wept bitterly.

"Dear sister Violet," said Anenome, winding her arms lovingly round the
weeping fairy, "be comforted. This night we will go together and seek an
audience of the Owl. Perhaps he will give us wiser counsel this time."

"The Owl only mocks me," said Violet; "I will not ask counsel from him
again."

Then Anenome was silent, for she knew not what else to advise, and only
tried to show her pity by tender words and caresses. But Fairy Kingcup
lifted up her bright face, and said, cheerily:--

"Why not try the Wizard of the Black Rock? He lives a long way off, but
he is the wisest magician that ever lived; and if any one can help our
sister Violet, it is he."

Violet shook her head sorrowfully.

"I do not know the way," she said.

"I will lead you," hummed a bee, from the deep cup of a cowslip.

"And I will sing you my merriest songs to cheer you by the way," warbled
a thrush, circling lovingly round her head.

"And I," cried the glowworm, "will light you at night with my golden
lamp."

"We all love you, Fairy Violet, because you are so gentle and good,"
they sang in chorus; and Violet lifted her head, comforted, and smiled a
sweet, joyous smile, as she bade farewell to her sister fairies.

It was a long journey that she undertook, for the Wizard of the Black
Rock lived quite at the other end of the earth.

Sometimes a benighted traveller, hurrying homewards, fancied he saw a
golden light flash like lightning past his dazzled eyes, or heard a
warbling of sweet music, delighting for an instant his bewildered ears;
but light and music were gone in a moment, and he never guessed that it
was the Fairy Violet who had passed him as she glided onward with her
three faithful attendants to seek the Wizard of the Black Rock.

At length they reached the great Black Rock, which rose up, grim and
forbidding, from a wide, desolate plain. The bee sank down humming
cheerfully, at the base, the thrush perched himself on a projecting
ridge, and the glowworm hid himself behind a tuft of withered grass.

Violet advanced boldly to the small black door, studded with iron nails,
which was standing open, guarded only by a black dwarf of preternatural
ugliness. He turned as the beautiful fairy came floating towards him,
and led the way silently through dark long passages, and up narrow
winding stairs to his master's chamber. It was a small dark room,
lighted only by a silver lamp of great brilliancy, which stood on a
table by the fire-place, where, though the month was May, and the
weather bright and sunny, there burned a dim, smouldering fire. The
Wizard, whose silvery locks contrasted strangely with the surrounding
gloom, bent over a book; its jewelled clasps were rusted with age, each
page was enriched with coloured tracery. He was very old. More than a
hundred years had elapsed since it was first rumoured that a famous
magician had taken up his abode in the Black Rock, and all that time he
had spent in studying the great black book of magic spells that lay open
before him. No wonder he was wise and learned!

The dwarf shut the door with a sullen resentful clang, and Violet was
left alone with the great magician.

She glided to his side, and knelt down meekly before him.

But the Wizard, deep in his abstruse studies, did not hear her; and
Violet felt a sensation of awe creeping over her as she noted his
abstracted gaze, and looked on the high, arched forehead wrinkled with
centuries of years and study. Suddenly the magician turned, muttering
some strange words in an unknown tongue, and, as he did so, his eyes
fell upon Violet.

[Illustration: _The Fairy Violet visits the Magician._]

A remembrance of some by-gone spell of grace and beauty seemed to stir
the Wizard as he looked upon the bright-haired fairy, to whose upturned
face the light of the silver lamp had lent a fairer radiance, for his
deep voice softened as he spoke to her, and he laid his hand gently on
her head while she told her story.

When she had finished, he remained musing for some time in silence.

"I know no spells that will serve where the Spirits of Snow and of Fire
have failed," he said at length, with unwonted gentleness. "No one can
help thee here but thine own loving heart. Kind words, gentle deeds,
faithful service, patient waiting--from these alone can be wrought the
wings, which will be slight enough for thy delicate frame to bear, and
yet powerful enough to withstand every trial. Go forth then, gentle
fairy, to thy daily tasks, and wait patiently till the great Mother
Nature herself give thee thy reward."

"Thanks, kind magician," said Violet, with a bright smile; "you have
given me a pleasant task to do."

Then kissing gratefully his withered hand, she went on her way, and the
aged Magician thought his silver lamp burned dimly, and his cell grew
dark when she had left.

"Could not the great wizard help you?" cried her three friends,
sorrowfully, as, gliding past the black dwarf that guarded the entrance,
she stepped out into the open air.

"Could he not help you?" echoed her sister fairies, when she re-entered
once more the old forest.

"Alas! is there no help for you, sweet Violet?" wept the wind, wandering
in and out among the lofty trees, rocking and swaying them like slender
bulrushes in his fierce sorrow.

But to each and all Violet replied only by a glad quiet smile.

"Patience!" she said, gently; "Mother Nature will help me in her own
time."

So she returned to her work among the violets; and when they had all
died, and the spring had gone, and her sister fairies flew away to
fairy-land, she still smiled, though a little sadly, and bade them
farewell without a shade of discontent in her brave, gentle voice.

"Now, I must find some work," she said to herself, when her wistful eyes
could no longer discern the flutter of their wings in the azure sky.

And she soon found plenty to do.

Now it was binding up the wound of some stricken bird, or raising some
crushed flower, and sprinkling its drooping leaves with cooling dew, and
now it was closing the eyelids of a tired child who had thrown himself
down to rest beneath the forest shade, and singing softly in his ear a
fairy lullaby, till he fell asleep. Sometimes she would perch herself on
the shoulder of some sleeping wayfarer by the roadside, and whisper in
his ear sweet and tender words that made him dream of his home, and of
the mother sleeping so peacefully in the churchyard far away, till he
started from his sleep and went on his way with a touched and softened
heart. Every day Fairy Violet found some kindly deed to do, and every
day Mother Nature, looking lovingly on her child, saw the time was
drawing nearer when she should receive her reward.

One day as she was wandering through one of the by-streets of a crowded
city, she was attracted by a plaintive voice that proceeded from one of
the low-roofed, badly built houses.

"Put the geranium where I can see it, mother," the voice was saying, "I
love to lie back and watch it."

A woman came forward at these words and altered the position of the
plant, which Fairy Violet had already noticed as being rather faded, and
in want of her skill to brighten the colours.

"It is very washy-like," she said regretfully, "I doubt this stuffy air
is killing it."

"Will it live as long as I shall?" asked the plaintive voice.

There was no answer, but Violet saw that the mother's hands shook as
they busied themselves with the flower.

"I hope it will," the voice continued, with a sort of wistful eagerness,
"for it is such a pleasure to me to watch it. It seems to comfort me,
when the pain is very bad, and I lie awake through the long weary night,
to look at it and wonder what the little garden is looking like in the
old home you have told me of so often, mother, and whether the moon is
shining as sweetly there as over our poor house here. I sometimes
wonder, too, whether the flowers there are so very much more beautiful
than my poor sickly geranium, and whether if I saw them I should care
for it no longer; and then I think no, that no flower could ever be so
beautiful to me as my flower, and that I love it far better, rearing its
pretty head so bravely in this dull stuffy room, than if it bloomed in
the loveliest garden that was ever planted. And many a time when I have
felt a little downhearted, with being a burden to you, mother, and the
pain seeming as if it was more than I could bear, it has seemed to say;
'Patience! poor little Faith, it will be over soon.' Do you think there
will be flowers in heaven, mother?"

"Like enough, child," said the woman, dreamily; "there will be
everything that is beautiful there, I expect," and she heaved a deep
sigh. Poor woman! there was little of beauty in her present life, and
the country home of which her child had spoken was but a far off
recollection to her now.

"I should like to have it near me when I die," the sick girl went on, "I
have never had a friend you know, mother, but my flower has seemed to
stand in the place of one to me, and I should like to look at it just at
the last."

"Lord love you, child! don't talk of dying; unless you want to break my
heart," said the mother, with a tone of sharp impatience in which there
was more of grief than of anger.

While she was speaking, Fairy Violet glided in at the open door.

The room was poor, but scrupulously clean, and the scanty furniture was
as bright as diligent rubbing could make it. On a rude couch, opposite
the open window, lay a girl of about sixteen years of age, but with a
wan-pinched face that made her look ten years older. Constant pain had
blanched all the colour she might once have possessed, and the blue
veins showed clearly through the thin transparent skin. She turned her
head as Violet entered, and a faint flush of pleasure rose on her pale
cheeks.

"Mother! do you smell the violets?" she exclaimed, eagerly, "the room
seems filled with fragrance."

"It must be your fancy, child," said the woman wearily; "I smell
nought."

By this time Violet had settled herself in one of the blossoms of the
geranium, and was busy at work.

"Look, look, mother!" cried the sick girl again, "this at least is no
fancy;" and mother and daughter gazed at the flower in amazement as the
faded colour grew bright under the fairy's magic touch. "'Tis the moving
it to a sunnier spot, or mayhap 'twas the water I gave it this morning,"
said the woman, recovering herself with a start. "I'll give it a drop
more," and she bustled off to get some, while her daughter lay back and
watched the flower with a quiet, restful smile on her patient lips.

"There is work for me to do here," said Violet to herself, feeling quite
happy as she glided from blossom to blossom, touching and re-touching
with her delicate brush. So she stayed, and day by day the flower grew
more radiantly beautiful beneath her loving hands, sweetest fragrance
filled the room, and softest murmuring of fairy music floated on the
air, which, though the dull senses of mother and daughter failed to
interpret rightly, yet stole into their hearts and gave them comfort.
Sometimes a vision would come before her of the radiant fairy-land from
which she was banished, or of her beautiful forest-home where fragrant
flowers had wrapt her in their dewy leaves, where birds had sung to her
from the leafy bower above her head, and the bright sun had shone upon
her with genial warmth. But she would quickly banish such thoughts, and
gliding round the room would touch every dull corner with her fairy wand
till it shone and brightened with a magic charm, would cast a spell upon
the smouldering fire, so that it burned and crackled cheerily, would lay
her cool hand upon the sick girl's throbbing brow till the pain abated,
and would cast a fairy haze before her languid eyes, so that they saw
beautiful visions in the changeful sky.

So day by day passed by, till one morning, bending over a glass that
stood beneath the flower she was painting, Fairy Violet saw her own
reflection in the clear water. But she saw something more! A pair of
wings of the most delicate gossamer, tipped with silver and sparkling
with a marvellous radiance, had sprung from her shoulders and rose
almost on a level with her tiny head! Fairy Violet had won her wings at
last, and the golden gates of Fairy-land, where the woods and forests
were always green, and the valleys ever radiant with beautiful flowers,
were open to her once more.

Wild with joy, she darted out of the window, and was already far above
the tops of the smoky chimneys, when she remembered the patient
suffering girl whose life was slowly wasting away in the close confined
atmosphere of her miserable home. Then her wings drooped and her bright
face clouded over.

"I must not leave my work unfinished," she said, and with a wistful
glance at the white fleecy clouds that seemed to beckon lovingly to her,
she returned to the cottage; and the dying girl's last days were
brightened by the fairy presence of which she was so unconscious.

She knew not that it was from Violet the murmuring music came that
delighted her wondering ears, that it was to her she owed the sweet
fragrance that filled the air, and the soft fresh colouring of the
flower at which she loved to gaze; but though the gentle fairy got no
thanks, she felt well rewarded for her labour of love when she saw the
peaceful smile that rested on Faith's wasted face, and the light that
beamed in her dark eyes.

At last the end came. One evening as the sun was sinking to rest in
great waves of crimson and gold, Faith asked for her flower to be
brought to her, smiled faintly as her dim eyes rested on it for the last
time, laid her head on her mother's breast, and died. A low wailing cry
broke from the mother as she felt that never again would the dark eyes
be raised lovingly to hers, or the wan face brighten at her approach;
but Violet saw what the mother failed to see, that white-robed angels
had gathered round the death-bed, and were now bearing away the freed
spirit with strains of triumphant joy. So she framed the glorious vision
into a song, which she sang in the woman's ear, and the mother was
comforted, though she knew not why.

"'Tis better so, my poor lamb," she murmured, while tears dropped slowly
one by one down her sunken cheeks. "There is no pain where thou art
gone, nor hunger either, and I will join thee there by-and-bye."

Then Violet knew that her work was done, and she flew out of the open
window, and up into the clear sky, far above the tops of the tall
chimneys, and some men, who were looking up from the dusty streets at
the sunset, wondering whether the next day would be fine or wet, caught
a sudden gleam of her silver-tipped wings, and thought it was a flash of
summer lightning, and were conscious at the same moment of a delicious
fragrance as of violets, and said the wind must be from the west, for it
was wafting to them country scents. Fairy Violet laughed as she heard
their blundering guesses, a laugh that rippled out on the still air like
the chiming of silver bells, and then flew joyously on to thank the
Wizard of the Black Rock for his wise counsel.

But when she reached the Black Rock, she found the magician, wearied out
with a succession of sleepless nights spent in abstruse study and deep
research, had fallen fast asleep, with his venerable head resting on the
mysterious book, and the black dwarf at his feet jealously guarding his
slumber. So she trimmed his silver lamp for him afresh, so that it
burned with a yet more wonderful brilliance, laid a cluster of sweet
flowers beside him, and then gladly flitting from the gloomy rock,
spread her glistening wings, and darted up into the air; up, up, far
above the tops of the lofty trees, flashing like a bright vision through
the now darkening night. She passed the silver moon, which was shining
calmly down upon the world she had just left; she threaded her way in
and out among the golden stars; on, on she went till she saw the
beautiful radiant light that never dims, and heard the soft murmuring of
sweet music, and smelled the delicious fragrance of Fairy-land.

As she passed through the golden gates she heard a great shout of, "'Tis
the Fairy Violet!" and instantly all the bells of Fairy-land began to
ring, and a gay procession of radiant fairies, all dressed in their
fairest robes, came to meet her, and pressed round her with loving
welcome and congratulation. "Come to our Queen, for she is waiting for
you," they cried; and led her in triumph up the shining steps of the
Fairy Palace, and into the Hall of Pearl, where the Queen was seated on
her throne dispensing the graceful wreaths, which, woven by her own
hand, were the choicest rewards bestowed in Fairy-land. It was easy to
adjudge the crowns of merit among the fairies, for their beauty
increased, or waned, according as they had done well or ill.

Now, every one looking on the Fairy Violet saw that she was the most
beautiful of all, for her face was so radiantly lovely, that none but
the purest fairies could look on it undazzled. So when the Queen, after
greeting Violet with her sweetest smiles, had asked, "To whom shall I
give the fairest crown?" they all shouted unanimously, "To our Sister
Violet!"

But Violet lifted her gentle face with a pleading gesture.

"May it please your Majesty," she said, earnestly, "I do not deserve to
be so highly honoured; my sisters have all done as well as I have."

"No, little Violet," said the Queen, smiling, "you have done best of
all. We well know what your work has been.--Listen!"

Then Violet listened, and she heard a wondrous song, which, rising and
falling with each change of the fitful breeze, now broke into a wild
strain of piercing sweetness, and anon died away into a soft musical
murmur like the rippling of fairy streams.

"That song, little Violet," said the Queen, "is the record of your life
on earth.--Listen again."

They all listened, while the marvellous strain sang of Violet's gentle
life on earth.

Not a loving word she had ever said, not a kind deed she had ever done,
not a smile her loving arts had brought to the lips of the dying girl,
not a blessing uttered by the mother unconscious to whom she owed the
peace and quiet of her daughter's last days; not a fragrant breath from
rescued flower, not a song from grateful bird, but added its sweet note
to that marvellous song.

Had there been one unkind word, one selfish thought, one cruel deed, the
song would have been broken by jarring discords; but all was harmony,
not one harsh note disturbed the rippling melody.

As one by one Violet's beautiful secrets were brought to light, the
fairies looked on her with loving admiration, but Violet was quite
ashamed at being praised so openly, and hid her blushing face on
Anenome's shoulder.

When the story of Violet's deeds was ended, and the wild mysterious
music had lulled into inarticulate murmuring, the Fairy Queen looked
round upon her subjects, and asked once more, "To whom shall I give the
fairest crown?"

And all the fairies cried again, more eagerly than ever--

"To Violet! To Violet!"

Then Violet could refuse no longer, but bent gracefully on one knee
before the throne, while the Queen placed the crown on her shining hair.

The wonderful music died away into silence, and was never heard again,
but the court-minstrel who had listened eagerly to its wild strains,
caught the beautiful melody, and repeated it on his harp; and to this
day, at fairy-feast and revel, the favourite legend is that which tells
how the Fairy Violet lost and won her wings.

[Illustration]




Bellenden Series

OF

STORIES FOR CHILDREN.

By M. L. B. KER.

_Author of "Eva's Victory" &c., &c._

ILLUSTRATED BY J. A. MARTIN.


1. HOW THE FAIRY VIOLET LOST AND WON HER WINGS.

          _Will shortly be published--_

2. HANS VOGLER.

          =PRICE FOURPENCE.=

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 23, "desevre" changed to "deserve" (do not deserve)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of How the Fairy Violet Lost and Won Her
Wings, by Marianne L. B. Ker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAIRY VIOLET LOST AND WON WINGS ***

***** This file should be named 25453.txt or 25453.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/4/5/25453/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was made using scans of public domain works in the
International Children's Digital Library.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
