The Project Gutenberg EBook of A report on the feasibility and
advisability of some policy to inaugurate a system of rifle practice throughout the public schools of the country, by George W. Wingate and Ammon B. Critchfield

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A report on the feasibility and advisability of some policy to inaugurate a system of rifle practice throughout the public schools of the country

Author: George W. Wingate
        Ammon B. Critchfield

Release Date: May 31, 2008 [EBook #25662]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FEASIBILITY OF RIFLE PRACTICE ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






A REPORT ON
THE FEASIBILITY AND ADVISABILITY OF SOME POLICY
TO INAUGURATE A SYSTEM OF RIFLE PRACTICE
THROUGHOUT THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS
OF THE COUNTRY



By

Gen. GEORGE W. WINGATE
Of New York

and

Gen. AMMON B. CRITCHFIELD
Of Ohio



PUBLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH A RESOLUTION OF THE NATIONAL BOARD
FOR THE PROMOTION OF RIFLE PRACTICE

WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1907




NOTICE


At the annual meeting of the National Board for the Promotion of Rifle
Practice, held at Washington, D.C., January 24, 1906, the question of
building up an interest in target practice throughout the schools of
the country was discussed, and a special committee consisting of Gen.
L. M. Oppenheimer, of Texas; Gen. George W. Wingate, of New York, and
Gen. Ammon B. Critchfield, of Ohio, was appointed to inquire into and
report at the next annual meeting of the board upon--

The feasibility and advisability of some policy to inaugurate a system
of rifle practice throughout the public schools of the country.

At the last meeting of the board held at Washington, D.C., January 25,
1907, the report of this committee was submitted by Generals Wingate
and Critchfield, and is published in accordance with the following
resolution of the board, which was unanimously adopted:

    _Resolved_, That the report of the committee on rifle practice in
    public schools be approved and the thanks of the board be tendered
    Generals Wingate and Critchfield for their valuable paper; that the
    National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice recommend to the
    various educational authorities the desirability of interesting
    school boys over 13 years of age in the subject of rifle practice.
    It was

    _Further resolved_, That this report be printed separately and
    given the greatest publicity, the matter of distribution and number
    of copies required therefor to be submitted to the committee on
    publicity, with power.

It is deeply regretted that before the completion of the report General
Oppenheimer died, and his great help in assisting to promote interest
in rifle practice is lost to the country.

This report is earnestly commended to the superintendents of public
instruction throughout the country.

                        ROBERT SHAW OLIVER,
                            _Assistant Secretary of War_,
      _President National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice_.
                        GROTE HUTCHESON,
                            _Captain, General Staff_,
      _Member and Recorder, National Board for the Promotion of Rifle
         Practice_.




Report on the Feasibility and Advisability of some Policy to Inaugurate
a System of Rifle Practice throughout the Public Schools of the
Country.


                                        NEW YORK, _January 21, 1907_.

NATIONAL BOARD FOR THE PROMOTION OF RIFLE PRACTICE.

GENTLEMEN: In pursuance of the resolution of the board requesting the
late Gen. L. M. Oppenheimer, of Texas (who died since the last meeting
of the board, and whose death is deplored), and the undersigned to
report "on the feasibility and advisability of some policy to
inaugurate a system of rifle practice throughout the public schools of
the country," we respectfully report:

For many years attempts have been made to inaugurate a system of
military instruction in the public schools of the country. As a rule,
these have not proved successful. In a few private military schools
situated in the country some target practice is conducted, but the
difficulty of carrying on anything of the kind in the public schools
has rendered it impracticable.

The matter, however, has recently been introduced in the public schools
of the city of New York, and the success which has been attained there
has demonstrated the feasibility and advisability of introducing rifle
practice in the public schools among the boys over the age of 13 years.

The schools of the different States are organized upon many different
methods. The educational authorities not unnaturally are jealous of
their prerogatives. No outside organization could well introduce a new
subject of instruction in the schools without seriously interfering
with the educational routine. Consequently, however desirable it may be
that the pupils attending these schools should be taught to shoot, such
instruction can only be secured by the voluntary action of the school
authorities and with their hearty cooperation.

The result which has been attained by the Public Schools Athletic
League in introducing shooting in the high schools of the city of New
York has been so thoroughly tested that the committee are of the
opinion that that system should be recommended for adoption.

Few appreciate the magnitude of the New York public schools. There are
3 training schools, 19 high schools, 490 elementary schools, 2 truant
schools, and 1 nautical school; total, 515, with 14,500 teachers.

These schools are scattered all over the 326 square miles which the
city covers.

The registered number of pupils enrolled in these schools is about
600,000, which is more than the entire population of St. Louis, the
fourth city in the Union. Half of them are boys. The number attending
the high schools is about 20,000, a little more than half of whom are
boys. The College of the City of New York has about 4,000 male
students.

The vast territory over which the city has spread, and its congested
streets have made it impossible for the children (particularly in the
poorer districts), to get any physical exercise, and the physical
condition of many of them has in consequence not only become below
normal, but instead of spending their energies in play, as they do in
the country, the boys are led to join "gangs" and to become criminals.

This lamentable condition of affairs led to the formation of the Public
Schools Athletic League for the purpose of promoting wholesome athletic
exercises among the children attending the public schools of that city.
The league is made up from officers and directors of the board of
education, superintendents, principals and teachers, prominent
athletes, gentlemen interested in philanthropic work, and leading
business men. It was organized December 4, 1903, and its progress has
been so great that during the year 1906 there were over 150,000 entries
in the games which it carried on, which numbered over 600.

In the early part of 1905 it decided to institute rifle practice among
the boys of the high schools of the city, which schools are attended by
boys from fourteen to nineteen years of age, by installing in as many
of the high schools as possible a "subtarget gun machine." This is an
ingenious apparatus, by which an ordinary Krag army rifle is attached
to a rod upon an upright standard, placed to the right of the firer, in
such a way that while the gun is movable, the rod follows the movements
of the barrel of the rifle, and is at all times parallel with the line
of the sights.

The shooter cocks the rifle and aims at a target a foot high on the
other side of the room, and when his aim is satisfactory, pulls the
trigger. When this is done an electrical connection is made which
shoots forward the rod which is on the standard, so that its point
punches a hole in a miniature target like a visiting card, which is
placed in front of it, which hole is mathematically on the same
relative place on the card target as would have been made in the target
at which the shooter was aiming if he had a bullet in his rifle. It
consequently gives the same experience in holding and "pull off" as is
had in actual shooting.

The machine possesses the additional advantage that the instructor
standing on one side of the shooter can see by the movements of the
point of the rod on the miniature target exactly how the aim is being
taken on the large target and is able to correct all errors in holding
and pulling off as they are made, something which has hitherto been
supposed to be impossible. The apparatus makes no noise. There is no
danger of its hurting anybody. It can be used very rapidly, and there
is no expense involved in its operation. The results obtained from its
use are so valuable that several of the New York National Guard
regiments consider the machine equal in value to their rifle galleries.

The league succeeded in interesting a number of prominent gentlemen
with the importance of teaching the youth of the country the use of the
military rifle, so that they presented a sufficient number of these
machines to enable the league to install one of them in each of ten of
the high schools at a cost of $265 each. The schools which are thus
equipped are as follows:

Mr. S. R. Guggenheim, the treasurer of the league, gave one to each of
the following schools:

The High School of Commerce and the De Witt Clinton High School
(Manhattan), Morris High School (Bronx), Boys' High School (Brooklyn),
Curtis High School (Staten Island), and the Bryant High School
(Queens).

Col. Leslie C. Bruce presented one to the Stuyvesant High School
(Manhattan), Mr. Warren Cruikshank gave one to Erasmus Hall High School
(Flatbush), Col. Robert B. Woodward gave one to the Manual Training
High School (Brooklyn) in memory of his brother, the late Maj. Gen.
John B. Woodward, and Hon. Bird S. Coler and Mr. Horace J. Morse united
in giving one to the Commercial High School (Brooklyn). Another,
presented by Mr. J. A. Haskell, will shortly be installed in one of the
other high schools. The City College expects to have one during the
spring.

In pursuance of the policy adopted by the league in regard to its
athletic games, it caused a "marksmanship committee" to be appointed in
1905, consisting of the coaches of the different schools having gun
machines, to organize and control the shooting under regulations
adopted by the high schools games committee and approved by the central
games committee of the league.

This committee has been found of great value in carrying on the work
and creating interest in shooting in their different schools.

In 1905 Mr. Henry Payne Whitney presented to the league a beautiful
bronze bas-relief, being a reproduction of Darnley's "Battle of
Lexington," for annual competition by teams from the different schools
having these machines, the winning school to keep it for the year.

In 1905 four gun machines were in use, namely, by the De Witt Clinton
High School, High School of Commerce, Morris High School, and the Boys'
High School.

In June, 1905, a competition was held between these schools, each
school shooting in its own building under the inspection of the
"marksmanship committee."

The following were the scores for teams of 8, 10 shots standing,
highest possible score 400:

    De Witt Clinton High School    377
    High School of Commerce        363
    Morris High School             345
    Boys' High School              344

The winning team averaged 47-3/8 out of 50.

Two boys made perfect scores.

Each member of the winning team was given a bronze badge modeled from
the Whitney trophy.

The result of this match greatly stimulated interest in the shooting.
It also attracted public attention.

During the fall of 1905, and the spring of 1906, the league was able to
equip the remainder of the other six high schools with the machine.

In 1906 it employed Capt. G. W. Corwin, inspector of rifle practice in
the Seventy-first Regiment, New York National Guard, and one of the
best shots in the National Guard, as a general instructor, who served
until after the Creedmoor competition.

He selected in each school a teacher who was interested in the subject
(usually the athletic instructor) as superintendent of shooting, and in
each class four boys as sergeant-instructors. The superintendent and
these boys were carefully instructed by Captain Corwin in the theory
and practice of shooting, so as to make them competent instructors.

The system adopted varied in the different schools. Most of them
preferred to use school hours for the purpose. In these schools,
usually when each class was sent to the gymnasium for physical
exercise, squads of boys in rotation were detached to practice their
firing under the immediate direction of a sergeant-instructor, and the
general direction of the superintendent of shooting, the whole being
carefully supervised by Captain Corwin.

Some schools preferred to have their shooting after school hours, in
which case, however, it was carried on under the same general
principle.

Captain Corwin was of the opinion that the former method was the most
satisfactory, although the Morris High School, which won the Whitney
trophy in 1906, adopted the latter method.

The league established a marksmanship badge, to be awarded, as in the
National Guard and in the Army, to each boy who annually showed
satisfactory proficiency in shooting. The qualifying score first
adopted for this badge was 40 out of a possible 50 "off-hand." It was
found almost immediately that the boys were shooting so well that it
was necessary to raise the standard, which was therefore increased to
42 and later to 43.

The following is a list of the number of boys who qualified as marksmen
in their respective schools during the year 1906:

    Boys' High School              45
    Bryant High School             18
    Commercial High School          6
    Curtis High School             24
    De Witt Clinton High School    23
    Morris High School             16
    Erasmus Hall High School       15
    Manual Training High School    23
    High School of Commerce        19
    Stuyvesant High School          8

    Total                         197

The qualifying score has now been raised to 44.

The Brooklyn Eagle assumed the expense of manufacturing and presenting
these badges, which consisted of a Maltese cross having crossed rifles,
the seal of the league, which is the "Winged Victory," in the center,
the whole being suspended from a bar with the word "Marksman" on it,
and the date.

During the spring of 1906 a large number of interscholastic
competitions were held. These were found valuable, not only in
broadening the boys' ideas in respect to shooting, but in helping their
nerve in competitions.

On June 1 and 2 the annual interscholastic competition for the Whitney
trophy was held. Instead of having each team shoot in its own school it
was decided to have them shoot together at the Seventy-first Regiment
Armory as neutral ground, under the supervision of Captain Corwin as
range officer. The following were the scores, the conditions being the
same as above stated:

    Morris High School. Instructor E. M. Williams             359
    Curtis High School. Instructor O. M. Curtis               356
    High School of Commerce. Instructor Charles Jamison       355
    De Witt Clinton. Instructor Emanuel Haug                  354
    Manual Training High School. Instructor Ernest G. Muller  350
    Bryant High School. Instructor George W. Norton           349
    Erasmus Hall High School. Instructor J. M. Tilden         348
    Stuyvesant High School. Instructor M. F. Goodrich         348
    Boys' High School. Instructor W. H. Andrews               340

The two best scores were not as high as were made in 1905, largely
owing to the strain of shooting in actual competition and among strange
surroundings. But the average was better and the scores were closer.

The Savage Arms Company presented a rifle to each of the six schools
whose team made the highest score in this match.

For the purpose of impressing upon the boys and the public that those
who could make a good score on the subtarget gun machine could shoot
accurately in the field, the league arranged for a match between teams
of five from all high schools and colleges, to be held at Creedmoor,
July 26, 1906, to be shot 100 yards standing; 400 yards lying, five
shots at each distance. It also arranged for two days' previous
practice by the teams and also by all other boys who had won its
marksman's badge, and paid the transportation and ammunition for the
participants. It provided Captain Corwin as instructor, who was
assisted by a number of volunteers from the National Guard. About 150
boys in all availed themselves of this opportunity. None of the boys
had ever previously fired a cartridge. Some of them were consequently a
little nervous, in addition to being embarrassed in shooting in the
presence of so many military men. After a few shots, however, they got
over their nervousness.

In the first practice the average score was about 60 out of 100. The
second score averaged 80.

Mr. J. A. Haskell, president of the Du Pont Powder Company, and a
member of the national board, induced that company to present for
annual competition in the match, a handsome bronze trophy.

Mr. Simon Uhlmann presented a bronze figure of a rifleman, as second
annual prize.

The following is the score of the competitors in this match; highest
possible score 250:

    De Witt Clinton High School (Manhattan)        220
    Boys' High School (Brooklyn)                   215
    St. John's Military School (Manlius, N.Y.)     211
    Commercial High School (Brooklyn)              201
    Curtis High School (Staten Island)             201
    St. John's Second Team                         183
    Manual Training High School (Brooklyn)         181
    Stuyvesant High School (Manhattan)             174

The winning team averaged 44 out of a possible 50, although the day was
a difficult one for shooting.

The School of Applied Science of Columbia University asked to be
allowed to enter a team in this match, and offered to allow the high
school boys a handicap of 25 points. This was objected to on the ground
that they were grown men, who had opportunities for practice which were
out of the reach of the boys, and who were not in the same class. They
were, however, allowed to shoot under protest for the purpose of seeing
how their scores would compare with those of the boys.

The score which they made was 218, which is less than that of the De
Witt Clinton team, which could have beaten them without any handicap.

This shooting shows the value of the practice with the subtarget
machine, as the teams from both Columbia University and St. John's
Military School had been practiced in actual rifle shooting, and yet
were inferior in marksmanship to the high-school boys, who had only
used the machine.

A match was put on the programme of the New Jersey Rifle Association,
September, 1906, at Sea Girt, in which a number of the boys entered.
The pressure upon the target accommodation in consequence of the
national matches was, however, so great that it could not be held at
the date appointed, and the boys could not remain.

The high schools which are equipped with this subtarget gun machine
have organized rifle clubs, and are holding interscholastic contests in
the armories of the different regiments of the National Guard, shooting
with .22-caliber ammunition, and are displaying great proficiency.

The movement has the hearty support of President Roosevelt, who has
accepted the office of honorary vice-president of the league, and also
has announced his intention of writing to the boy who attains the
greatest skill in the rifle matches during the year a personal letter
of congratulation and commendation.

At the present time there are over 7,000 young men being instructed in
these high schools in shooting with a military rifle, the gun used
being the regular Krag army rifle as issued by the War Department.

Great interest in the matter has been taken by both teachers and boys.
Many of these have now become so proficient, that the services of a
paid instructor have been dispensed with. It would, of course, be much
better if a regular officer could be procured for such a purpose. But
the finances of the league will not permit it to continue to incur the
expense of paying the salary of such an instructor. It is believed that
if a young and active regular officer could be detailed to act in this
capacity he would be of the greatest service, and could, besides
helping the shooting, give the boys some idea of military movements and
discipline, which would be of great value. In fact an officer in this
position would accomplish greater results for the country than is
obtained by any of those who are detailed as instructors in many of the
small colleges. The supply of regular officers is, however,
insufficient for the needs of the Army, and it has so far been
impossible to have one detailed for this purpose.

The league is now preparing a manual of instruction to be used in the
different schools. In addition to containing instructions for the use
of the subtarget gun machine it will give a general idea of what is
necessary to know in order to shoot accurately.

Those who have had charge of the instruction of these boys are
unanimous in the opinion that they acquire knowledge of rifle shooting
in about one-quarter of the time that is found necessary in the case of
grown men.

It is hardly necessary to state that the experience of our recent wars
has pointed out that while there is no difficulty in case of war in
getting all the volunteers that the country requires and they can be
given a reasonable amount of drill in a few weeks, it takes a long time
to teach them to shoot, and that unless they can shoot accurately they
are of little value as soldiers. If, however, the young men who are
graduating from our high schools in the different States should be
skilled riflemen the country can rest content with a small standing
army, knowing that in case of war it can put into the field at short
notice a force of volunteers whose skill in rifle shooting will enable
them to be fully the equal of any army which may be brought against
them.

The system is, therefore, a great factor for national peace.

The committee would therefore recommend:

1. That the largest possible publicity should be given to the methods
that have been found to be so successful in the New York high schools.

2. That the educational officials of the different States should be
urged to introduce instruction in rifle shooting in their schools among
the boys of 13 years of age and upward, conforming to the New York
methods as far as their situation will permit.

3. That this would be helped by the organization of a public schools
athletic league in each educational center.

                                     GEO. W. WINGATE,
                                     A. B. CRITCHFIELD,
                                                 _Committee_.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A report on the feasibility and
advisability of some policy to inaugurate a system of rifle practice throughout the public schools of the country, by George W. Wingate and Ammon B. Critchfield

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FEASIBILITY OF RIFLE PRACTICE ***

***** This file should be named 25662.txt or 25662.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/6/6/25662/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
