Project Gutenberg's The Sympathy of Religions, by Thomas Wentworth Higginson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sympathy of Religions

Author: Thomas Wentworth Higginson

Release Date: June 14, 2008 [EBook #25792]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SYMPATHY OF RELIGIONS ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Sam W. and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was made using scans of public domain works
from the University of Michigan Digital Libraries.)






Transcriber's Note

Greek has been transliterated in this version of the e-text, and is
surrounded by + symbols, +like this+.




                    THE
           SYMPATHY OF RELIGIONS.


                AN ADDRESS,
  DELIVERED AT HORTICULTURAL HALL, BOSTON,
             February 6, 1870.


                     BY
         THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON.


                   BOSTON:
        _REPRINTED FROM THE RADICAL._
        OFFICE, 25 BROMFIELD STREET.
                    1871.




THE SYMPATHY OF RELIGIONS.

BY THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON.


Our true religious life begins when we discover that there is an Inner
Light, not infallible but invaluable, which "lighteth every man that
cometh into the world." Then we have something to steer by; and it is
chiefly this, and not an anchor, that we need. The human soul, like
any other noble vessel, was not built to be anchored, but to sail. An
anchorage may, indeed, be at times a temporary need, in order to make
some special repairs, or to take fresh cargo in; yet the natural
destiny of both ship and soul is not the harbor, but the ocean; to cut
with even keel the vast and beautiful expanse; to pass from island on
to island of more than Indian balm, or to continents fairer than
Columbus won; or, best of all, steering close to the wind, to extract
motive power from the greatest obstacles. Men must forget the eternity
through which they have yet to sail, when they talk of anchoring here
upon this bank and shoal of time. It would be a tragedy to see the
shipping of the world whitening the seas no more, and idly riding at
anchor in Atlantic ports; but it would be more tragic to see a world
of souls fascinated into a fatal repose and renouncing their destiny
of motion.

And as with individuals, so with communities. The great historic
religions of the world are not so many stranded hulks left to perish.
The best of them are all in motion. All over the world the divine
influence moves men. There is a sympathy in religions, and this
sympathy is shown alike in their origin, their records, and their
progress. Men are ceasing to disbelieve, and learning to believe more.
I have worshiped in an Evangelical church when thousands rose to their
feet at the motion of one hand. I have worshiped in a Roman Catholic
church when the lifting of one finger broke the motionless multitude
into twinkling motion, till the magic sign was made, and all was still
once more. But I never for an instant have supposed that this
concentrated moment of devotion was more holy or more beautiful than
when one cry from a minaret hushes a Mohammedan city to prayer, or
when, at sunset, the low invocation, "Oh! the gem in the lotus--oh!
the gem in the lotus," goes murmuring, like the cooing of many doves,
across the vast surface of Thibet. True, "the gem in the lotus" means
nothing to us, but it means as much to the angels as "the Lamb of
God," for it is a symbol of aspiration.

Every year brings new knowledge of the religions of the world, and
every step in knowledge brings out the sympathy between them. They all
show the same aim, the same symbols, the same forms, the same
weaknesses, the same aspirations. Looking at these points of unity, we
might say there is but one religion under many forms, whose essential
creed is the Fatherhood of God, and the Brotherhood of Man,--disguised
by corruptions, symbolized by mythologies, ennobled by virtues,
degraded by vices, but still the same. Or if, passing to a closer
analysis, we observe the shades of difference, we shall find in these
varying faiths the several instruments which perform what Cudworth
calls "the Symphony of Religions." And though some may stir like
drums, and others soothe like flutes, and others like violins command
the whole range of softness and of strength, yet they are all alike
instruments, and nothing in any one of them is so wondrous as the
great laws of sound which equally control them all.

"Amid so much war and contest and variety of opinion," said Maximus
Tyrius, "you will find one consenting conviction in every land, that
there is one God, the King and Father of all." "God being one," said
Aristotle, "only receives various names from the various
manifestations we perceive." "Sovereign God," said Cleanthes, in that
sublime prayer which Paul quoted, "whom men invoke under many names,
and who rulest alone, ... it is to thee that all nations should
address themselves, for we all are thy children." So Origen, the
Christian Father, frankly says that no man can be blamed for calling
God's name in Egyptian, nor in Scythian, nor in such other language as
he best knows.[A]

To say that different races worship different Gods, is like saying
that they are warmed by different suns. The names differ, but the sun
is the same, and so is God. As there is but one source of light and
warmth, so there is but one source of religion. To this all nations
testify alike. We have yet but a part of our Holy Bible. The time will
come when, as in the middle ages, all pious books will be called
sacred scriptures, _Scripturae Sacrae_. From the most remote portions of
the earth, from the Vedas and the Sagas, from Plato and Zoroaster,
Confucius and Mohammed, from the Emperor Marcus Antoninus and the
slave Epictetus, from the learned Alexandrians and the ignorant Galla
negroes, there will be gathered hymns and prayers and maxims in which
every religious soul may unite,--the magnificent liturgy of the human
race.

The greatest of modern scholars, Von Humboldt, asserted in middle life
and repeated the assertion in old age, that "all positive religions
contain three distinct parts. First, a code of morals, very fine, and
nearly the same in all. Second, a geological dream, and, third, a myth
or historical novelette, which last becomes the most important of
all." And though this observation may be somewhat roughly stated, its
essential truth is seen when we compare the different religions of the
world side by side. With such startling points of similarity, where is
the difference? The main difference lies here, that each fills some
blank space in its creed with the name of a different teacher. For
instance, the Oriental Parsee wears a fine white garment, bound around
him with a certain knot; and whenever this knot is undone, at morning
or night, he repeats the four main points of his creed, which are as
follows:--

"To believe in one God, and hope for mercy from him only."

"To believe in a future state of existence."

"To do as you would be done by."

Thus far the Parsee keeps on the universal ground of religion. Then he
drops into the language of his sect and adds,--

"To believe in Zoroaster as lawgiver, and to hold his writings
sacred."

The creed thus furnishes a formula for all religions. It might be
printed in blank like a circular, leaving only the closing name to be
filled in.[B] For Zoroaster read Christ, and you have Christianity;
read Buddha, and you have Buddhism; read Mohammed, and you have
Mohammedanism. Each of these, in short, is Natural Religion _plus_ an
individual name. It is by insisting on that _plus_ that each religion
stops short of being universal.

In this religion of the human race, thus variously disguised, we find
everywhere the same leading features. The same great doctrines, good
or bad,--regeneration, predestination, atonement, the future life, the
final judgment, the Divine Reason or Logos, and the Trinity. The same
religious institutions,--monks, missionaries, priests, and pilgrims.
The same ritual,--prayers, liturgies, sacrifices, sermons, hymns. The
same implements,--frankincense, candles, holy water, relics, amulets,
votive offerings. The same symbols,--the cross, the ball, the
triangle, the serpent, the all-seeing eye, the halo of rays, the tree
of life. The same saints, angels, and martyrs. The same holiness
attached to particular cities, rivers, and mountains. The same
prophecies and miracles,--the dead restored and evil spirits cast out.
The self-same holy days; for Easter and Christmas were kept as spring
and autumn festivals, centuries before our era, by Egyptians,
Persians, Saxons, Romans. The same artistic designs, since the mother
and child stand depicted, not only in the temples of Europe, but in
those of Etruria and Arabia, Egypt and Thibet. In ancient Christian
art, the evangelists were represented with the same heads of eagles,
oxen, and lions, upon which we gaze with amazement in Egyptian tombs.
Nay, the very sects and subdivisions of all historic religions have
been the same, and each supplies us with mystic and rationalist,
formalist and philanthropist, ascetic and epicurean. The simple fact
is, that all these things are as indigenous as grass and mosses; they
spring up in every soil, and only the microscope can tell them apart.

And, as all these inevitably recur, so comes back again and again the
idea of incarnation,--the Divine Man. Here, too, all religions
sympathize, and, with slight modifications, each is the copy of the
other. As in the dim robing-rooms of foreign churches are kept rich
stores of sacred vestments, ready to be thrown over every successive
generation of priests, so the world has kept in memory the same
stately traditions to decorate each new Messiah. He is predicted by
prophecy, hailed by sages, born of a virgin, attended by miracle,
borne to heaven without tasting death, and with promise of return.
Zoroaster and Confucius have no human father. Osiris is the Son of
God, he is called the Revealer of Life and Light; he first teaches one
chosen race; he then goes with his apostles to teach the Gentiles,
conquering the world by peace; he is slain by evil powers; after death
he descends into hell, then rises again, and presides at the last
judgment of all mankind: those who call upon his name shall be saved.
Buddha is born of a virgin; his name means the Word, the Logos, but he
is known more tenderly as the Saviour of Man; he embarrasses his
teachers, when a child, by his understanding and his answers; he is
tempted in the wilderness, when older; he goes with his apostles to
redeem the world; he abolishes caste and cruelty, and teaches
forgiveness; he receives among his followers outcasts whom Pharisaic
pride despises, and he only says, "My law is a law of mercy to all."
Slain by enemies, he descends into hell, rising without tasting death,
and still lives to make intercession for man.

These are the recognized properties of religious tradition; the
beautiful garments belong not to the individual, but the race. It is
the drawback on all human greatness that it makes itself deified. Even
of Jesus it was said sincerely by the Platonic philosopher Porphyry,
"That noble soul, who has ascended into heaven, has by a certain
fatality become an occasion of error." The inequality of gifts is a
problem not yet solved, and there is always a craving for some miracle
to explain it. Men set up their sublime representatives as so many
spiritual athletes, and measure them. "See, this one is six inches
taller; those six inches prove him divine." But because men surpass
us, or surpass everybody, shall we hold them separate from the race?
Construct the race as you will, somebody must stand at the head, in
virtue as in intellect. Shall we deify Shakespeare? Because we may
begin upon his treasury of wisdom almost before we enjoy any other
book, and can hold to it longer, and read it all our lives, from those
earnest moments when we demand the very core of thought, down to
moments of sickness and sadness when nothing else captivates; because
we may go the rounds of all literature, and grow surfeited with every
other great author, and learn a dozen languages and a score of
philosophical systems, and travel the wide world over, and come back
to Shakespeare at length, fresh as ever, and begin at the beginning of
his infinite meanings once more,--are we therefore to consider him as
separated from mortality? Are we to raise him to the heavens, as in
the magnificent eulogium of Keats, who heads creation with "things
real, as sun, stars, and passages of Shakespeare"? Or are we to erect
into a creed the bold words I once heard an enthusiast soberly say,
"that it is impossible to think of Shakespeare as a man"? Or shall we
reverently own, that, as man's humility first bids him separate
himself from these his great superiors, so his faith and hope bring
him back to them and renew the tie. It paralyzes my intellect if I
doubt whether Shakespeare was a man; it paralyzes my whole spiritual
nature if I doubt whether Jesus was.

Therefore I believe that all religion is natural, all revealed. What
faith in humanity springs up, what trust in God, when one recognizes
the sympathy of religions! Every race believes in a Creator and
Governor of the world, in whom devout souls recognize a Father also.
Every race believes in immortality. Every race recognizes in its
religious precepts the brotherhood of man. The whole gigantic system
of caste in Hindostan has grown up in defiance of the Vedas, which are
now being invoked to abolish them. The Heetopades of Vishnu Sarman
forbid caste. "Is this one of our tribe or a stranger? is the
calculation of the narrow-minded; but, to those of a noble
disposition, the earth itself is but one family." "What is religion?"
says elsewhere the same book, and answers, "Tenderness toward all
creatures." "He is my beloved of whom mankind are not afraid and who
of mankind is not afraid," says the Bhagvat Geeta. "Kesava is pleased
with him who does good to others, ... who is always desirous of the
welfare of all creatures," says the Vishnu Purana. In Confucius it is
written, "My doctrine is simple and easy to understand;" and his chief
disciple adds, "It consists only in having the heart right and in
loving one's neighbor as one's self." When he was asked, "Is there one
word which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's life?" he
answered, "Is not 'Reciprocity' such a word? What you wish done to
yourself, do to others." By some translators the rule is given in a
negative form, in which it is also found in the Jewish Talmud (Rabbi
Hillel), "Do not to another what thou wouldst not he should do to
thee; this is the sum of the law." So Thales, when asked for a rule of
life, taught, "That which thou blamest in another, do not thyself."
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," said the Hebrew book of
Leviticus. Iamblichus tells us that Pythagoras taught "the love of all
to all." "To live is not to live for one's self alone, let us help one
another," said the Greek dramatist Menander; and the Roman dramatist
Terence, following him, brought down the applause of the whole theatre
by the saying, "I am a man; I count nothing human foreign to me."
"Give bread to a stranger," said Quintilian, "in the name of the
universal brotherhood which binds together all men under the common
father of nature." "What good man will look on any suffering as
foreign to himself?" said the Latin satirist Juvenal. "This sympathy
is what distinguishes us from brutes," he adds. The poet Lucan
predicted a time when warlike weapons should be laid aside, and all
men love one another. "Nature has inclined us to love men," said
Cicero, "and this is the foundation of the law." He also described
his favorite virtue of justice as "devoting itself wholly to the good
of others." Seneca said, "We are members of one great body, Nature
planted in us a mutual love, and fitted us for a social life. We must
consider that we were born for the good of the whole." "Love mankind,"
wrote Marcus Antoninus, summing it all up in two words; while the
loving soul of Epictetus extended the sphere of mutual affection
beyond this earth, holding that "the universe is but one great city,
full of beloved ones, divine and human, by nature endeared to each
other."[C]

This sympathy of religions extends even to the loftiest virtues,--the
forgiveness of injuries, the love of enemies and the overcoming of
evil with good. "The wise man," said the Chinese Lao-tse, "avenges his
injuries with benefits." "Hatred," says a Buddhist sacred book, the
Dhammapada, "does not cease by hatred at any time; hatred ceases by
love; this is the eternal rule." "To overcome evil with good is good,
and to resist evil by evil is evil," says a Mohammedan manual of
ethics. "Turn not away from a sinner, but look on him with
compassion," says Saadi's Gulistan. "If thine enemy hunger, give him
bread to eat; if he thirst, give him water to drink," said the Hebrew
proverb. "He who commits injustice is ever made more wretched than he
who suffers it," said Plato, and adds, "It is never right to return an
injury." "No one will dare maintain," said Aristotle, "that it is
better to do injustice than to bear it." "We should do good to our
enemy," said Cleobulus, "and make him our friend." "Speak not evil to
a friend, nor even to an enemy," said Pittacus, one of the Seven Wise
Men. "It is more beautiful," said Valerius Maximus, "to overcome
injury by the power of kindness than to oppose to it the obstinacy of
hatred." Maximus Tyrius has a special chapter on the treatment of
injuries, and concludes: "If he who injures does wrong, he who returns
the injury does equally wrong." Plutarch, in his essay, "How to profit
by our enemies," bids us sympathize with them in affliction and aid
their needs. "A philosopher, when smitten, must love those who smite
him, as if he were the father, the brother, of all men," said
Epictetus. "It is peculiar to man," said Marcus Antoninus, "to love
even those who do wrong.... Ask thyself daily to how many ill-minded
persons thou hast shown a kind disposition." He compares the wise and
humane soul to a spring of pure water which blesses even him who
curses it; and the Oriental story likens such a soul to the
sandal-wood tree, which imparts its fragrance even to the axe that
cuts it down.[D]

How it cheers and enlarges us to hear of these great thoughts and
know that the Divine has never been without a witness on earth! How it
must sadden the soul to disbelieve them. Worse yet to be in a position
where one has to hope that they may not be correctly reported,--that
one by one they may be explained away. A prosecuting attorney once
told me that the most painful part of his position was that he had to
hope that every man he prosecuted would be proved a villain. What is
the painful circumstance in Mrs. Stowe's Byron controversy? That she
is obliged to hope that the character of a sister woman, hitherto
stainless, may be hopelessly blackened. But what is this to their
position who are bound to hope that the character of humanity will be
blackened by wholesale, who are compelled to resist every atom of
light that history reveals. For instance, as the great character of
Buddha has come out from the darkness, within fifty years, how these
reluctant people have struggled against it, still desiring to escape.
"Save us, O God!" they have seemed to say, "from the distress of
believing that so many years ago there was a sublime human life." Show
such persons that the great religious ideas and maxims are as old as
literature; and how they resist the knowledge! "Surely it is not so
bad as that," they say. "Is there not a possibility of a
mistranslation? Let us see the text, explore the lexicon; is there no
labor, no toil, by which we can convince ourselves that there is a
mistake? Anything rather than believe that there is a light which
lighteth every man that cometh into the world."

For this purpose the very facts of history must be suppressed or
explained away. Sir George Mackenzie, in his "Travels in Iceland,"
says that the clergy prevented till 1630, with "mistaken zeal," the
publication of the Scandinavian Eddas. Huc, the Roman Catholic
Missionary, described in such truthful colors the religious influence
of Buddhism in Thibet that his book was put in the _index
expurgatorius_ at Rome. Balmes, a learned Roman Catholic writer,
declares that "Christianity is stripped of a portion of its honors" if
we trace back any high standard of female purity to the ancient
Germans; and so he coolly sets aside as "poetical" the plain
statements of the accurate Tacitus. If we are to believe the accounts
given of the Jewish Essenes by Josephus, De Quincey thinks, the claims
made by Christianity are annihilated. "If Essenism could make good its
pretensions, there, at one blow, would be an end of Christianity,
which, in that case, is not only superseded as an idle repetition of a
religious system already published, but as a criminal plagiarism. Nor
can the wit of man evade the conclusion." He accordingly attempts to
explain away the testimony of Josephus.[E]

And what makes this exclusiveness the more repulsive is its
modernness. Paul himself quoted from the sublime hymn of Cleanthes to
prove to the Greeks that they too recognized the Fatherhood of God.
The early Christian apologists, living face to face with the elder
religions, made no exclusive claims. Tertullian declared the soul to
be an older authority than prophecy, and its voice the gift of God
from the beginning. Justin Martyr said, "Those who live according to
Reason are Christians, though you may call them atheists.... Such
among the Greeks were Socrates and Heraclitus and the rest. They who
have made or do make Reason (Logos) their rule of life are Christians
and men without fear and trembling." "The same God," said Clement, "to
whom we owe the Old and New Testaments gave also to the Greeks their
Greek philosophy by which the Almighty is glorified among the Greeks."
Lactantius declared that the ancient philosophers "attained the full
truth and the whole mystery of religion." "One would suppose," said
Minucius Felix, "either that the Christians were philosophers, or the
philosophers Christians." "What is now called the Christian religion,"
said Augustine, "has existed among the ancients, and was not absent
from the beginning of the human race, until Christ came in the flesh;
from which time the true religion, which existed already, began to be
called Christian." Jerome said that "the knowledge of God was present
by nature in all, nor was there any one born without God, or who had
not in himself the seeds of all virtues."[F]

How few modern sects reach even this point of impartiality! The usual
course of theologians is to deny, and to deny with fury, that any such
sympathy of religions exists. "There never was a time," says a
distinguished European preacher, "when there did not exist an infinite
gulf between the ideas of the ancients and the ideas of Christianity.
There is an end of Christianity if men agree in thinking the
contrary." And an eminent Unitarian preacher in America, Rev. A. P.
Peabody, says, "If the truths of Christianity are intuitive and
self-evident, how is it that they formed no part of any man's
consciousness till the advent of Christ?" How can any one look history
in the face, how can any man open even the dictionary of any ancient
language, and yet say this? What word sums up the highest Christian
virtue if not _philanthropy_? And yet the word is a Greek word, and
was used in the same sense before Christendom existed.[G]

Fortunately there have always been men whose larger minds could adapt
themselves to the truth instead of narrowing the truth to them. In
William Penn's "No Cross No Crown," one-half the pages are devoted to
the religious testimony of Christians, and one-half to that of the
non-Christian world. The writings of the most learned of English
Catholics, Digby, are a treasure-house of ancient religion, and the
conflict between the bigot and the scholar makes him deliciously
inconsistent. He states a doctrine, illustrates it from the schoolmen
or the fathers, proudly claims it as being monopolized by the
Christian church, and ends by citing a parallel passage from Plato or
AEschylus! "The ancient poets," he declares, "seem never to have
conceived the idea of a spirit of resignation which would sanctify
calamity;" and accordingly he quotes Aristotle's assertion, that
"suffering becomes beautiful when any one bears great calamities with
cheerfulness, not through insensibility, but through greatness of
mind." "There is not a passage in the classics," he declares, "which
recognizes the beauty of holiness and Christian mildness;" and in the
next breath he remarks, that Homer's description of Patroclus
furnishes "language which might convey an idea of that mildness of
manner which belonged to men in Christian ages." And he closes his
eloquent picture of the faith of the middle ages in immortality by
attributing to the monks and friars the dying language of Socrates,
that "a man who has spent his life in the study of philosophy ought to
take courage in his death, and to be full of hope that he is about to
possess the greatest good that can be obtained, which will be in his
possession as soon as he dies;" and much more of that serene and
sublime wisdom. Yet all this is done in a manner so absolutely free
from sophistry, the conflict between the scholar and the churchman is
so innocent and transparent, that one forgives it in Digby. In most
writers on these subjects there is greater bigotry, without the
learning which in his case makes it endurable, because it supplies
the means for its own correction.[H]

And, if it is thus hard to do historical justice, it is far harder to
look with candor upon contemporary religions. Thus the Jesuit Father
Ripa thought that Satan had created the Buddhist religion on purpose
to bewilder the Christian church. There we see a creed possessing more
votaries than any in the world, numbering nearly one-third of the
human race. Its traditions go back to a founder whose record is
stainless and sublime. It has the doctrine of the Real Presence, the
Madonna and Child, the invocation of the dead, monasteries and
pilgrimages, celibacy and tonsure, relics, rosaries, and holy water.
Wherever it has spread, it has broken down the barrier of caste. It
teaches that all men are brethren, and makes them prove it by their
acts; it diffuses gentleness and self-sacrificing benevolence. "It has
become," as Neander admits, "to many tribes of people a means of
transition from the wildest barbarism to semi-civilization." Tennent,
living amid the lowest form of it in Ceylon, says that its code of
morals is "second only to that of Christianity itself," and enjoins
"every conceivable virtue and excellence." It is coming among us,
represented by many of the Chinese, and a San-Francisco merchant, a
Christian of the Episcopal Church, told me that, on conversing with
their educated men, he found in them a religious faith quite as
enlightened as his own. Shall we not rejoice in this consoling
discovery? "Yes," said the simple-hearted Abbe Huc: so he published
his account of Buddhism, and saw it excommunicated. "No!" said Father
Ripa, "it is the invention of the devil!"[I]

With a steady wave of progress Mohammedanism is sweeping through
Africa, where Christianity scarcely advances a step. Wherever
Mohammedanism reaches, schools and libraries are established,
gambling and drunkenness cease, theft and falsehood diminish, polygamy
is limited, woman begins to be elevated and has property rights
guaranteed; and, instead of witnessing human sacrifices, you see the
cottager reading the Koran at her door, like the Christian cottager in
Cowper's description. "Its gradual extension," says an eye-witness,
"is gradually but surely modifying the negro.... Within the last half
century the humanizing influence of the Koran is acknowledged by all
who are acquainted with the interior tribes."[J] So in India,
Mohammedanism makes converts by thousands (according to Col. Sleeman,
than whom there can be no more intelligent authority) where
Christianity makes but a handful; and this, he testifies, because in
Mohammedanism there is no spirit of caste, while Christians have a
caste of their own, and will not put converts on an equality. Do we
rejoice in this great work of progress? No! one would think we were
still in the time of the crusades by the way we ignore the
providential value of Mohammedanism.

The one unpardonable sin is exclusiveness. Any form of religion is
endangered when we bring it to the test of facts; for none on earth
can bear that test. There never existed a person, nor a book, nor an
institution, which did not share the merits and the drawbacks of its
rivals. Granting all that can be established as to the debt of the
world to the very best dispensation, the fact still remains, that
there is not a single maxim, nor idea, nor application, nor triumph,
that any single religion can claim as exclusively its own. Neither
faith, nor love, nor truth, nor disinterestedness, nor forgiveness,
nor patience, nor peace, nor equality, nor education, nor missionary
effort, nor prayer, nor honesty, nor the sentiment of brotherhood, nor
reverence for woman, nor the spirit of humility, nor the fact of
martyrdom, nor any other good thing, is monopolized by any one or any
half dozen forms of faith. All religions recognize, more or less
distinctly, these principles; all do something to exemplify, something
to dishonor them. Travelers find virtue in a seeming minority in all
other countries, and forget that they have left it in a minority at
home. A Hindoo girl, astonished at the humanity of a British officer
toward her father, declared her surprise that any one could display so
much kindness who did not believe in the god Vishnu. Gladwin, in his
"Persian Classics," narrates a scene which occurred in his presence
between a Jew and a Mohammedan. The Mohammedan said in wrath, "If this
deed of conveyance is not authentic, may God cause me to die a Jew."
The Jew said, "I make my oath on the Pentateuch, and if I swear
falsely I am a Mohammedan like you."

What religion stands highest in moral results if not Christianity? Yet
the slave-trader belongs to Christendom as well as the saint. If we
say that Christendom was not truly represented by the slaves in the
hold of John Newton's slave-ship, but only by the prayers which he
read every day, as he narrates, in the cabin,--then we must admit that
Buddhism is not to be judged merely by the prostrations before Fo, but
by the learning of its lamaseries and the beneficence of its people.
The reformed Brahmoes of India complain that Christian nations force
alcoholic drinks on their nation, despite their efforts; and the
greater humanity of Hindoos towards animals has been, according to Dr.
Hedge, a serious embarrassment to our missionaries. So men interrupt
the missionaries in China, according to Coffin's late book, by asking
them why, if their doctrines be true, Christian nations forced opium
on an unwilling emperor, who refused to the last to receive money from
the traffic? What a history has been our treatment of the American
Indians? "Instead of virtues," said Cadwallader Colden, writing as
early as 1727, "we have taught them vices that they were entirely free
from before that time." The delegation from the Society of Friends
reported last year that an Indian chief brought a young Indian before
a white commissioner to give evidence, and the commissioner hesitated
a little in receiving a part of the testimony, when the chief said
with great emphasis, "Oh! you may believe what he says: he tells the
truth: _he has never seen a white man before_!" In Southey's Wesley
there is an account of an Indian whom Wesley met in Georgia, and who
thus summed up his objections to Christianity: "Christian much drunk!
Christian beat man! Christian tell lies! Devil Christian! Me no
Christian!"[K] What then? All other religions show the same disparity
between belief and practice, and each is safe till it tries to exclude
the rest. Test each sect by its best or its worst as you will, by its
high-water mark of virtue or its low-water mark of vice. But falsehood
begins when you measure the ebb of any other religion against the
flood-tide of your own.

There is a noble and a base side to every history. The same religion
varies in different soils. Christianity is not the same in England and
in Italy; in Armenia and in Ethiopia; in the Protestant and Catholic
cantons of Switzerland; in Massachusetts, in Georgia, and in Utah.
Neither is Buddhism the same in China, in Thibet and in Ceylon; nor
Mohammedanism in Turkey and in Persia. We have no right to pluck the
best fruit from one tree, the worst from another, and then say that
the tree is known by its fruits. I say again, Christianity has, on the
whole, produced the highest results of all, in manners, in arts, in
energy. Yet when Christianity had been five centuries in the world,
the world's only hope seemed to be in the superior strength and purity
of pagan races. "Can we wonder," wrote Salvian (A.D. 400), "if our
lands have been given over to the barbarians by God? since that which
we have polluted by our profligacy the barbarians have cleansed by
their chastity."[L] At the end of its first thousand years,
Christianity could only show Europe at its lowest ebb of civilization,
in a state which Guizot calls "death by the extinction of every
faculty." The barbarians had only deteriorated since their conversion;
the great empires were falling to pieces; and the only bright spot in
Europe was Mohammedan Spain, whose universities taught all Christendom
science, as its knights taught chivalry. Even at the end of fifteen
hundred years, the Turks, having conquered successively Jerusalem and
Constantinople, seemed altogether the most powerful nation of the
world; their empire was compared to the Roman empire; they were
gaining all the time. You will find everywhere, in Luther's
"Table-talk" for instance, how weak Christendom seemed against them in
the middle of the sixteenth century; and Lord Bacon, yet later,
describes them in his "Essays" as the only warlike nation in Europe,
except the Spaniards. But the art of printing had been discovered, and
that other new world, America; the study of Greek literature was
reviving the intellect of Europe, and the tide had begun to turn. For
four hundred years it has been safe for Christendom to be boastful,
but, if at any time during the fifteen hundred years previous the
comparison had been made, the boasting would have been the other way.
It is unsafe to claim a monopoly of merit on the basis of facts that
cover four centuries out of nineteen. Let us not be misled by a hasty
vanity, lest some new incursion of barbarians teach us, as it taught
the early Christians, to be humble.

We see what Christianity has done for Europe; but we do not remember
how much Europe has done for Christianity. Take away the influence of
race and climate; take away Greek literature and Mohammedan chivalry
and the art of printing; set the decline of Christianity in Asia and
Africa against its gain in Europe and America,--and whatever
superiority may be left is not enough on which to base exclusive
claims.[M] The recent scientific advances of the age are a brilliant
theme for the rhetorician; but those who make these advances are the
last men to ascribe them to the influence of any exclusive religion.

Indeed it is only very lately that the claim of superiority in
civilization and the arts of life has been made in behalf of
Christianity. Down to the time of the Reformation it was usual to
contrast the intellectual and practical superiority of the heathen
with the purely spiritual claims of the church. "The church has always
been accustomed," says the Roman Catholic Digby, "to see genius and
learning in the ranks opposed to her." "From the beginning of the
world," said Luther, "there have always been among the heathens higher
and rarer people, of greater and more exalted understanding, more
excellent diligence and skill in all arts, than among Christians, or
the people of God." "Do we excel in intellect, in learning, in decency
of morals?" said Melancthon. "By no means. But we excel in the true
knowledge and worship and adoration of God."[N]

Historically, of course, we are Christians, and can enjoy the
advantage which that better training has given, just as the favored
son of a king may enjoy his special advantages and yet admit that the
less favored are equally sons. The name of Christianity only ceases to
excite respect when it is used to represent any false or exclusive
claims, or when it takes the place of the older and grander words,
"Religion" and "Virtue." When we fully comprehend the sympathy of
religions we shall deal with other faiths on equal terms. We shall
cease trying to free men from one superstition by inviting them into
another. The true missionaries are the men inside each religion who
have outgrown its limitations. But no Christian missionary has ever
yet consented to meet the men of other religions upon the common
ground of Theism. In Bishop Heber's time, the Hindoo reformer Swaamee
Narain was teaching purity and peace, the unity of God, and the
abolition of castes. Many thousands of men followed his teachings, and
whole villages and districts were raised from the worst immorality by
his labors, as the Bishop himself bears witness. But the good Bishop
seems to have despaired of him as soon as Swaamee Narain refused
conversion to Christianity, making the objection that God was not
incarnated in one man, but in many. Then came Ram Mohun Roy, forty
years ago, and argued from the Vedas against idolatry, caste, and the
burning of widows. He also refused to be called a Christian, and the
missionaries denounced him. Now comes Keshub Chunder Sen, with his
generous utterances: "We profess the universal and absolute religion,
whose cardinal doctrines are the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood
of Man, and which accepts the truths of all scriptures, and honors the
prophets of all nations." The movement reaches thousands whom no
foreign influence could touch; yet the Methodist missionaries denounce
it in the name of Christ, and even the little Unitarian mission opens
against it a battery of a single gun. It is the same with our
treatment of the Jews. According to Bayard Taylor, Christendom
converts annually three or four Jews in Jerusalem, at a cost of
$20,000 each. Nothing has been more criticised in the course of the
Free Religious Association than its admission of Jews as equals on its
platform; and yet the reformed Jews in America have already gone in
advance of the most liberal Christian sects in their width of
religious sympathy. "The happiness of man," says Rabbi Wise, in
speaking for them, "depends on no creed and no book; it depends on the
dominion of truth, which is the Redeemer and Savior, the Messiah and
the King of Glory."[O]

It is our happiness to live in a time when all religions are at last
outgrowing their mythologies, and emancipated men are stretching out
their hands to share together "the luxury of a religion that does not
degrade." The progressive Brahmoes of India, the Jewish leaders in
America, the Free Religious Association among ourselves, are teaching
essentially the same principles, seeking the same ends. The Jewish
congregations in Baltimore were the first to contribute for the
education of the freedmen; the Buddhist Temple, in San Francisco, was
the first edifice of that city draped in mourning after the murder of
President Lincoln; the Parsees of the East sent contributions to the
Sanitary Commission. The great religions of the world are but larger
sects; they come together, like the lesser sects, for works of
benevolence; they share the same aspirations, and every step in the
progress of each brings it nearer to all the rest. For us, the door
out of superstition and sin may be called Christianity; that is an
historical name only, the accident of a birthplace. But other nations
find other outlets; they must pass through their own doors, not
through ours; and all will come at last upon the broad ground of God's
providing, which bears no man's name. The reign of heaven on earth
will not be called the Kingdom of Christ nor of Buddha,--it will be
called the Church of God, or the Commonwealth of Man. I do not wish to
belong to a religion only, but to _the_ religion; it must not include
less than the piety of the world.

If one insists on being exclusive, where shall he find a home? What
hold has any Protestant sect among us on a thoughtful mind? They are
too little, too new, too inconsistent, too feeble. What are these
children of a day compared with that magnificent Church of Rome, which
counts its years by centuries, and its votaries by millions, and its
martyrs by myriads; with kings for confessors and nations for
converts; carrying to all the earth one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
and claiming for itself no less title than the Catholic, the
Universal? Yet in conversing with Catholics one is again repelled by
the extreme juvenility, and modernness, and scanty numbers of their
church. It is the superb elder brother of our little sects, doubtless,
and seems to have most of the family fortune. But the whole fortune
is so small! and even the elder brother is so young! Even the
Romanist ignores traditions more vast, antiquity more remote, a
literature of piety more grand. His temple suffocates: give us a
shrine still vaster; something than this Catholicism more catholic;
not the Church of Rome, but of God and Man; a Pantheon, not a
Parthenon; the true _semper, ubique, et ab omnibus_, the Religion of
the Ages, Natural Religion.

I was once in a foreign cathedral when, after the three days of
mourning, in Holy Week, came the final day of Hallelujah. The great
church had looked dim and sad, with the innumerable windows closely
curtained, since the moment when the symbolical bier of Jesus was
borne to its symbolical tomb beneath the High Altar, while the three
mystic candles blazed above it. There had been agony and beating of
cheeks in the darkness, while ghostly processions moved through the
aisles, and fearful transparencies were unrolled from the pulpit. The
priests kneeled in gorgeous robes, chanting, with their heads resting
on the altar steps; the multitude hung expectant on their words.
Suddenly burst forth a new chant, "Gloria in Excelsis!" In that
instant every curtain was rolled aside, the cathedral was bathed in
glory, the organs clashed, the bells chimed, flowers were thrown from
the galleries, little birds were let loose, friends embraced and
greeted one another, and we looked down upon a tumultuous sea of
faces, all floating in a sunlit haze. And yet, I thought, the whole of
this sublime transformation consisted in letting in the light of day!
These priests and attendants, each stationed at his post, had only
removed the darkness they themselves had made. Unveil these darkened
windows, but remove also these darkening walls; the temple itself is
but a lingering shadow of that gloom. Instead of its coarse and
stifling incense, give us God's pure air, and teach us that the
broadest religion is the best.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] This is Cudworth's interpretation, but he has rather strained the
passage, which must be that beginning, +Ouden oun oimai diapherein+
(Adv. Celsum, v.). The passages from Aristotle and Cleanthes are in
Stobaeus. Compare Maximus Tyrius, Diss. I.: +Theos heis panton basileus
kai pater+.

[B] Compare Augustine, De Vera Relig., c. iv.: "Paucis mutatis verbis
atque sententiis Christiani fierent." The Parsee creed is given as
above in a valuable article in Martin's Colonial Magazine, No. 18.

[C] See Vishnu Sarman (tr. by Johnson), pp. 16, 28. Bhagvat Geeta (tr.
by Wilkins), ch. 12. Vishnu Purana (tr. by Wilson), p. 291. Confucius,
Lun-yu (tr. by Pauthier), ch. iv. Sec. 16. Also Davis' Chinese, ii. 50.
[Legge's Confucian Analects, xv. 23, gives the negative form.] Thales,
in Diogenes Laertius, B. I., Sec. 36: +Pos an arista kai dikaiotata
biosaimen? ean ha tois allois epitimomen, hautoi me dromen+. Stobaeus
reads instead (c. 43), +hosa nemeseis ton plesion, hautos me poiei+.
Leviticus xix. 18. Iamblichus de Pythag. vita, c. 16 and 33: +Philian
de diaphanestata panton pros hapantas Pythagoras paredoke+. Terence,
Heaut. I., 1, 25: "Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto."
Quintilian, Declamations, quoted by Denis. Juvenal, Sat. xv.
140-142:--

          "Quis enim bonus ...
    Ulla aliena sibi credat mala?"

Lucan, Pharsalia, I. 60, 61:--

    "Tunc genus humanum positis sibi consulat armis
    Inque vicem gens omnis amet."

Cicero, de Legibus i. 15: "Nam haec nascuntur ex eo, quia natura
propensi sumus ad diligendos homines, quod fundamentum juris est."
Also de Republica, iii. 7, 7 (fragment): "Quae virtus, praeter
ceteras, tota se ad alienas porrigit utilitates et explicat." Marcus
Antoninus, vii, 31: +Phileson ton anthropinon genos+. Epictetus, B.
III., c. xxiv.: +Hoti ho kosmos houtos mia polis esti ... panta de
philon mesta, proton men Theon, eita kai anthropon, physei pros
allelois okeiomenon+.

[D] Dhammapada (tr. by Max Mueller), in Rogers' Buddhagosha's Parables.
Akhlak-i-Jalaly (tr. by Thompson), p. 441. Saadi's Gulistan (tr. by
Ross), p. 240; (tr. by Gladwin, Am. ed.), p. 209. Proverbs xxv. 21.
Plato, Gorgias, Sec. 78: +Aei ton adikounta tou adikoumenou athlioteron
einai+. Crito, Sec. 10: +Hos oudepote orthos echontos oute tou adikein
oute tou antadikein+. Cleobulus in Diog. Laertius, B. I., Sec. 91: +Elege
te ton philon dein euergetein, hopos e mallon philos. ton de echthron,
philon poiein+. Pittacus in Diog. Laertius, B. I., Sec. 78: +Philon me
legein kakos, alla mede echthron+. Val. Maximus, iv. 2, 4: "Quia
speciosius aliquanto injuriae beneficiis vincuntur quam mutui odii
pertinacia pensantur." Max. Tyrius, Diss. II.: +Kai men ei ho adikon
kakos poiei, ho antipoion kakos ouden etton poiei kakos, kan
amynetai+. Plutarch's Morals (tr. by Goodwin, I., 293). Epictetus, B.
IV., c. 23: +Dairesthai dei auton, hos onon, kai dairomenon philein
autous tous dairontas, hos patera panton, hos adelphon+. Marcus
Antoninus, Medit. v. 31. vii. 22: +Idion anthropon philon kai tous
ptaiontas.... Eis hosous de agnomonas eugnomon egenes+.

[E] Balmes, Protestantism and Catholicity, c. xxvii. and note.
Mackenzie's Iceland, p. 26. De Quincey, Autobiographical Sketches, p.
17, and Essay on the Essenes. The condemnation of Huc's book is
mentioned by Max Mueller, Chips, &c., I., 187.

[F] "Nec hoc ullis Mosis libris debent. Ante anima quam prophetia.
Animae enim a primordio conscientia Dei dos est."--_Tertullian_, _adv.
Marcion_, 1, 10.

+Hoi meta Logou biosantes christianoi eisi, kan atheoi enomisthesan,
hoion en Hellesi men Sokrates kai Herakleitos kai hoi homoioi autois,
k. t. l.+--_Justin Martyr_, _Apol._ i. 46.

+Pros de kai hoti ho autos theos amphoin tain diathekain choregos, ho
kai tes Hellenikes philosophias doter tois Hellesin, di' hes ho
pantokrator par' Hellesi doxazetai, parestesen, delon de
kanthende.+--_Clem. Alex. Strom._, VI. v. 42.

"Totam igitur veritatem et omne divinae religionis arcanum philosophi
attigerunt."--_Lactantius_, _Inst._ viii. 7.

"Ut quivis arbitretur, aut nunc Christianos philosophos esse, aut
philosophos fuisse jam tunc Christianos."--_Minucius Felix_,
_Octavius_, c. xx.

"Res ipsa, quae nunc religio Christiana nuncupatur, erat apud antiquos,
nec defuit ab initio generis humani, quousque Christus veniret in
carnem, unde vera religio, quae jam erat, coepit appellari
Christiana."--_Augustine_, _Retr._, i. 13.

"Natura omnibus Dei inesse notitiam, nec quemquam sine Deo nasci, et
non habere in se semina sapientiae et justitiae reliquarumque
virtutum."--_Hieron._, _Comm. in Gal._, I., 1, 15.

[G] +Ego de phoboumai me hypo philanthropias doko autois ho ti per
echo ekkechymenos panti andri legein.+--_Plato_, _Euthyphron_, Sec. 3.

"Quodque a Graecis +philanthropia+ dicitur, et significat dexteritatem
quandam benevolentiamque erga omnes homines promiscuam."--_Aulus
Gellius_, B. XIII., c. xvi. 1.

How much more frank and scholarlike are the admissions of Dean Milman:
"If we were to glean from the later Jewish writings, from the
beautiful aphorisms of other Oriental nations, which we cannot fairly
trace to Christian sources, and from the Platonic and Stoic philosophy
their more striking precepts, we might find, perhaps, a counterpart to
almost all the moral sayings of Jesus."--_Hist. Christianity_, B. I.,
c. iv., Sec. 3.

[H] Digby's Ages of Faith, II., 174, 178, 287-289, &c. Digby's
inconsistent method has ample precedent in the early Christian
apologists. Tertullian, for instance, glorifies the Christian martyrs,
and then, to show that they are not foolish or desperate men, cites
the precedents of Regulus, Zeno, Mutius Scaevola, and many others
(Apol. c. 50)!

[I] Compare Neander (Am. tr.), I., 450. Huc's Thibet, II., 50.
Tennent's Christianity in Ceylon, pp. 219, 220.

[J] Capt. Canot, pp. 153, 180, 181. Wilson's Western Africa, 75, 79,
92. Richardson's Great Desert, II., 63, 129. Johnstone's Abyssinia,
I., 267; Allen's Niger Expedition, I., 383. Du Chaillu, Ashango Land,
xiii., 129. Barth, _passim_, especially (I., 310): "That continual
struggle, which always continuing further and further, seems destined
to overpower the nations at the very equator, if Christianity does not
presently step in to dispute the ground with it." He says "that a
great part of the Berbers of the desert were once Christians, and that
they afterwards changed their religion and adopted Islam" (I., 197,
198). He represents the slave merchants of the interior as complaining
that the Mohammedans of Tunis have abolished slavery, but that
Christians still continue it (I., 465). "It is difficult to decide how
a Christian government is to deal with these countries, where none but
Mohammedans maintain any sort of government" (II., 196). "There is a
vital principle in Islam, which has only to be brought out by a
reformer to accomplish great things" (I., 164).

Reade, in his Savage Africa, discusses the subject fully in a closing
chapter, and concludes thus: "Mohammed, a servant of God, redeemed the
eastern world. His followers are now redeeming Africa.... Let us aid
the Mohammedans in their great work, the redemption of Africa.... In
every Mohammedan town there is a public school and a public library."
He complains that Christianity utterly fails to check theft, but
Mohammedanism stops it entirely (pp. 135, 579, English ed.).

For Asiatic Mohammedanism see Sleeman's Recollections, II., 164, and
compare Tennent's Christianity in Ceylon, p. 330, and Max Mueller's
Chips from a German Workshop, II., 351. The London Spectator, in
April, 1869, stated that "Mohammedanism gains thousands of converts
every year," and thus described the activity of its organization, the
statement being condensed in the Boston Journal: "Of all these
societies, the largest, the most powerful, the most widely diffused,
is the Mohammedan population. Everywhere it has towns, villages,
temples, places within which no infidel foot ever is or can be set.
Its missionaries wander everywhere, keeping up the flame of
Islam,--the hope that the day is coming, is at hand, when the white
curs shall pass away, and the splendid throne which Timour won for the
faithful shall again be theirs. They have their own papers, their own
messengers, their own mail carriers, and they trust no other.
Repeatedly, before the telegraph was established, their agents
outstripped the fastest couriers the government could employ. The
government express was carried by Mussulmans, who allowed the private
messengers to get on a few hours ahead. Every dervish, moollah, or
missionary, is a secret agent. This organization, which has always
existed, has of late been drawn closer, partly as the result of their
great mutiny, which taught the priests their hold over the soldiery,
partly by the expiration of the 'century of expiation,' and partly by
the marvelous revival of the Puritan element in Mohammedanism itself."

[K] See Southey's Wesley, chap. III. Report of Joint Delegation of the
Society of Friends, 1869. Hedge's Primeval World of Hebrew Tradition,
p. 83. Coffin's New Way Round the World, pp. 270, 308, 361. Colden's
History of the Five Indian Nations (dedication). He says also, "We
have reason to be ashamed that those infidels, by our conversation and
neighborhood, are become worse than they were before they knew us." It
appears from this book (as from other witnesses), that one of the
worst crimes now practiced by the Indians has sprung up since that
day, being apparently stimulated by the brutalities practiced by
whites towards Indian women. Colden says, "I have been assured that
there is not an instance of their offering the least violence to the
chastity of any woman that was their captive" (Vol. I., p. 9, 3d ed.).
Compare Parkman's Pontiac, II., 236.

[L] "Cum ea quae Romani polluerant fornicatione, nunc mundent barbari
castitate."--_Salvian de Gubern. Dei._ ed. 1623, p. 254, quoted in
Gilly's Vigilantius, p. 360.

[M] "Neither history nor more recent experience can furnish any
example of the long retention of pure Christianity by a people
themselves rude and unenlightened. In all the nations of Europe,
embracing every period since the second century, Christianity must be
regarded as having taken the hue and complexion of the social state
with which it was incorporated, presenting itself unsullied,
contaminated, or corrupted, in sympathy with the enlightenment or
ignorance or debasement of those by whom it had been originally
embraced. The rapid and universal degeneracy of the early Asiatic
churches is associated with the decline of education and the
intellectual decay of the communities among whom they were
established."--_Tennent's Christianity in Ceylon_, p. 273. For the
influence of Mohammedanism on the revival of letters in Europe, see
Andres, Origine di ogni litteratura. Jourdain, Recherches critiques
sur les traductions latines d'Aristote. Schmoelders, Ecoles
philosophiques entre les Arabes. Forster, Mohammedanism Unveiled.
Urquhart, Pillars of Hercules. Lecky's Rationalism, II., 284.

[N] "Quid igitur nos antecellimus? Num ingenio, doctrina, morum
moderatione illos superamus? Nequaquam. Sed vera Dei agnitione,
invocatione et celebratione praestamus."--_Melancthon_, quoted by
Feuerbach, Essence of Christianity (Eng. tr.) p. 284. He also cites
the passage from Luther.

[O] Rabbi Wise's remarks may be found in the Report of the Free
Religious Association for 1869, p. 118. For Swaamee Narain, see
Heber's Journal, II., 109-121 (Am. ed.). For Ram Mohun Roy, see his
translation of the Sama Veda (Calcutta, 1816), his two tracts on the
burning of widows (Calcutta, 1818, 1820), and other pamphlets. Victor
Jacquemont wrote of him from Calcutta in 1830, "Il n'est pas Chretien,
quoi qu'on en dise.... Les honnetes Anglais l'execrent parce que,
disent-ils, c'est un affreux deiste."--_Letters_, I., 288.




Transcriber's Note

The following amendments have been made:

    Page 4--Budhhism amended to Buddhism--"... read Buddha,
    and you have Buddhism; ..."

    Page 4, footnote B--valuble amended to valuable--"The
    Parsee creed is given as above in a valuable article
    ..."

    Page 9, footnote D--omitted closing bracket added--"...
    (tr. by Goodwin, I., 293)."

    Page 13--omitted opening quote added (cross-checked
    against a different edition)--"... description of
    Patroclus furnishes "language which might convey ...""

    Page 15, footnote J--Mohamedanism amended to
    Mohammedanism--"... fails to check theft, but
    Mohammedanism stops it entirely ..."

    Page 15, footnote J--s amended to is--"... is at hand,
    when the white curs shall pass away, ..."

    Page 20--omitted closing quote added (cross-checked
    against a different edition)--""... has always
    been accustomed," says the Roman Catholic Digby, ..."

    Page 23--gorgeeous amended to gorgeous--"The priests
    kneeled in gorgeous robes, ..."

Accent errors in the Greek text have been repaired without note. The
following amendments have also been made:

    Page 9, footnote D--ton amended to tou--"+Aei ton
    adikounta tou adikoumenou athlioteron ...+"

    Page 9, footnote D--antadykein amended to
    antadikein--"+... tou adikein oute tou antadikein+"

    Page 9, footnote D--Slege amended to Elege--"+Elege te
    ton philon dein euergetein, ...+"

    Page 12, footnote G--to amended to ti--"+...
    philanthropias doko autois ho ti per echo ...+"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sympathy of Religions, by
Thomas Wentworth Higginson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SYMPATHY OF RELIGIONS ***

***** This file should be named 25792.txt or 25792.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/7/9/25792/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Sam W. and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was made using scans of public domain works
from the University of Michigan Digital Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
