The Project Gutenberg eBook, Answers to Prayer , by George Müller, Edited
by A. E. C. Brooks


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Answers to Prayer 
       From George Müller's Narratives


Author: George Müller

Editor: A. E. C. Brooks

Release Date: June 24, 2008  [eBook #25891]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANSWERS TO PRAYER ***


E-text prepared by A. Folland, the Bookworm <bookworm.librivox AT
gmail.com>, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



ANSWERS TO PRAYER

From George Mueller's Narratives

Compiled by A. E. C. Brooks.







The Moody Press
153 Institute Place
Chicago




"I never remember, in all my Christian course, a period now (in March,
1895) of sixty-nine years and four months, that I ever SINCERELY and
PATIENTLY sought to know the will of God by _the teaching of the Holy
Ghost_, through the instrumentality of the _Word of God_, but I have
been ALWAYS directed rightly. But if _honesty of heart_ and _uprightness
before God_ were lacking, or if I did not _patiently_ wait upon God for
instruction, or if I preferred _the counsel of my fellow men_ to the
declarations of _the Word of the living God_, I made great mistakes."

GEORGE MUELLER.




Printed in United States of America




[Illustration: Fac simile of Mr. Mueller's permission for the compilation
of this book.]




PREFACE


Mr. Brooks, in this compilation, has endeavored to select those incidents
and practical remarks from Mr. Mueller's Narratives, that show in an
unmistakeable way, both to believers and unbelievers, the secret of
believing prayer, the manifest hand of a living God, and His unfailing
response, in His own time and way, to every petition which is according
to His will.

The careful perusal of these extracts will thus further the great object
which Mr. Mueller had in view, without the necessity of reading through
the various details of his "Narratives," details which Mr. Mueller felt
bound to give when writing periodically the account of God's dealings
with him.

For those who have the opportunity, an examination of the "Autobiography
of George Mueller, or, a Million and a Half in Answer to Prayer" will
richly repay the time spent upon it.

Mr. Mueller's permission for the compilation of this volume is shown in
the accompanying facsimile, (see p. 2), in the following words:

"If the extracts are given exactly as printed, and the punctuation
exactly as in the book and in the connection in which the facts stand, I
have no objection."




HOW TO ASCERTAIN THE WILL OF GOD


I seek at the beginning to get my heart into such a state that it has no
will of its own in regard to a given matter. Nine-tenths of the trouble
with people generally is just here. Nine-tenths of the difficulties are
overcome when our hearts are ready to do the Lord's will, whatever it
may be. When one is truly in this state, it is usually but a little way
to the knowledge of what His will is.

2.--Having done this, I do not leave the result to feeling or simple
impression. If so, I make myself liable to great delusions.

3.--I seek the Will of the Spirit of God through, or in connection with,
the Word of God. The Spirit and the Word must be combined. If I look to
the Spirit alone without the Word, I lay myself open to great delusions
also. If the Holy Ghost guides us at all, He will do it according to the
Scriptures and never contrary to them.

4.--Next I take into account providential circumstances. These often
plainly indicate God's Will in connection with His Word and Spirit.

5.--I ask God in prayer to reveal His Will to me aright.

6.--Thus, through prayer to God, the study of the Word, and reflection,
I come to a deliberate judgment according to the best of my ability and
knowledge, and if my mind is thus at peace, and continues so after two
or three more petitions, I proceed accordingly. In trivial matters, and
in transactions involving most important issues, I have found this
method always effective.

GEORGE MUELLER.





ANSWERS TO PRAYER




CHAPTER I

BEGINNING AND EARLY DAYS OF THE ORPHAN WORK.

     "That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of
     gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be
     found unto praise and honour and glory at the appearing of
     Jesus Christ."--1 Peter, i. 7.


Mr. George Mueller, the founder of the New Orphan-Houses, Ashley Down,
Bristol (institutions that have been for many years the greatest
monuments of modern times to a prayer-answering God), gives in that most
valuable and instructive book, "A Narrative of Some of the Lord's
Dealings with George Mueller," Vol. I., among other reasons for
establishing an Orphan-House, the following:--

"Sometimes I found children of God tried in mind by the prospect of old
age, when they might be unable to work any longer, and therefore were
harassed by the fear of having to go into the poorhouse. If in such a
case I pointed out to them, how their Heavenly Father has always helped
those who put their trust in Him, they might not, perhaps, always say,
that times have changed; but yet it was evident enough, that God was not
looked upon by them as the LIVING God. My spirit was ofttimes bowed down
by this, and I longed to set something before the children of God,
whereby they might see, that He does not forsake, even in our day, those
who rely upon Him.

"Another class of persons were brethren in business, who suffered in
their souls, and brought guilt on their consciences, by carrying on
their business, almost in the same way as unconverted persons do. The
competition in trade, the bad times, the over-peopled country, were
given as reasons why, if the business were carried on simply according
to the word of God, it could not be expected to do well. Such a brother,
perhaps, would express the wish, that he might be differently situated;
but very rarely did I see _that there was a stand made for God, that
there was the holy determination to trust in the living God, and to
depend on Him, in order that a good conscience might be maintained_. To
this class likewise I desired to show, by a visible proof, that God is
unchangeably the same.

"Then there was another class of persons, individuals who were in
professions in which they could not continue with a good conscience, or
persons who were in an unscriptural position with reference to spiritual
things; but both classes feared, on account of the consequences, to give
up the profession in which they could not abide with God, or to leave
their position, lest they should be thrown out of employment. My spirit
longed to be instrumental in strengthening their faith, by giving them
not only instances from the word of God, of His willingness and ability
to help all those who rely upon Him, but _to show them by proofs_, that
He is the same in our day. I well knew _that the Word of God ought to be
enough_, and it was, by grace, enough, to me; but still, I considered
that I ought to lend a helping hand to my brethren, if by any means, by
this visible proof to the unchangeable faithfulness of the Lord, I might
strengthen their hands in God; for I remembered what a great blessing my
own soul had received through the Lord's dealings with His servant A. H.
Franke, who in dependence upon the living God alone, established an
immense Orphan-House, which I had seen many times with my own eyes. I,
therefore, judged myself bound to be the servant of the Church of God,
in the particular point on which I had obtained mercy: namely, _in being
able to take God by His word and to rely upon it_. All these exercises
of my soul, which resulted from the fact that so many believers, with
whom I became acquainted, were harassed and distressed in mind, or brought
guilt on their consciences, on account of not trusting in the Lord; were
used by God to awaken in my heart the desire of setting before the
church at large, and before the world, a proof that He has not in the
least changed; and this seemed to me best done, by the establishing of
an Orphan-House. It needed to be something which could be seen, even by
the natural eye. Now, if I, a poor man, simply by prayer and faith,
obtained _without asking any individual_, the means for establishing and
carrying on an Orphan-House, there would be something which, with the
Lord's blessing, might be instrumental in strengthening the faith of the
children of God, besides being a testimony to the consciences of the
unconverted, of the reality of the things of God. This, then, was the
primary reason for establishing the Orphan-House. I certainly did from
my heart desire to be used by God to benefit the bodies of poor children,
bereaved of both parents, and seek in other respects, with the help of
God, to do them good for this life;--I also particularly longed to be
used by God in getting the dear orphans trained up in the fear of
God;--but still, the first and primary object of the work was (and still
is:) that God might be magnified by the fact, that the orphans under my
care are provided with all they need, only by _prayer and faith_ without
anyone being asked by me or my fellow-laborers whereby it may be seen,
that God is FAITHFUL STILL, and HEARS PRAYER STILL. That I was not
mistaken, has been abundantly proved since November, 1835, both by the
conversion of many sinners who have read the accounts, which have been
published in connection with this work, and also by the abundance of
fruit that has followed in the hearts of the saints, for which from my
inmost soul, I desire to be grateful to God, and the honor and glory of
which not only is due to Him alone, but, which I, by His help, am
enabled to ascribe to Him."


"OPEN THY MOUTH WIDE."

In the account written by Mr. Mueller dated Jan. 16, 1836, respecting the
Orphan-House intended to be established in Bristol in connection with
the Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad, we read:--

"When, of late, the thoughts of establishing an Orphan-House, in
dependence upon the Lord, revived in my mind, during the first two weeks
I only prayed that if it were of the Lord, he would bring it about, but
if not that He graciously would be pleased to take all thoughts about it
out of my mind. My uncertainty about knowing the Lord's mind did not
arise from questioning whether it would be pleasing in His sight, that
there should be an abode and Scriptural education provided for destitute
fatherless and motherless children; but whether it were His will that I
should be the instrument of setting such an object on foot, as my hands
were already more than filled. My comfort, however, was, that, if it
were His will, He would provide not merely the means, but also suitable
individuals to take care of the children, so that my part of the work
would take only such a portion of my time, as, considering the importance
of the matter, I might give, notwithstanding my many other engagements.
The whole of those two weeks I never asked the Lord for money or for
persons to engage in the work.

"On December 5th, however, the subject of my prayer all at once became
different. I was reading Psalm lxxxi., and was particularly struck, more
than at any time before, with verse 10: "_Open thy month wide, and I
will fill it_." I thought a few moments about these words, and then was
led to apply them to the case of the Orphan-House. It struck me that I
had never asked the Lord for anything concerning it, except to know His
will, respecting its being established or not; and I then fell on my
knees and opened my mouth wide, asking Him for much. I asked in submission
to His will, and without fixing a time when He should answer my petition.
I prayed that He would give me a house, _i. e._, either as a loan, or
that someone might be led to pay the rent for one, or that one might be
given permanently for this object; further, I asked Him for L1000; and
likewise for suitable individuals to take care of the children. Besides
this, I have been since led to ask the Lord, to put into the hearts of
His people to send me articles of furniture for the house, and some
clothes for the children. When I was asking the petition, I was fully
aware what I was doing, _i. e._, that I was asking for something which I
had no natural prospect of obtaining from the brethren whom I know, but
which was not too much for the Lord to grant."

"December 10, 1835.--This morning I received a letter, in which a
brother and sister wrote thus:--"We propose ourselves for the service of
the intended Orphan-House, if you think us qualified for it; also to
give up all the furniture, &c., which the Lord has given us, for its
use; and to do this without receiving any salary whatever; believing
that if it be the will of the Lord to employ us, He will supply all our
needs, &c."

"Dec. 13.--A brother was influenced this day to give 4s. per week, or
L10 8s. yearly, as long as the Lord gives the means; 8s. was given by
him as two weeks' subscriptions. To-day a brother and sister offered
themselves, with all their furniture, and all the provisions which they
have in the house, if they can be usefully employed in the concerns of
the Orphan-House."


A GREAT ENCOURAGEMENT.

"Dec. 17.--I was rather cast down last evening and this morning about
the matter, questioning whether I ought to be engaged in this way, and
was led to ask the Lord to give me some further encouragement. Soon
after were sent by a brother two pieces of print, the one seven and the
other 23-3/4 yards, 6-3/4 yards of calico, four pieces of lining, about
four yards altogether, a sheet, and a yard measure. This evening another
brother brought a clothes horse, three frocks, four pinafores, six
handkerchiefs, three counterpanes, one blanket, two pewter salt cellars,
six tin cups, and six metal tea spoons; he also brought 3s. 6d. given
to him by three different individuals. At the same time he told me that
it had been put into the heart of an individual to send to-morrow L100."


ONE THOUSAND POUNDS.

"June 15, 1837.--To-day I gave myself once more earnestly to prayer
respecting the remainder of the L1000. This evening L5 was given, so
that now the whole sum is made up. To the Glory of the Lord, whose I am,
and whom I serve, I would state again, that every shilling of this
money, and all the articles of clothing and furniture, which have been
mentioned in the foregoing pages, have been given to me, _without one
single individual having been asked by me for anything_."


ORPHANS FOR THE BUILDING.

In a third statement, containing the announcement of the opening of the
Orphan-House, for destitute female children, and a proposal for the
establishment of an Infant Orphan-House, which was sent to the press on
May 18, 1836, Mr. Mueller wrote:--

"So far as I remember, I brought even the most minute circumstances
concerning the Orphan-House before the Lord in my petitions, being
conscious of my own weakness and ignorance. There was, however, one
point I never had prayed about, namely that the Lord would send children;
for I naturally took it for granted that there would be plenty of
applications. The nearer, however, the day came which had been appointed
for receiving applications, the more I had a secret consciousness, that
the Lord might disappoint my natural expectations, and show me that I
could not prosper in one single thing without Him. The appointed time
came, and not even one application was made. I had before this been
repeatedly tried, whether I might not, after all, against the Lord's
mind, have engaged in the work. This circumstance now led me to lie low
before my God in prayer the whole of the evening, February 3, and to
examine my heart once more as to all the motives concerning it; and
being able, as formerly, to say, that His glory was my _chief aim_,
_i. e._, that it might be seen that it is not a vain thing to trust in
the living God,--and that my _second aim_ was the spiritual welfare of
the orphan-children,--and the _third_ their bodily welfare; and still
continuing in prayer, I was at last brought to this state, that I could
say _from my heart_, that I should rejoice in God being glorified in
this matter, though it were by _bringing the whole to nothing_. But as
still, after all, it seemed to me more tending to the glory of God, to
establish and prosper the Orphan-House, I could then ask Him heartily,
to send applications. I enjoyed now a peaceful state of heart concerning
the subject, and was also more assured than ever that God would
establish it. _The very next day_, February 4, the first application
was made, and since then 42 more have been made."


"JUST FOR TO-DAY."

Later on, when there were nearly 100 persons to be maintained, and the
funds were reduced to about L20, Mr. Mueller writes:--

"July 22 [1838].--This evening I was walking in our little garden,
meditating on Heb. xiii. 8, "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to-day,
and for ever." Whilst meditating on His unchangeable love, power, wisdom,
&c.--and turning all, as I went on, into prayer respecting myself; and
whilst applying likewise His unchangeable love, and power and wisdom,
&c., both to my present spiritual and temporal circumstances:--all at
once the present need of the Orphan-House was brought to my mind.
Immediately I was led to say to myself, Jesus in His love and power has
hitherto supplied me with what I have needed for the Orphans, and in the
same unchangeable love and power He will provide me with what I may need
for the future. A flow of joy came into my soul whilst realising thus
the unchangeableness of our adorable Lord. About one minute after, a
letter was brought me, enclosing a bill for L20. In it was written:
"Will you apply the amount of the enclosed bill to the furtherance of
the objects of your Scriptural Knowledge Society, or of your Orphan
Establishment, or in the work and cause of our Master in any way that
He Himself, on your application to Him, may point out to you. It is not
a great sum, but it is a sufficient provision for the exigency of
to-day; and it is for _to-day's_ exigencies, that, ordinarily, the Lord
provides. To-morrow, as it brings its demands, will find its supply,
etc."

"[Of this L20 I took L10 for the Orphan fund, and L10 for trip other
objects, and was thus enabled to meet the expenses of about L34 which,
in connection with the Orphan-Houses, came upon me within four days
afterwards, and which I knew beforehand would come.]"


WAITING FOR HELP.

"Nov. 21, 1838.--Never were we so reduced in funds as to-day. There was
not a single halfpenny in hand between the matrons of the three houses.
Nevertheless there was a good dinner, and by managing so as to help one
another with bread, etc., there was a prospect of getting over this day
also; but for none of the houses had we the prospect of being able to
take in bread. When I left the brethren and sisters at one o'clock,
after prayer, I told them that we must wait for help, and see how the
Lord would deliver us this time. I was sure of help, but we were indeed
straitened. When I came to Kingsdown, I felt that I needed more exercise,
being very cold; wherefore I went not the nearest way home, but round by
Clarence Place. About twenty yards from my house, I met a brother who
walked back with me, and after a little conversation gave me L10 to be
handed over to the brethren, the deacons, towards providing the poor
saints with coals, blankets and warm clothing; also L5 for the Orphans,
and L5 for the other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution.
The brother had called twice while I was gone to the Orphan-Houses, and
had I now been _one half minute_ later, I should have missed him. But
the Lord knew our need, and therefore allowed me to meet him. I sent off
the L5 immediately to the matrons."


BEYOND DISAPPOINTMENT.

"Sept. 21 [1840], Monday. By what was in hand for the Orphans, and by what
had come in yesterday, the need of to-day is more than supplied, as there
is enough for to-morrow also. To-day a brother from the neighbourhood of
London gave me L10, to be laid out as it might be most needed. As we
have been praying many days for the School,--Bible,--and Missionary
Funds, I took it all for them. This brother knew nothing about our work,
when he came three days since to Bristol. Thus the Lord, to show His
continued care over us, raises up new helpers. They that trust in the
Lord shall never be confounded! Some who helped for a while may fall
asleep in Jesus; others may grow cold in the service of the Lord; others
may be as desirous as ever to help, but have no longer the means; others
may have both a willing heart to help, and have also the means, but may
see it the Lord's will to lay them out in another way;--and thus, from
one cause or another, were we to lean upon man, we should surely be
confounded; but, in leaning upon the living God alone, we are _BEYOND
disappointment, and BEYOND being forsaken because of death_, or _want of
means_, or _want of love_, or _because of the claims of other work_. How
precious to have learned in any measure to stand with God alone in the
world, and yet to be happy, and to know that surely no good thing shall
be withheld from us whilst we walk uprightly!"


A GREAT SINNER CONVERTED.

In his REVIEW OF THE YEAR 1841, Mr. Mueller writes:--

"During this year I was informed about the conversion of one of the very
greatest sinners, that I ever heard of in all my service for the Lord.
Repeatedly I fell on my knees with his wife, and asked the Lord for his
conversion, when she came to me in the deepest distress of soul, on
account of the most barbarous and cruel treatment that she received from
him, in his bitter enmity against her for the Lord's sake, and because
he could not provoke her to be in a passion, and _she would not_ strike
him again, and the like. At the time when it was at its worst I pleaded
especially on his behalf the promise in Matthew xviii. 19: 'Again I say
unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching anything
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my father which is in
heaven.' And now this awful persecutor is converted."


PRAYER FOR SPIRITUAL BLESSING AMONG THE SAINTS.

"On May 25th, I began to ask the Lord for greater real spiritual
prosperity among the saints, among whom I labour in Bristol, than there
ever yet had been among them; and now I have to record to the praise of
the Lord that truly He has answered this request; for, considering all
things, at no period has there been more manifestation of grace and
truth, and spiritual power among us, than there is now while I am
writing this for the press (1845). Not that we have attained to what we
might; we are far, very far from it; but the Lord has been very, very
good to us, and we have most abundant cause for thanksgiving."


WITHHOLDING THE REPORT.

"Dec. 9 [1841].--To-day came in for the Orphans by the sale of stockings
10s. 10d.--We are now brought to the close of the sixth year of this
part of the work, _having only in hand the money which has been put by
for the rent_; but during the whole of this year we have been supplied
with all that was needed.

"During the last three years we had closed the accounts on this day, and
had, a few days after, some public meetings, at which, for the benefit
of the hearers, we stated how the Lord had dealt with us during the
year, and the substance of what had been stated at these meetings was
afterwards printed for the benefit of the church at large. This time,
however, it appeared to us better to delay for a while both the public
meetings and the publishing of the Report. Through grace we had learned
to lean upon the Lord only, being assured, that, if we were never to
speak or write one single word more about this work, yet should we be
supplied with means, as long as He should enable us to depend on Himself
alone. But whilst we neither had had those public meetings for the
purpose of exposing our necessity, nor had had the account of the Lord's
dealings with us published for the sake of working thereby upon the
feelings of the readers, and thus inducing them to give money, but only
that we might by our experience benefit other saints; yet it might have
appeared to some that, in making known our circumstances, we were
actuated by some such motives. What better proof, therefore, could we
give of our depending upon the living God alone, and not upon public
meetings or printed Reports, than that, _in the midst of our deep
poverty_, instead of being glad for the time to have come when we could
make known our circumstances, we still went on quietly for some time
longer, without saying anything. We therefore determined, as we sought
and still seek in this work to act for the profit of the saints
generally, to delay both the public meetings and the Report for a few
months. _Naturally_ we should have been, of course, as glad as anyone to
have exposed our poverty at that time; but _spiritually_ we were unable
to delight even then in the prospect of the increased benefit that might
be derived by the church at large from our acting as we did.

       *       *       *      *       *

"Dec. 18. Saturday morning. There is now the greatest need, and only 4d.
in hand, which I found in the box at my house; yet I fully believe the
Lord will supply us this day also with all that is required.--Pause a
few moments, dear reader! Observe two things! We acted _for God_ in
delaying the public meetings and the publishing of the Report; but _God's
way leads always into trial, so far as sight and sense are concerned_.
_Nature_ always will be tried _in God's ways_. The Lord was saying by
this poverty, 'I will now see whether you truly lean upon me, and
whether you truly look to me.' Of all the seasons that I had ever passed
through since I had been living in this way, _up to that time_, I never
knew any period in which my faith was tried so sharply, as during the
four months from Dec. 12, 1841, to April 12, 1842. But observe further:
We might even now have altered our minds with respect to the public
meetings and publishing the Report; _for no one knew our determination,
at this time_, concerning the point. Nay, on the contrary, we knew with
what delight very many children of God were looking forward to receive
further accounts. But the Lord kept us steadfast to the conclusion, at
which we had arrived under His guidance."


"HE ABIDETH FAITHFUL."

Under the date Jan. 25, 1842, Mr. Mueller writes:--

"Perhaps, dear reader, you have said in your heart before you have read
thus far: 'How would it be, suppose the funds for the Orphans were
reduced to nothing, and those who are engaged in the work had nothing of
their own to give, and a meal time were come, and you had no food for
the children.'

"Thus indeed it may be, for our hearts are desperately wicked. If ever
we should be so left to ourselves, as that either we depend no more upon
the living God, or that 'we regard iniquity in our hearts,' then such a
state of things, we have reason to believe, would occur. But so long as
we shall be enabled to trust in the living God, and so long as, though
falling short in every way of what we might be, and ought to be, we are
at least kept from living in sin, such a state of things cannot occur.
Therefore, dear reader, if you yourself walk with God, and if, on that
account, His glory is dear to you, I affectionately and earnestly
entreat you to beseech Him to uphold us; for how awful would be the
disgrace brought upon His holy name if we, who have so publicly made our
boast in Him, and have spoken well of Him, should be left to disgrace
Him, either by unbelief in the hour of trial, or by a life of sin in
other respects."


DELAYED BUT SURE.

"March 9 [1842].--At a time of the greatest need, both with regard to
the Day-Schools and the Orphans, so much so that we could not have gone
on any longer without help, I received this day L10 from a brother who
lives near Dublin. The money was divided between the Day-Schools and the
Orphan-Houses. The following little circumstance is to be noticed
respecting this donation:--As our need was so great, and my soul was,
through grace, truly waiting upon the Lord, I looked out for supplies in
the course of this morning. The post, however, was out, and no supplies
had come. This did not in the least discourage me. I said to myself, the
Lord can send means without the post, or even now, though the post is
out, by this very delivery of letters He may have sent means, though the
money is not yet in my hands. It was not long after I had thus spoken to
myself, when, according to my hope in God, we were helped; for the
brother who sent us the L10, had this time directed his letter to the
Boys' Orphan-House, whence it was sent to me."


"LIKE AS A FATHER."

"March 17.--From the 12th to the 16th had come in L4 5s. 11-1/2d. for
the Orphans. This morning our poverty, which now has lasted more or less
for several months, had become exceedingly great. I left my house a few
minutes after seven to go to the Orphan-Houses, to see whether there was
money enough to take in the milk, which is brought about eight o'clock.
On my way it was specially my request that the Lord would be pleased to
pity us, even as a father pitieth his children, and that He would not
lay more upon us than He would enable us to bear, I especially entreated
Him that He would now be pleased to refresh our hearts by sending us
help. I likewise reminded Him of the consequences that would result,
both in reference to believers and unbelievers, if we should have to
give up the work because of want of means, and that He therefore would
not permit of its coming to nought. I moreover again confessed before
the Lord that I deserved not that He should continue to use me in this
work any longer. While I was thus in prayer, about two minutes' walk
from the Orphan-Houses, I met a brother who was going at this early hour
to his business. After having exchanged a few words with him, I went on;
but he presently ran after me, and gave me L1 for the Orphans. Thus the
Lord speedily answered my prayer. Truly, it is worth being poor and
greatly tried in faith, for the sake of having day by day such precious
proofs of the loving interest which our kind Father takes in everything
that concerns us. And how should our Father do otherwise? He that has
given us the greatest possible proof of His love which He could have
done, in giving us His own Son, surely He will with Him also freely give
us all things."


TRUST IN THE LORD BETTER THAN MAN'S PROMISES.

"May 6 [1845].--About six weeks ago intimation was kindly given by a
brother that he expected a certain considerable sum of money, and that,
if he obtained it, a certain portion of it should be given to the Lord,
so that L100 of it should be used for the work in my hands, and the other
part for Brother Craik's and my own personal expenses. However, day
after day passed away, and the money did not come. I did not trust in
this money, yet, as during all this time, with scarcely any exception,
we were more or less needy, I thought again and again about this
brother's promise; though I did not, by the grace of God, trust in the
brother who had made it, but in the Lord. Thus week after week passed
away, and the money did not come. Now this morning it came to my mind,
that such promises ought to be valued, in a certain sense, as nothing,
_i. e._, that the mind ought never for a moment to be directed to them,
but to the living God, and to the living God only. I saw that such
promises ought not to be of the value of one farthing, so far as it
regards thinking about them for help. I therefore asked the Lord, when,
as usual, I was praying with my beloved wife about the work in my hands
that He would be pleased to take this whole matter, about that promise,
completely out of my mind, and to help me, not to value it in the
least, yea, to treat it as if not worth one farthing, but to keep my eye
directed only to Himself. I was enabled to do so. We had not yet
finished praying when I received the following letter:


     ----May 5, 1845

     Beloved Brother,

     Are your bankers still Messrs. Stuckey and Co. of Bristol, and
     are their bankers still Messrs. Robarts and Co. of London?
     Please to instruct me on this; and if the case should be so,
     please to regard this as a letter of advice that L70 are paid
     to Messrs. Robarts and Co., for Messrs. Stuckey and Co., for
     you. This sum apply as the Lord may give you wisdom. I shall
     not send to Robarts and Co. until I hear from you.

     Ever affectionately yours,
                                * * * *


"Thus the Lord rewarded at once this determination to endeavour not to
look in the least to that promise from a brother, but only to Himself.
But this was not all. About two o'clock this afternoon I received from
the brother, who had more than forty days ago, made that promise, L166
18s., as he this day received the money, on the strength of which he had
made that promise. Of this sum L100 are to be used for the work in my
hands, and the remainder for brother Craik's and my own personal
expenses."

Under date 1842 Mr. Mueller writes:--

"I desire that all the children of God, who may read these details, may
thereby be lead to increased and more simple confidence in God for
everything which they may need under any circumstances, and that these
many answers to prayer may encourage them to pray, particularly as it
regards the conversion of their friends and relatives, their own progress
in grace and knowledge, the state of the saints whom they may know
personally, the state of the church of God at large, and the success of
the preaching of the Gospel. Especially I affectionately warn them against
being led away by the device of Satan, to think that these things are
peculiar to me, and cannot be enjoyed by all the children of God; for
though, as has been stated before, every believer is not called upon to
establish Orphan-Houses, Charity Schools, etc., and trust in the Lord
for means; yet all believers are called upon, in the simple confidence
of faith, to cast all their burdens upon Him, to trust in Him for
everything, and not only to make every thing a subject of prayer, but to
expect answers to their petitions which they have asked according to His
will, and in the name of the Lord Jesus.--Think not, dear reader, that I
have _the gift of faith_, that is, that gift of which we read in 1 Cor.
xii. 9, and which is mentioned along with 'the gifts of healing,' 'the
working of miracles,' 'prophecy,' and that on that account I am able to
trust in the Lord. _It is true_ that the faith, which I am enabled to
exercise, is altogether God's own gift; it is true that He alone
supports it, and that He alone can increase it; it is true that, moment
by moment, I depend upon Him for it, and that, if I were only one
moment left to myself, my faith would utterly fail; but _it is not true_
that my faith is that gift of faith which is spoken of in 1 Cor. xii. 9
for the following reasons:--

"1. The faith which I am enabled to exercise with reference to the
Orphan-Houses and my own temporal necessities, is not that 'faith' of
which it is said in 1 Cor. xiii. 2 (evidently in allusion to the faith
spoken of in 1 Cor. xii. 9), 'Though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not charity (love), I am nothing'; but it is
the self-same faith which is found in _every believer_, and the growth
of which I am most sensible of to myself; for, by little and little, it
has been increasing for the last sixty-nine years.

"2. This faith which is exercised respecting the Orphan-Houses and my
own temporal necessities, shows itself in the same measure, for instance
concerning the following points: I have never been permitted to doubt
during the last sixty-nine years that my sins are forgiven, that I am a
child of God, that I am beloved of God, and that I shall be finally
saved; because I am enabled, by the grace of God, to exercise faith upon
the word of God, and believe what God says in those passages which
settle these matters (1 John v. 1--Gal. iii. 26--Acts x. 43--Romans x.
9, 10--John iii. 16, etc.).... Further, when sometimes all has been
dark, exceedingly dark, with reference to my service among the saints,
judging from natural appearances; yea, when I should have been
overwhelmed indeed in grief and despair, had I looked at things after
the outward appearance; at such times I have sought to encourage myself
in God, by laying hold in faith on His mighty power, His unchangeable
love, and His infinite wisdom, and I have said to myself: God is able
and willing to deliver me, if it be good for me; for it is written: "He
that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall
He not with Him also freely give us all things?" Rom. viii. 32. This,
this it was which, being believed by me through grace, kept my soul in
peace.--Further, when in connection with the Orphan-Houses, Day Schools,
etc., trials have come upon me which were far heavier than the want of
means when lying reports were spread that the Orphans had not enough to
eat, or that they were cruelly treated in other respects, and the like;
or when other trials, still greater, but which I cannot mention, have
befallen me in connexion with this work, and that at a time when I was
nearly a thousand miles absent from Bristol, and had to remain absent
week after week: at such times my soul was stayed upon God; I believed
His word of promise which was applicable to such cases; I poured out my
soul before God, and arose from my knees in peace, because the trouble
that was in the soul was in believing prayer cast upon God, and thus I
was kept in peace, though I saw it to be the will of God to remain far
away from the work.--Further, when I needed houses, fellow-labourers,
masters and mistresses for the Orphans or for the Day Schools, I have
been enabled to look for all to the Lord and trust in Him for
help.--Dear reader, I may seem to boast; but, by the grace of God, I do
not boast in thus speaking. From my inmost soul I do ascribe it to God
alone that He has enabled me to trust in Him, and that hitherto He has
not suffered my confidence in Him to fail. But I thought it needful to
make these remarks, lest anyone should think that my depending upon God
was a particular gift given to me, which other saints have no right to
look for; or lest it should be thought that this my depending upon Him
had _only to do with the obtaining of MONEY by prayer and faith_. By the
grace of God I desire that my faith in God should extend towards EVERY
thing, the smallest of my own temporal and spiritual concerns, and the
smallest of the temporal and spiritual concerns of my family, towards
the saints among whom I labour, the church at large, everything that has
to do with the temporal and spiritual prosperity of the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution, etc. Dear reader, do not think that I have
attained in faith (and how much less in other respects!) to that degree
to which I might and ought to attain; but thank God for the faith which
He has given me, and ask Him to uphold and increase it. And lastly, once
more, let not Satan deceive you in making you think that you could not
have the same faith but that it is only for persons who are situated as
I am. When I lose such a thing as a key, I ask the Lord to direct me to
it, and I look for an answer to my prayer; when a person with whom I have
made an appointment does not come, according to the fixed time, and I
begin to be inconvenienced by it, I ask the Lord to be pleased to hasten
him to me and I look for an answer; when I do not understand a passage
of the word of God, I lift up my heart to the Lord, that He would be
pleased, by His Holy Spirit to instruct me, and I expect to be taught,
though I do not fix the time when, and the manner how it should be; when
I am going to minister in the Word, I seek help from the Lord, and while
I, in the consciousness of natural inability as well as utter unworthiness
begin this His service, I am not cast down, but of good cheer, because I
look for His assistance, and believe that He, for His dear Son's sake
will help me. And thus in other of my temporal and spiritual concerns I
pray to the Lord, and expect an answer to my requests; and may not _you_
do the same, dear believing reader? Oh! I beseech you, do not think me
an extraordinary believer, having privileges above other of God's dear
children, which they cannot have; nor look on my way of acting as
something that would not do for other believers. Make but trial! Do but
stand still in the hour of trial, and you will see the help of God, if
you trust in Him. But there is so often a forsaking the ways of the Lord
in the hour of trial, and thus the _food of faith_, the means whereby
our faith may be increased, is lost. This leads me to the following
important point. You ask, How may I, a true believer, have my faith
strengthened? The answer is this:--

"I.--Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh
down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning." James i. 17. As the increase of faith is a good
gift, it must come from God, and therefore He ought to be asked for this
blessing.

"II.--The following means, however, ought to be used:--1, _The careful
reading of the word of God, combined with meditation on it._ Through
reading of the word of God, and especially through meditation on the
word of God, the believer becomes more and more acquainted with the
nature and character of God, and thus sees more and more, besides His
holiness and justice, what a kind, loving, gracious, merciful, mighty,
wise, and faithful Being He is, and, therefore, in poverty, affliction
of body, bereavement in his family, difficulty in his service, want of a
situation or employment, he will repose upon the _ability_ of God to
help him, because he has not only learned from His word that He is of
almighty power and infinite wisdom, but he has also seen instance upon
instance in the Holy Scriptures in which His almighty power and infinite
wisdom have been actually exercised in helping and delivering His
people; and he will repose upon the _willingness_ of God to help him,
because he has not only learned from the Scriptures what a kind, good,
merciful, gracious, and faithful being God is, but because he has also
seen in the word of God how, in a great variety of instances He has
proved Himself to be so. And the consideration of this, if _God has
become known to us through prayer and meditation on His own word_, will
lead us, in general at least, with a measure of confidence to rely upon
Him: and thus the reading of the word of God, together with meditation
on it, will be one especial means to strengthen our faith. 2, As with
reference to the growth of every grace of the Spirit, it is of the
utmost importance that we seek to maintain an upright heart and a good
conscience, and, therefore, do not knowingly and habitually indulge in
those things which are contrary to the mind of God, so it is also
particularly the case with reference to the _growth in faith_. How can I
possibly continue to act faith upon God, concerning anything, if I am
habitually grieving Him, and seek to detract from the glory and honour
of Him in whom I profess to trust, upon whom I profess to depend? All my
confidence towards God, all my leaning upon Him in the hour of trial
will be gone, if I have a guilty conscience, and do not seek to put away
this guilty conscience, but still continue to do the things which are
contrary to the mind of God. And if, in any particular instance, I
cannot trust in God, because of the guilty conscience, then my faith is
weakened by that instance of distrust; for faith with every fresh trial
of it either increases by trusting God, and thus getting help, or it
decreases by not trusting Him; and then there is less and less power of
looking simply and directly to Him, and a habit of self-dependence is
begotten or encouraged. One or the other of these will always be the
case in each particular instance. Either we trust in God, and in that
case we neither trust in ourselves, nor in our fellow-men, nor in
circumstances, nor in anything besides; or we DO trust in one or more of
these, and in that case do NOT trust in God. 3, If we, indeed, desire
our faith to be strengthened, we should not shrink from opportunities
where our faith may be tried, and, therefore, through the trial, be
strengthened. In our natural state we dislike dealing with God alone.
Through our natural alienation from God we shrink from Him, and from
eternal realities. This cleaves to us more or less, even after our
regeneration. Hence it is, that more or less, even as believers, we have
the same shrinking from standing with God alone,--from depending upon
Him alone,--from looking to Him alone:--and yet this is the very
position in which we ought to be, if we wish our faith to be
strengthened. The more I am in a position to be tried in faith with
reference to my body, my family, my service for the Lord, my business,
etc., the more shall I have opportunity of seeing God's help and
deliverance; and every fresh instance, in which He helps and delivers
me, will tend towards the increase of my faith. On this account,
therefore, the believer should not shrink from situations, positions,
circumstances, in which his faith may be tried; but should cheerfully
embrace them as opportunities where he may see the hand of God stretched
out on his behalf, to help and deliver him, and whereby he may thus
have his faith strengthened. 4, The last important point for the
strengthening of our faith is, that we let God work for us, when the
hour of the trial of our faith comes, and do not work a deliverance of
our own. Wherever God has given faith, it is given, among other reasons,
for the very purpose of being tried.

"Yea, however weak our faith may be, God will try it; only with this
restriction, that as in every way, He leads on gently, gradually,
patiently, so also with reference to the trial of our faith. At first
our faith will be tried very little in comparison with what it may be
afterwards; for God never lays more upon us that He is willing to enable
us to bear. Now when the trial of faith comes, we are naturally inclined
to distrust God, and to trust rather in ourselves, or in our friends, or
in circumstances.

"We will rather work a deliverance of our own somehow or other, than
simply look to God and wait for His help. But if we do not patiently
wait for God's help, if we work a deliverance of our own, then at the
next trial of our faith it will be thus again, we shall be again
inclined to deliver ourselves; and thus with every fresh instance of
that kind, our faith will decrease; whilst on the contrary, were we to
stand still, in order to see the salvation of God, to see His hand
stretched out on our behalf, trusting in Him alone, then our faith would
be increased, and with every fresh case in which the hand of God is
stretched out on our behalf in the hour of the trial of our faith, our
faith would be increased yet more.

"Would the believer, therefore, have his faith strengthened, he must
especially, _give time to God_, who tries his faith in order to prove to
His child, in the end, how willing He is to help and deliver him, the
moment it is good for him."

In the early years of the Institution Mr. Mueller and his fellow
labourers had to endure many severe trials of faith, as some of these
instances show.

Mr. Mueller when writing of this period says:--

"Though now (July, 1845) for about seven years our funds have been so
exhausted, that it has been a _rare_ case that there have been means in
hand to meet the necessities of more than 100 persons for _three days_
together; yet I have been only once tried in spirit, and that was on
September 18, 1838, when, for the first time the Lord seemed not to
regard our prayer. But when He did send help at that time, and I saw
that it was only for the trial of our faith, and not because He had
forsaken the work, that we were brought so low, my soul was so
strengthened and encouraged, that I have not only not been allowed to
distrust the Lord, but _I have not been even cast down when in the
deepest poverty_ since that time."


A GIFT OF L12.

"Aug. 20 [1838].--The L5 which I had received on the 18th. had been
given for house-keeping, so that to-day I was again penniless. But my
eyes were up to the Lord. I gave myself to prayer this morning, knowing
that I should want again this week at least L13, if not above L20.
To-day I received L12 in answer to prayer, from a lady who is staying at
Clifton, whom I had never seen before. Adorable Lord, grant that this
may be a fresh encouragement to me!"


A SOLEMN CRISIS.

Regarding one of the sharpest times of trial Mr. Mueller writes:--

"Sept. 10 [1838]. Monday morning. Neither Saturday nor yesterday had any
money come in. It appeared to me now needful to take some steps on
account of our need, _i. e._, to go to the Orphan-Houses, call the
brethren and sisters together, (who, except brother T----, had never
been informed about the state of the funds), state the case to them, see
how much money was needed for the present, tell them that amidst all
this trial of faith I still believed that God would help, and to pray
with them. Especially, also, I meant to go for the sake of telling them
that no more articles must be purchased than we have the means to pay
for, but to let there be nothing lacking in any way to the children as
it regards nourishing food and needful clothing; for I would rather at
once send them away than that they should lack. I meant to go for the
sake also of seeing whether there were still articles remaining which
had been sent for the purpose of being sold, or whether there were any
articles really needless, that we might turn them into money. I felt
that the matter was now come to a solemn crisis. About half-past nine
sixpence came in, which had been put anonymously into the box at Gideon
Chapel. This money seemed to me like an earnest, that God would have
compassion and send more. About ten, after I had returned from brother
Craik, to whom I had unbosomed my heart again, whilst once more in
prayer for help, a sister called who gave two sovereigns to my wife for
the Orphans, stating that she had felt herself stirred up to come and
that she had delayed coming already too long. A few minutes after, when
I went into the room where she was, she gave me two sovereigns more, and
all this without knowing the least about our need. Thus the Lord most
mercifully has sent us a little help, to the great encouragement of my
faith. A few minutes after I was called on for money from the Infant
Orphan-House, to which I sent L2, and L1 0s. 6d. to the Boys'
Orphan-House, and L1 to the Girls' Orphan-House."


A PRECIOUS DELIVERANCE.

"Sept. 17 [1838].--The trial still continues. It is now more and more
trying, even to faith, as each day comes. Truly, the Lord has wise
purposes in allowing us to call so long upon Him for help. But I am sure
God will send help, if we can but wait. One of the labourers had had a
little money come in of which he gave 12s. 6d.; another labourer gave
11s. 8d., being all the money she had left; this, with 17s. 6d., which,
partly, had come in, and, partly was in hand, enabled us to pay what
needed to be paid, and to purchase provisions, so that nothing yet, in
any way, has been lacking. This evening I was rather tired respecting
the long delay of larger sums coming; but being led to go to the
Scriptures for comfort, my soul was greatly refreshed, and my faith
again strengthened, by the xxxivth Psalm, so that I went very cheerfully
to meet with my dear fellow-labourers for prayer. I read to them the
Psalm, and sought to cheer their hearts through the precious promises
contained in it."

"Sept. 18.--Brother T. had 25s. in hand, and I had 3s. This L1 8s.
enabled us to buy the meat and bread, which was needed; a little tea for
one of the houses, and milk for all; no more than this is needed. Thus
the Lord has provided not only for this day; for there is bread for two
days in hand. Now, however, we are come to an extremity. The funds are
exhausted. The labourers, who had a little money, have given as long as
they had any left. Now observe how the Lord helped us! A lady from the
neighbourhood of London who brought a parcel with money from her
daughter, arrived four or five days since in Bristol, and took lodgings
next door to the Boys' Orphan-House. This afternoon she herself kindly
brought me the money, amounting to L3 2s. 6d. We had been reduced so
low as to be on the point of selling those things which could be spared;
but this morning I had asked the Lord, if it might be, to prevent the
necessity, of our doing so. That the money had been so near the
Orphan-Houses for several days without being given, is a plain proof
that it was from the beginning in the heart of God to help us; but
because He delights in the prayers of His children, He had allowed us to
pray so long; also to try our faith, and to make the answer so much the
sweeter. It is indeed a precious deliverance. I burst out into loud
praises and thanks the first moment I was alone, after I had received
the money. I met with my fellow-labourers again this evening for prayer
and praise; their hearts were not a little cheered. This money was this
evening divided, and will comfortably provide for all that will be
needed to-morrow."




CHAPTER II.

THE NEW ORPHAN HOUSES, ASHLEY DOWN.


A complaint having been received from a gentleman in October, 1845, that
some of the inhabitants of Wilson Street were inconvenienced by the
Orphan-Houses being in that street, Mr. Mueller ultimately decided for
that and other reasons, after much prayerful meditation, to build an
Orphan-House elsewhere to accommodate 300 children, and commenced to ask
the Lord for means for so doing:--

"Jan. 31 [1846].--It is now 89 days since I have been daily waiting upon
God about the building of an Orphan-House. The time seems to me now near
when the Lord will give us a piece of ground, and I told the brethren
and sisters so this evening, after our usual Saturday evening prayer
meeting at the Orphan-Houses.

"Feb. 1.--A poor widow sent to-day 10s.

"Feb. 2.--To-day I heard of suitable and cheap land on Ashley Down.

"Feb. 3.--Saw the land. It is the most desirable of all I have
seen.--There was anonymously put in an Orphan-box at my house a
sovereign, in a piece of paper, on which was written, 'The New
Orphan-House.'

"Feb. 4.--This evening I called on the owner of the land on Ashley Down,
about which I had heard on the 2nd, but he was not at home. As I,
however, had been informed that I should find him at his house of
business, I went there, but did not find him there either, as he had
_just before_ left. I might have called again at his residence, at a
later hour having been informed by one of the servants that he would be
sure to be at home about eight o'clock; but I did not do so, judging
that there was the hand of God in my not finding him at either place:
and I judged it best therefore not to force the matter, but to 'let
patience have her perfect work.'

"Feb. 5.--Saw this morning the owner of the land. He told me that he
awoke at three o'clock this morning and could not sleep again till five.
While he was thus lying awake, his mind was all the time occupied about
the piece of land, respecting which inquiry had been made of him for the
building of an Orphan-House, at my request; and he determined that if I
should apply for it, he would not only let me have it, but for L120 per
acre, instead of L200; the price which he had previously asked for it.
How good is the Lord! The agreement was made this morning, and I
purchased a field of nearly seven acres, at L120 per acre.

"Observe the hand of God in my not finding the owner at home last
evening! The Lord meant to speak to His servant first about this matter,
during a sleepless night, and to lead him _fully_ to decide, before I
had seen him."




"BECAUSE OF HIS IMPORTUNITY."

"Nov. 19 [1846].--I am now led more and more to importune the Lord to send
me the means, which are requisite in order that I may be able to commence
the building. Because (1) it has been for some time past publicly stated
in print, that I allow it is not without ground that some of the
inhabitants of Wilson Street consider themselves inconvenienced by the
Orphan-Houses being in that street, and I long therefore to be able to
remove the Orphans from thence as soon as possible. (2) I become more and
more convinced, that it would be greatly for the benefit of the children,
both physically and morally, with God's blessing, to be in such a position
as they are intended to occupy, when the New Orphan-House shall have been
built. And (3) because the number of very poor and destitute Orphans,
that are waiting for admission, is so great, and there are constantly
fresh applications made. Now whilst, by God's grace, I would not wish
the building to be begun one single day sooner than is His will; and
whilst I firmly believe, that He will give me, in His own time every
shilling which I need; yet I also know, that He delights in being
earnestly entreated, and that He takes pleasure in the continuance in
prayer, and in the importuning Him, which so clearly is to be seen from
the parable of the widow and the unjust judge, Luke xviii. 1-8. For
these reasons I gave myself again particularly to prayer last evening,
that the Lord would send further means, being also especially led to do
so, in addition to the above reasons, because there had come in but
little comparatively, since the 29th of last month. This morning, between
five and six o'clock I prayed again, among other points, about the
Building Fund, and then had a long season for the reading of the word of
God. In the course of my reading I came to Mark xi. 24, 'What things
soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them.' The importance of the truth contained in this portion
I have often felt and spoken about; but this morning I felt it again
most particularly, and, applying it to the New Orphan-House, said to the
Lord: 'Lord I believe that Thou wilt give me all I need for this work. I
am sure that I shall have all, because I believe that I receive in
answer to my prayer.' Thus, with the heart full of peace concerning this
work, I went on to the other part of the chapter, and to the next
chapter. After family prayer I had again my usual season for prayer with
regard to all the many parts of the work, and the various necessities
thereof, asking also blessings upon my fellow-labourers, upon the
circulation of Bibles and Tracts, and upon the precious souls in the
Adult School, the Sunday Schools, the Six Day Schools, and the four
Orphan-Houses. Amidst all the many things I again made my requests about
means for the Building. And now observe: About five minutes, after I had
risen from my knees, there was given to me a registered letter, containing
a cheque for L300, of which L280 are for the Building Fund, L10 for my
own personal expenses, and L10 for Brother Craik. The Lord's holy name
be praised for this precious encouragement, by which the Building Fund
is now increased to more than six thousand pounds."


MR. MUELLER'S FIRST ORPHAN-HOUSE.

"Jan. 25 [1847].--The season of the year is now approaching, when
building may be begun. Therefore with increased earnestness I have given
myself unto prayer, importuning the Lord that He would be pleased to
appear on our behalf, and speedily send the remainder of the amount
which is required, and I have increasingly, of late, felt that the time
is drawing near, when the Lord will give me all that which is requisite
for commencing the building. All the various arguments which I have
often brought before God, I brought also again this morning before Him.
It is now 14 months and 3 weeks since day by day I have uttered my
petitions to God on behalf of this work. I rose from my knees this
morning in full confidence, not only that God _could_, but also _would_,
send the means, and that soon. Never, during all these 14 months and 3
weeks, have I had the least doubt, that I should have all that which is
requisite.--And now, dear believing reader, rejoice and praise with me.
About an hour, after I had prayed thus, there was given to me the sum of
Two Thousand Pounds for the Building Fund. Thus I have received
altogether L9,285 3s. 9-1/2d. towards this work.--I cannot describe the
joy I had in God when I received this donation. It must be known from
experience, in order to be felt. 447 days I have had day by day to wait
upon God, before the sum reached the above amount. How great is the
blessing which the soul obtains by _trusting in God_, and _by waiting
patiently_. Is it not manifest how precious it is to carry on God's work
in this way, even with regard to the obtaining of means?"

The total amount which came in for the Building Fund was L15,784 18s. 10d.


ORPHAN-HOUSES NOS. 2 & 3.

"March 12, 1862.--It was in November, 1850, that my mind became
exercised about enlarging the Orphan Work from 300 Orphans to 1000, and
subsequently to 1150; and it was in June, 1851, that this my purpose
became known, having kept it secret for more than seven months, whilst
day by day praying about it. From the end of November, 1850, to this
day, March 12, 1862, not one single day has been allowed to pass,
without this contemplated enlargement being brought before God in
prayer, and generally more than once a day. But only now, this day, the
New Orphan-House No. 3 was so far advanced, that it could be opened.
Observe then, first, esteemed Reader, how long it may be, before a full
answer to our prayers, even to thousands and tens of thousands of
prayers, is granted; yea, though those prayers may be believing prayers,
earnest prayers, and offered up in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
though we may only for the sake of the honour of our Lord desire the
answer: for I did, by the grace of God, without the least doubt and
wavering look for more than eleven years for the full answer; * * * and
I sought only in this matter the glory of God."


PRAYING THREE TIMES DAILY FOR HELPERS.

"As in the case of No. 2, so also in the case of the New Orphan-House
No. 3, I had daily prayed for the needed helpers and assistants for the
various departments. Before a stone was laid, I began to pray for this;
and, as the building progressed, I continued day by day to bring this
matter before God, feeling assured, that, as in everything else, so in
this particular also, He would graciously be pleased to appear on our
behalf and help us, as the whole work is intended for His honour and
glory.

"At last the time was near when the house could be opened, and the time
therefore near when the applications, which had been made in writing
during more than two years previously, should be considered, for the
filling up of the various posts. It now, however, was found that, whilst
there had been about 50 applications made for the various situations,
some places could not be filled up, because either the individuals, who
had applied for them, were married, or were, on examination, found
unsuitable. This was no small trial of faith; for day by day, for years,
had I asked God to help me in this particular, even as He had done in
the case of the New Orphan-House No. 2; I had also expected help,
confidently expected help: and yet now, when help _seemed_ needed, it
was wanting. What was now to be done, dear Reader? Would it have been
right to charge God with unfaithfulness? Would it have been right to
distrust Him? Would it have been right to say, it is useless to pray? By
no means. This, on the contrary, I did; I thanked God for all the help,
He had given me in connection with the whole of the enlargement; I
thanked Him for enabling me to overcome so many and such great
difficulties; I thanked Him for the helpers He had given me for No. 2; I
thanked Him, also, for the helpers He had given me already for No. 3;
and instead of distrusting God, I looked upon this delay of the full
answer to prayer, only as a trial of faith, and therefore resolved,
that, instead of praying _once_ a day with my dear wife about this
matter, as we had been doing day by day for years, we should now meet
daily _three_ times, to bring this before God. I also brought the matter
before the whole staff of my helpers in the work requesting their
prayers. Thus I have now continued for about four months longer in
prayer, day by day calling upon God three times on account of this
need, and the result has been, that one helper after the other has been
given, without the help coming _too_ late, or the work getting into
confusion; or the reception of the children being hindered; and I am
fully assured, that the few who are yet needed will also be found, when
they are _really_ required."


DIFFICULTIES REMOVED AFTER PRAYER AND PATIENCE.

Mr. Mueller relates the following incidents in connection with the
purchase of the land for the Fourth and Fifth Orphan-Houses, after
receiving five thousand pounds for the Building Fund:

"I had now, through all that had come in since May 26th, 1864, including
this last-mentioned donation, above Twenty-Seven Thousand Pounds in
hand. I had patiently waited God's time. I had determined to do nothing,
until I had the full half of the sum needed for the two houses. But now,
having above Two Thousand Pounds beyond the half, I felt, after again
seeking counsel from God, quite happy, in taking steps for the purchase
of land.

"My eyes had been for years directed to a beautiful piece of land, only
separated by the turnpike road from the ground on which the New
Orphan-House No. 3 is erected. The land is about 18 acres, with a small
house and outhouses built on one end thereof. Hundreds of times had I
prayed, within the last years, that God for Jesus' sake would count me
worthy, to be allowed to erect on this ground two more Orphan-Houses;
and hundreds of times I had with a prayerful eye looked on this land,
yea, as it were, bedewed it with my prayers. I might have bought it
years ago; but that would have been going before the Lord. I had money
enough in hand to have paid for it years ago; but I desired patiently,
submissively, to wait God's own time, and for Him to mark it clearly and
distinctly that His time was come, and that I took the step according to
His will; for whatever I might apparently accomplish, if the work were
mine, and not the Lord's, I could expect no blessing. But now the Lord's
mind was clearly and distinctly made manifest. I had enough money in
hand to pay for the land and to build one house, and therefore I went
forward, after having still asked the Lord for guidance, and being
assured that it was His will I should take active steps. The first thing
I did was, to see the agent who acted for the owner of the land, and to
ask him, whether the land was for sale. He replied that it was, but that
it was let till March 25th, 1867. He said that he would write for the
price. Here a great difficulty at once presented itself, that the land
was let for two years and four months longer, whilst it appeared
desirable that I should be able to take possession of it in about six
months, viz., as soon as the conveyance could be made out, and the plans
be ready for the New Orphan-House No. 4, and arrangements be made with
contractors. But I was not discouraged by this difficulty; for I
expected, through prayer, to make happy and satisfactory arrangements
with the tenant, being willing to give him a fair compensation for
leaving before his time had expired. But, before I had time to see about
this, two other great difficulties presented themselves: the one was,
that the owner asked L7,000 for the land, which I judged to be
considerably more than its value; and the other, that I heard that the
Bristol Waterworks Company intended to make an additional reservoir for
their water, on this very land, and to get an Act of Parliament passed
to that effect.

"Pause here for a few moments, esteemed Reader. You have seen, how the
Lord brought me so far, with regard to pecuniary means, that I felt now
warranted to go forward; and I may further add, that I was brought to
this point as the result of thousands of times praying regarding this
object; and that there were, also, many hundreds of children waiting for
admission; and yet, after the Lord Himself so manifestly had appeared on
our behalf, by the donation of L5,000, He allows this apparent
death-blow to come upon the whole. But thus I have found it hundreds of
times since I have known the Lord. The difficulties, which He is pleased
to allow to arise, are only allowed, under such circumstances, for the
exercise of our faith and patience; and more prayer, more patience, and
the exercise of faith, will remove the difficulties. Now, as I knew the
Lord, these difficulties were no insurmountable difficulties to me, for
I put my trust in Him, according to that word: "The Lord also will be a
refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble. And they that
know Thy name will put their trust in Thee: for Thou, Lord, hast not
forsaken them that seek Thee." (Psalm ix. 9, 10). I gave myself,
therefore, earnestly to prayer concerning all these three especial
difficulties which had arisen regarding the land. I prayed several times
daily about the matter, and used the following means: 1. I saw the
Acting Committee of the Directors of the Bristol Waterworks Company
regarding their intended reservoir on the land, which I was about to
purchase, and stated to them, what I had seen in print concerning their
intentions. They courteously stated to me, that only a small portion of
the land would be required, not enough to interfere with my purpose; and
that, if it could be avoided, even this small portion should not be
taken. 2. This being settled, I now saw the tenant, after many prayers;
for I desired, as a Christian, that if this land were bought, it should
be done under amicable circumstances with regard to him. At the first
interview, I stated my intentions to him, at the same time expressing my
desire that the matter should be settled pleasantly with regard to
himself. He said that he would consider the matter, and desired a few
days for that purpose. After a week I saw him again, and he then kindly
stated, that, as the land was wanted for such an object, he would not
stand in the way; but that, as he had laid out a good deal on the house
and land, he expected a compensation for leaving it before his time was
up. As I, of course, was quite willing to give a _fair_ and _reasonable_
compensation, I considered this a very precious answer to prayer. 3. I
now entered upon the third difficulty, the price of the land. I knew
well how much the land was worth to the Orphan Institution; but its
value to the Institution was not the market value. I gave myself,
therefore, day by day to prayer, that the Lord would constrain the owner
to accept a considerably lower sum than he had asked; I also pointed out
to him why it was not worth as much as he asked. At last he consented to
take L5,500 instead of L7,000, and I accepted the offer; for I knew that
by the level character of the land we should save a considerable sum for
the two houses, and that by the new sewer, which only a few months
before had been completed, running along under the turnpike road near
the field, we should be considerably benefited. In addition to these two
points I had to take into the account, that we can have gas from
Bristol, as in the three houses already in operation. And lastly, the
most important point of all, the nearness of this piece of land to the
other three houses, so that all could easily be under the same direction
and superintendence. In fact, no other piece of land, near or far off,
would present so much advantage to us, as this spot, which the Lord thus
so very kindly had given to us. All being now settled, I proceeded to
have the land conveyed to the same trustees who stood trustees for the
New Orphan-Houses No. 1, No. 2, and No. 3.--I have thus minutely dwelt
on these various matters for the encouragement of the reader, that he
may not be discouraged by difficulties, however great and many and
varied, but give himself to prayer, trusting in the Lord for help, yea,
expecting help, which, in His own time and way, He will surely grant."


ORPHAN-HOUSES NOS. 4 & 5.

"March 5, 1874.--Both houses, No. 4 and No. 5, have now been for years
in operation, No. 4 since Nov. 1868 and No. 5 since the beginning of the
year 1870, and above 1,200 Orphans have been already received into them,
and month after month more are received, as the Orphans are sent out
from them as apprentices or servants. Moreover all the expenses in
connection with their being built, fitted up and furnished were met to
the full, as the demands arose, and, after all had been paid, there was
left a balance of several thousand pounds, which is being used for
keeping the houses in repair. See, esteemed Reader, how abundantly God
answered our prayers, and how plain it is, that we were not mistaken,
after we had patiently and prayerfully sought to ascertain His will. Be
encouraged, therefore, yet further and further to confide in the Living
God."




CHAPTER III

PRECIOUS ANSWERS TO PRAYER


In remarkable ways God helped Mr. Mueller as "The Narratives" show:--


THE ARTIST'S FIRST RETURN.

"April 30 [1859].--Received the following letter from a considerable
distance: 'My dear Christian Brother, I am the husband of Mrs. ---- who
sends you by this post the two Sovereign piece. How can we better
dispose of this relic of affectionate remembrance, than by depositing it
in the bank of Christ, who always pays the best interest, and never
fails.--Now, my best and spiritual counsellor, I cannot express to you
the exceeding great joy I feel, in relating what follows. I am an
artist, a _poor_ artist, a landscape painter. About two weeks ago I sent
a picture to Bristol for exhibition, just as I finished your book that
was lent us. I most humbly and earnestly prayed to God to enable me, by
the sale of my Bristol picture, to have the blessed privilege of sending
you _half the proceeds_. The price of the picture is L20. Now mark.
Immediately the exhibition is open, God, in His mercy, mindful of my
prayer, sends me a purchaser. I have exhibited in Bristol before, _but
never sold_ a picture. Oh! my dear friend, my very heart leaps for joy.
I have never been so near God before. Through your instrumentality I
have been enabled to draw nearer to God, with more earnestness, more
faith, more holy desires.--This is the _first return_ God has blessed me
with for the whole of my last year's labours. What a blessing to have it
so returned!--Oh, with what joy I read your book!--The picture I speak
of is now being exhibited in the academy of arts at Clifton, numbered in
the Catalogue ----, the title is ----. I cannot pay you till the close
of the exhibition, as I shall not be paid till then, &c.' Of such
letters I have had thousands during the last 40 years."


THE NORTH WIND CHANGED INTO A SOUTH WIND.

"It was towards the end of November of 1857, when I was most
unexpectedly informed that the boiler of our heating apparatus at No. 1
leaked very considerably, so that it was impossible to go through the
winter with such a leak.--Our heating apparatus consists of a large
cylinder boiler, inside of which the fire is kept, and with which boiler
the water pipes, that warm the rooms, are connected. Hot air is also
connected with this apparatus. The boiler had been considered suited for
the work of the winter. To suspect that it was worn out, and not to do
anything towards replacing it by a new one, and to have said, I will
trust in God regarding it, would be careless presumption, but not faith
in God. It would be the counterfeit of faith.

"The boiler is entirely surrounded by brickwork; its state, therefore,
could not be known without taking down the brickwork; this, if needless,
would be rather injurious to the boiler, than otherwise; and as for
eight winters we had had no difficulty in this way, we had not
anticipated it now. But suddenly, and most unexpectedly, at the
commencement of the winter, this difficulty occurred. What then was to
be done? For the children, especially the younger infants, I felt deeply
concerned, that they might not suffer, through want of warmth. But how
were we to obtain warmth? The introduction of a _new_ boiler would, in
all probability, take many weeks. The _repairing_ of the boiler was a
questionable matter, on account of the greatness of the leak; but, if
not, nothing could be said of it, till the brick-chamber in which it is
enclosed, was, at least in part, removed; but that would, at least, as
far as we could judge, take days; and what was to be done in the
meantime, to find warm rooms for 300 children? It naturally occurred to
me, to introduce temporary gas-stoves; but on further weighing the
matter, it was found, that we should be unable to heat our very large
rooms with gas, except we had many stoves, which we could not introduce,
as we had not a sufficient quantity of gas to spare from our lighting
apparatus. Moreover, for each of these stoves we needed a small chimney,
to carry off the impure air. This mode of heating, therefore, though
applicable to a hall, a staircase, or a shop, would not suit our
purpose. I also thought of the temporary introduction of Arnott's
stoves; but they would have been unsuitable, requiring long chimneys (as
they would have been of a temporary kind) to go out of the windows. On
this account, the uncertainty of their answering in our case, and the
disfigurement of the rooms, led me to give up this plan also. But what
was to be done? Gladly would I have paid L100, if thereby the difficulty
could have been overcome, and the children not be exposed to suffer for
many days from being in cold rooms. At last I determined on falling
entirely into the hands of God, who is very merciful and of tender
compassion, and I decided on having the brick-chamber opened, to see the
extent of the damage, and whether the boiler might be repaired, so as to
carry us through the winter.

"The day was fixed, when the workmen were to come, and all the necessary
arrangements were made. The fire, of course, had to be let out while the
repairs were going on. But now see. After the day was fixed for the
repairs a bleak North wind set in. It began to blow either on Thursday
or Friday before the Wednesday afternoon, when the fire was to be let
out. Now came the first really cold weather, which we had in the
beginning of that winter, during the first days of December. What was to
be done? The repairs could not be put off. I now asked the Lord for two
things, viz., that He would be pleased to change the north wind into a
south wind, and that He would give to the workmen 'a mind to work'; for
I remembered how much Nehemiah accomplished in 52 days, whilst building
the walls of Jerusalem, because 'the people had a mind to work.' Well,
the memorable day came. The evening before, the bleak north wind blew
still: but, on the Wednesday, the south wind blew: exactly as I had
prayed. The weather was so mild that no fire was needed. The brickwork
is removed, the leak is found out very soon, the boiler makers begin to
repair in good earnest. About half-past eight in the evening, when I was
going home, I was informed at the lodge, that the acting principal of
the firm, whence the boiler makers came, had arrived to see how the work
was going on, and whether he could in any way speed the matter. I went
immediately, therefore, into the cellar, to see him with the men, to
seek to expedite the business. In speaking to the principal of this, he
said in their hearing, 'the men will work late this evening, and come
very early again to-morrow.'

"'We would rather, Sir,' said the leader, 'work all night.' Then
remembered I the second part of my prayer, that God would give the men
'a mind to work.' Thus it was: by the morning the repair was
accomplished, the leak was stopped, though with great difficulty, and
within about 30 hours the brickwork was up again, and the fire in the
boiler; and all the time the south wind blew so mildly, that there was
not the least need of a fire.

"Here, then, is one of our difficulties which was overcome by prayer and
faith."


CONVERSION OF THE ORPHANS.

"May 26, 1860.--Day after day, and year after year, by the help of God,
we labour in prayer for the spiritual benefit of the Orphans under our
care. These our supplications, which have been for 24 years brought
before the Lord concerning them, have been abundantly answered, in
former years, in the conversion of hundreds from among them. We have,
also, had repeated seasons in which, within a short time, or even all at
once, _many_ of the Orphans were converted. Such a season we had about
three years since, when, within a few days, about 60 were brought to
believe in the Lord Jesus; and such seasons we have had again twice
during the first year. The first was in July, 1859, when the Spirit of
God wrought so mightily in one school of 120 girls, as that very many,
yea more than one-half, were brought under deep concern about the
salvation of their souls. This work, moreover, was not a mere momentary
excitement; but, after more than eleven months have elapsed, there are
31 concerning whom there is _full_ confidence as to their conversion,
and 32 concerning whom there is likewise a goodly measure of confidence,
though not to the same amount, as regarding the 31. There are therefore
63 out of the 120 Orphans in that one School who are considered to have
been converted in July, 1859. This blessed and mighty work of the Holy
Spirit cannot be traced to any particular cause. It was however, a most
precious answer to prayer. As such we look upon it, and are encouraged
by it to further waiting upon God. The second season of the mighty
working of the Holy Spirit among the Orphans, during the past year, was
at the end of January and the beginning of February, 1860. The
particulars of it are of the deepest interest; but I must content myself
by stating, that this great work of the Spirit of God in January and
February, 1860, began among the younger class of the children under our
care, little girls of about 6, 7, 8 and 9 years old; then extended to
the older girls; and then to the boys, so that within about 10 days
above 200 of the Orphans were stirred up to be anxious about their
souls, and in _many_ instances found peace _immediately_, through faith
in our Lord Jesus. They at once requested to be allowed to hold
prayer-meetings among themselves, and have had these meetings ever
since. Many of them also manifested a concern about the salvation of
their companions and relations, and spoke or wrote to them, about the
way to be saved."


APPRENTICING THE ORPHANS.

"In the early part of the summer, 1862, it was found that we had several
boys ready to be apprenticed; but there were no applications made by
masters for apprentices. As all our boys are invariably sent out as
indoor apprentices, this was no small difficulty; for we not only look
for Christian masters, but consider their business, and examine into
their position, to see whether they are suitable; and the master must
also be willing to receive the apprentice into his own family. Under
these circumstances, we again gave ourselves to prayer, as we had done
for more than twenty years before, concerning this thing, instead of
advertising, which, in all probability, would only bring before us
masters who desire apprentices for the sake of the premium. We
remembered how good the Lord had been to us, in having helped us
hundreds of times before, in this very matter. Some weeks passed, but
the difficulty remained. We continued, however, in prayer, and then one
application was made, and then another; and since we first began to pray
about this matter, last summer, we have been able to send out altogether
18 boys up to May 26, 1863; the difficulty was thus again entirely
overcome by prayer, as every one of the boys, whom it was desirable to
send out, has been sent out."


SICKNESS AT THE ORPHANAGE.

Sickness at times visited the houses.

"During the summer and autumn of 1866 we had also the measles at all the
three Orphan-Houses. After they had made their appearance, our especial
prayer was: 1. That there might not be too many children ill at one time
in this disease, so that our accommodation in the Infirmary rooms or
otherwise might be sufficient. This prayer was answered to the full; for
though we had at the New Orphan-House No. 1 not less than 83 cases, in
No. 2 altogether 111, and in No. 3 altogether 68; yet God so graciously
was pleased to listen to our supplications, as that when our spare rooms
were filled with the invalids, He so long stayed the spreading of the
measles till a sufficient number were restored, so as to make room for
others, who were taken ill. 2. Further we prayed, that the children, who
were taken ill in the measles, might be safely brought through and not
die. Thus it was. We had the full answer to our prayers; for though 262
children altogether had the measles, not one of them died. 3. Lastly we
prayed, that no evil physical consequences might follow this disease, as
is so often the case; this was also granted. All the 262 children not
only recovered, but did well afterwards. I gratefully record this signal
mercy and blessing of God, and this full and precious answer to prayer,
to the honour of His name."


HELP FOR NEEDY BRETHREN.

1863.--"The end of the year was now at hand, and, in winding up the
accounts, it was my earnest desire, to do once more all I could, in
sending help to needy labourers in the gospel. I went therefore through
the list, writing against the various names of those to whom I had not
already recently sent, what amount it appeared desirable to send; and I
found, when these sums were added together, the total was L476, but L280
was all I had in hand. I wrote therefore a cheque for L280, though I
would have gladly sent L476, yet felt thankful, at the same time, that I
had this amount in hand for these brethren. Having written the cheque,
as the last occupation of the day, then came my usual season for prayer,
for the many things which I daily, by the help of God, bring before Him;
and then again, I brought also the case of these preachers of the Gospel
before the Lord, and besought Him that He would even now be pleased to
give me yet a goodly sum for them, though there remained but three days
to the close of our year. This being done, I went home about nine
o'clock in the evening, and found there had arrived from a great
distance L100 for Missions, with L100 left at my disposal, and L5 for
myself. I took, therefore, the whole L200 for Missions, and thus had
L480 in hand to meet the L476 which I desired for this object. Those who
know the blessedness of really trusting in God, and getting help from
Him, as in this case, in answer to prayer, will be able to enter into
the spiritual enjoyment I had in the reception of that donation, in
which both the answer to prayer was granted, and with it the great
enjoyment of gladdening the hearts of many devoted servants of Christ."




THE HEART'S DESIRE GIVEN TO HELP MISSION WORK IN CHINA.

"Sept. 30 [1869].--From Yorkshire L50.--Received also One Thousand
Pounds to-day for the Lord's work in China. About this donation it is
especially to be noticed, that for months it had been my earnest desire
to do more than ever for Mission Work in China, and I had already taken
steps to carry out this desire, when this donation of One Thousand
Pounds came to hand. This precious answer to prayer for means should be
a particular encouragement to all who are engaged in the Lord's work,
and who may need means for it. It proves afresh, that, if our work is
His work, and we honour Him, by waiting upon and looking to Him for
means, He will surely, in His own time and way, supply them."


THE JOY OF ANSWERS TO PRAYER.

"The joy which answers to prayer give, cannot be described; and the
impetus which they afford to the spiritual life is exceedingly great.
The experience of this happiness I desire for all my Christian readers.
If you believe indeed in the Lord Jesus for the salvation of your soul,
if you walk uprightly and do not regard iniquity in your heart, if you
continue to wait patiently, and believingly upon God; then answers will
surely be given to your prayers. You may not be called upon to serve the
Lord in the way the writer does, and therefore may never have answers
to prayer respecting such things as are recorded here; but, in your
various circumstances, your family, your business, your profession, your
church position, your labour for the Lord, etc., you may have answers as
distinct as any here recorded."


THE GREAT NEED OF BEING SAVED BY FAITH IN CHRIST JESUS.

"Should this, however, be read by any who are not believers in the Lord
Jesus, but who are going on in the carelessness or self-righteousness of
their unrenewed hearts, then I would affectionately and solemnly beseech
such, first of all to be reconciled to God by faith in the Lord Jesus.
You are sinners. You deserve punishment. If you do not see this, ask God
to show it unto you. Let this now be your first and especial prayer. Ask
God also to enlighten you not merely concerning your state by nature,
but especially to reveal the Lord Jesus to your heart. God sent Him,
that He might bear the punishment, due to us guilty sinners. God accepts
the obedience and sufferings of the Lord Jesus, in the room of those who
depend upon Him for the salvation of their souls; and the moment a
sinner believes in the Lord Jesus, he obtains the forgiveness of all his
sins. When thus he is reconciled to God, by faith in the Lord Jesus, and
has obtained the forgiveness of his sins, he has boldness to enter into
the presence of God, to make known his requests unto Him; and the more
he is enabled to realize that his sins are forgiven, and that God, for
Christ's sake, is well pleased with those who believe on Him, the more
ready he will be to come with all his wants, both temporal and
spiritual, to his Heavenly Father, that He may supply them. But as long
as the consciousness of unpardoned guilt remains, so long shall we be
kept at a distance from God, especially as it regards prayer. Therefore,
dear reader, if you are an unforgiven sinner, let your first and
especial prayer be, that God would be pleased to reveal to your heart
the Lord Jesus, His beloved Son."


A DOUBLE ANSWER.

"July 25 [1865].--From the neighbourhood of London L100, with the
following letter: 'My dear Sir, I believe that it is through the Lord's
actings upon me, that I enclose you a cheque on the Bank of England,
Western Branch, for L100. I hope that your affairs are going on well.
Yours in the Lord * * * *.' This Christian gentleman, whom I have never
seen, and who is engaged in a very large business in London, had sent me
several times before a similar sum. A day or two before I received this
last kind donation, I had asked the Lord, that He would be pleased to
influence the heart of this donor to help me again, which I had never
done before regarding him; and thus I had the double answer to prayer,
in that not only money came in, but money from _him_. The reader will
now see the meaning in the donor's letter, when he wrote 'I believe
that it is through the Lord's actings upon me that I enclose you a
cheque, &c.' Verily it was the Lord who acted upon this gentleman, to
send me this sum. Perhaps the reader may think, that in acknowledging
the receipt of the donation, I wrote to the donor what I have here
stated. I did not. My reason for not doing so was, lest he should have
thought I was in especial need, and might have been thus influenced to
send more. In truly knowing the Lord, in really relying upon Him and
upon Him alone, there is no need of giving hints directly or indirectly,
whereby individuals may be induced further to help. I might have written
to the donor (as was indeed the case), I need a considerable sum day by
day for the current expenses of the various objects of the Institution,
and also might have with truth told him, at that time, that I yet needed
about Twenty Thousand Pounds, to enable me to meet all the expenses
connected with the contemplated enlargement of the Orphan work. But my
practice is, never to allude to any of these things in my correspondence
with donors. When the Report is published, every one can see, who has a
desire to see, how matters stand; and thus I leave things in the hands
of God, to speak for us to the hearts of His stewards. And this He does.
Verily we do not wait upon God in _!"


CHRISTIANS IN BUSINESS.

"Jan. 1 [1869].--From Scotland L50 for Missions, L25 for the circulation
of the Holy Scriptures and L25 for the circulation of Tracts. Received
also from a considerable distance L10 for these objects, with L10 for
the Orphans. About this latter donation I make a few remarks. At the
early part of the year 1868, a Christian business man wrote to me for
advice in his peculiar difficult business affairs. His letter showed
that he had a desire to walk in the ways of the Lord, and to carry on
his business to the glory of God; but his circumstances were of the most
trying character. I therefore wrote to him to come to Bristol, that I
might be able to advise him. Accordingly he undertook the long journey,
and I had an interview with him, through which I saw his most trying
position in business. Having fully conversed with him, I gave him the
following counsel: 1, That he should day by day, expressly for the
purpose, retire with his Christian wife, that they might unitedly spread
their business difficulties before God in prayer, and do this, if
possible, twice a day. 2, That he should look out for answers to his
prayers, and expect that God would help him. 3, That he should avoid all
business trickeries, such as exposing for sale two or three articles,
marked below cost price, for the sake of attracting customers, because
of its being unbecoming a disciple of the Lord Jesus to use such
artifices; and that, if he did so, he could not reckon on the blessing
of God. 4, I advised him further, to set apart; out of his profits, week
by week, a certain proportion for the work of God, whether his income
was much or little, and use this income faithfully for the Lord. 5,
Lastly, I asked him, to let me know, month after month, how the Lord
dealt with him.--The reader will feel interested to learn, that from
that time the Lord was pleased to prosper the business of this dear
Christian brother, so that his returns from the 1st of March, 1868, up
to March 1, 1869, were L9,138 13s. 5d., while during the same period the
previous year they had been only L6,609 18s. 3d., therefore L2,528 15s.
2d. more than the year before. When he sent me the donation above
referred to, he also writes, that he had been enabled to put aside
during the previous year L123 13s. 3d. for the work of God or the need
of the poor.--I have so fully dwelt on this, because Christians in
business may be benefited by it."


REVIVAL IN THE ORPHAN-HOUSES.

"In giving the statistics of the previous year [1871-72], I referred
already to the great spiritual blessing, which it pleased the Lord to
grant to the Orphan Work at the end of that year and the beginning of
this; but, as this is so deeply important a subject, I enter somewhat
further and more fully into it here. It was stated before, that the
spiritual condition of the Orphans generally gave to us great sorrow of
heart, because there were so few, comparatively, among them, who were in
earnest about their souls, and resting on the atoning death of the Lord
Jesus for salvation. This our sorrow led us to lay it on the whole
staff of assistants, matrons and teachers, to seek earnestly the Lord's
blessing on the souls of the children. This was done in our united
prayer meetings, and, I have reason to believe, in secret also; and in
answer to these our secret and united prayers, in the year 1872, there
were, as the result of this, more believers by far among the Orphans
than ever. On Jan. 8, 1872, the Lord began to work among them, and this
work was going on more or less afterwards. In the New Orphan-House No.
3, it showed itself least, till it pleased the Lord to lay His hand
heavily on that house, by the small-pox; and, from that time the working
of the Holy Spirit was felt in that house also, particularly in one
department. At the end of July, 1872, I received the statements of all
the matrons and teachers in the five houses, who reported to me, that,
after careful observation and conversation, they had good reason to
believe that 729 of the Orphans then under our care, were believers in
the Lord Jesus. This number of believing Orphans is by far greater than
ever we had, for which we adore and praise the Lord! See how the Lord
overruled the great trial, occasioned by the small-pox, and turned it
into a great blessing! See, also, how, after so low a state,
comparatively, which led us to prayer, earnest prayer, the working of
the Holy Spirit was more manifest than ever!"


MR. MUELLER'S MISSION TOURS.

In the year 1875, when seventy years of age, Mr. Mueller was led to start
on his Missionary Tours, and during the next twenty years preached to
more than three million people, in forty-two countries of the world.

"On August 8th, 1882," Mr. Mueller says, "we began our ninth Missionary
Tour. The first place at which I preached was Weymouth, where I spoke in
public four times. From Weymouth we went, by way of Calais and Brussels,
to Duesseldorf on the Rhine, where I preached many times six years
before. During this visit, I spoke there in public eight times.
Regarding my stay at Duesseldorf, for the encouragement of the reader, I
relate the following circumstance. During our first visit to that city,
in the year 1876, a godly City Missionary came to me one day, greatly
tried, because he had six sons, for whose conversion he had been praying
many years, and yet they remained unconcerned about their souls, and he
desired me to tell him what to do. My reply was, '_Continue_ to pray for
your sons, and _expect_ an answer to your prayer, and you will have to
praise God.' Now, when after six years I was again in the same city,
this dear man came to me and said he was surprised he had not seen
before himself what he ought to do, and that he had resolved to take my
advice and more earnestly than ever give himself to prayer. Two months
after he saw me, five of his six sons were converted within eight days,
and have for six years now walked in the ways of the Lord, and he had
hope that the sixth son also was beginning to be concerned about his
state before God. May the Christian reader be encouraged by this, should
his prayers not at once be answered; and, instead of ceasing to pray,
wait upon God all the more earnestly and perseveringly, and _expect_
answers to his petitions."


THE DIVINE PLAN FOR SENDING OUT FOREIGN MISSIONARIES.

The Bristol Church with which Mr. Mueller was connected has been
privileged to set an example to the Church of God of the way in which
Foreign Missionaries (who are so greatly needed) can be sent forth in
answer to prayer. Mr. Mueller writes on p. 516, Vol. I. of his
Narrative:--

"I also mention here, that during the eight years previous to my going
to Germany to labour there, it had been laid on my heart, and on the
hearts of some other brethren among us, to ask the Lord that he would be
pleased to honour us, as a body of believers, by calling forth from our
midst brethren, for carrying the truth into foreign lands. But this
prayer seemed to remain unanswered. Now, however, the time was come when
the Lord was about to answer it, and I, on whose heart particularly this
matter had been laid, was to be the first to carry forth the truth from
among us. About that very time the Lord called our dear brother and
sister Barrington from among us, to go to Demerara, to labour there in
connexion with our esteemed brother Strong, and our dear brother and
sister Espenett, to go to Switzerland. Both these dear brethren and
sisters left very shortly after I had gone to Germany. But this was not
all. Our much valued brother Mordal, who had commended himself to the
saints by his unwearied faithful service among us for twelve years, had
from Aug. 31, 1843, (the day on which brothers Strong and Barrington
sailed from Bristol for Demerara), his mind likewise exercised about
service there, and went out from among us eleven months after. He,
together with myself, had had it particularly laid upon his heart,
during the eight years previously, to ask the Lord again and again to
call labourers from among us for foreign service. Of all persons he, the
father of a large family, and about 50 years of age, seemed the least
likely to be called to that work; but God did call him. He went,
laboured a little while in Demerara, and then, on January 9, 1845, the
Lord took him to his rest.--When we ask God for a thing, such as that He
would be pleased to raise up labourers for His harvest, or send means
for the carrying on of His work, the honest question to be put to our
hearts should be this: Am _I_ willing to go, if He should call _me_? Am
_I_ willing to give according to _my_ ability? For we may be the very
persons whom the Lord will call for the work, or whose means He may wish
to employ."

In the Report of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution for 1896 Mr.
Mueller shows how greatly this body of believers has been honoured by
God.

"From our own midst, as a church sixty brethren and sisters have gone
forth to foreign fields of labour, some of whom have finished their
labour on earth; but there are still about forty yet engaged in this
precious service."

Why should not the great and crying need for workers in Asia, Africa,
and other parts of the world be thus met by thousands of churches in
Europe and America following this divine plan of praying the Lord of the
harvest that He would send forth labourers from among them?

Surely they may expect GOD to answer their prayers as He did the prayers
of this Bristol church.

Look what has been done in China by the faithful use of GOD'S method! We
quote Mr. Hudson Taylor's words as given in _China's Millions_ for July,
1897:--

"For the obtaining of fellow-workers we took the MASTER'S direction,
'Pray ye the LORD of the Harvest.' As for the first five before the
Mission was formed, so for the twenty-four for whom we first asked for
the C.I.M.; for further reinforcements when they were needed; for the
seventy in three years, for the hundred in one year, and for further
additions from time to time, we have ever relied on this plan. Is it
possible that in any other way such a band of workers from nearly every
denomination, and from many lands, could have been gathered and kept
together for thirty years with no other bond save that which the call of
GOD and the love of GOD has proved--a band now numbering over seven
hundred men and women, aided by more than five hundred native workers."


THE BEGINNING OF THE 1859 REVIVAL.

"In November, 1856, a young Irishman, Mr. James McQuilkin, was brought
to the knowledge of the Lord. Soon after his conversion he saw my
Narrative advertised, viz.: the first two volumes of this book. He had a
great desire to read it, and procured it accordingly, about January,
1857. God blessed it greatly to his soul, especially in showing to him,
what could be obtained by prayer. He said to himself something like
this: 'See what Mr. Mueller obtains simply by prayer. Thus I may obtain
blessing by prayer.' He now set himself to pray, that the Lord would
give him a spiritual companion, one who knew the Lord. Soon after he
became acquainted with a young man who was a believer. These two began a
prayer-meeting in one of the Sunday Schools in the parish of Connor.
Having his prayer answered in obtaining a spiritual companion, Mr. James
McQuilkin asked the Lord to lead him to become acquainted with some more
of His hidden ones. Soon after the Lord gave him two more young men, who
were believers previously, as far as he could judge. In Autumn, 1857,
Mr. James McQuilkin stated to these three young men, given him in
answer to believing prayer, what blessing he had derived from my
Narrative, how it had led him to see the power of believing prayer; and
he proposed that they should meet for prayer to seek the Lord's blessing
upon their various labours in the Sunday Schools, prayer-meetings, and
preaching of the Gospel. Accordingly in Autumn, 1857, these four young
men met together for prayer in a small school-house near the village of
Kells, in the parish of Connor, every Friday evening. By this time the
great and mighty working of the Spirit, in 1857, in the United States,
had become known, and Mr. James McQuilkin said to himself, 'Why may not
we have such a blessed work here, seeing that God did such great things
for Mr. Mueller, simply in answer to prayer.' On January 1, 1858, the
Lord gave them the first remarkable answer to prayer in the conversion
of a farm servant. He was taken into the number, and thus there were
five who gave themselves to prayer. Shortly after, another young man,
about 20 years old, was converted; there were now six. This greatly
encouraged the other three who first had met with Mr. James McQuilkin.
Others now were converted, who were also taken into the number; but only
believers were admitted to these fellowship meetings, in which they
read, prayed, and offered to each other a few thoughts from the
Scriptures. These meetings and others for the preaching of the Gospel
were held in the parish of Connor, Antrim, Ireland. Up to this time all
was going on most quietly, though many souls were converted, There were
no physical prostrations, as afterwards.

"About Christmas, 1858, a young man, from Ahoghill, who had come to live
at Connor, and who had been converted through this little company of
believers, went to see his friends at Ahoghill, and spoke to them about
their own souls, and the work of God at Connor. His friends desired to
see some of these converts. Accordingly Mr. James McQuilkin, with two of
the first who met for prayer, went on February 2, 1859, and held a
meeting at Ahoghill in one of the Presbyterian Churches. Some believed,
some mocked, and others thought there was a great deal of presumption in
these young converts; yet many wished to have another meeting. This was
held by the same three young men on February 16th, 1859; and now the
Spirit of God began to work, and to work mightily. Souls were converted,
and from that time conversions multiplied rapidly. Some of these
converts went to other places, and carried the spiritual fire, so to
speak, with them. The blessed work of the spirit of God spread in _many
places_.--On April 5th, 1859, Mr. James McQuilkin went to Ballymena,
held a meeting there in one of the Presbyterian Churches; and on April
11th held another meeting in another of the Presbyterian churches.
Several were convinced of sin and the work of the Spirit of God went
forward in Ballymena.--On May 28th, 1859, he went to Belfast. During the
first week there were meetings held in five different Presbyterian
Churches, and from that time the blessed work commenced at Belfast. In
all these visits he was accompanied and helped by Mr. Jeremiah Meneely,
one of the three young men who first met with him, after the reading of
my Narrative. From this time the work of the Holy Ghost spread further
and further; for the young converts were used by the Lord to carry the
truth from one place to another.

"Such was the _beginning_ of that mighty work of the Holy Spirit, which
has led to the conversion of hundreds of thousands; for some of my
readers will remember how in 1859 this fire was kindled in England,
Wales and Scotland; how it spread through Ireland, England, Wales and
Scotland; how the Continent of Europe was more or less partaking of this
mighty working of the Holy Spirit; how it led thousands to give
themselves to the work of Evangelists; and how up to the year 1874 not
only the effects of this work, first begun in Ireland, are felt, but
that still more or less this blessed work is going on in Europe
generally. It is almost needless to add, that in no degree the honour is
due to the instruments, but to the Holy Spirit alone; yet these facts
are stated, in order that it may be seen, what delight God has in
answering abundantly the believing prayer of His children."


MR. MUELLER'S MARRIAGE.

In Vol. 3 of The Narrative, Mr. Mueller shows the ordering of God in his
meeting with and subsequent marriage to his first wife, Miss Mary
Groves.

"In giving her to me, I own the hand of God; nay, His hand was most
marked; and my soul says, 'Thou art good, and doest good.'

"I refer to a few particulars for the instruction of others. When at the
end of the year 1829, I left London to labour in Devonshire in the
Gospel, a brother in the Lord gave to me a card, containing the address
of a well-known Christian lady, Miss Paget, who then resided in Exeter,
in order that I should call on her, as she was an excellent Christian. I
took this address and put it into my pocket, but thought little of
calling on her. Three weeks I carried this card in my pocket, without
making an effort to see this lady; but at last I was led to do so. This
was God's way of giving me my excellent wife. Miss Paget asked me to
preach the last Tuesday in the month of January, 1830, at the room which
she had fitted up at Poltimore, a village near Exeter, and where Mr. A.
N. Groves, afterwards my brother-in-law, had preached once a month,
before he went out as a Missionary to Bagdad. I accepted readily the
invitation, as I longed, everywhere to set forth the precious truth of
the Lord's return, and other deeply important truths, which not long
before my own soul had been filled with.

"On leaving Miss Paget, she gave me the address of a Christian brother,
Mr. Hake, who had an Infant Boarding School for young ladies and
gentlemen, at Northernhay House, the former residence of Mr. A. N.
Groves, in order that I might stay there on my arrival in Exeter from
Teignmouth. To this place I went at the appointed time. Miss Groves,
afterwards my beloved wife, was there; for Mrs. Hake had been a great
invalid for a long time, and Miss Groves helped Mr. Hake in his great
affliction, by superintending his household matters. My first visit led
to my going again to preach at Poltimore, after the lapse of a month,
and I stayed again at Mr. Hake's house; and this second visit led to my
preaching once a week in a chapel at Exeter; and thus I went, week after
week, from Teignmouth to Exeter, each time staying in the house of Mr.
Hake. All this time my purpose had been, not to marry at all, but to
remain free for travelling about in the service of the Gospel; but after
some months I saw, for many reasons, that it was better for me, as a
young Pastor, under 25 years of age, to be married. The question now
was, to whom shall I be united? Miss Groves was before my mind; but the
prayerful conflict was long, before I came to a decision; for I could
not bear the thought, that I should take away from Mr. Hake this valued
helper, as Mrs. Hake continued still unable to take the responsibility
of so large a household. But I prayed again and again. At last this
decided me, I had reason to believe that I had begotten an affection in
the heart of Miss Groves for me, and that therefore I ought to make a
proposal of marriage to her, however unkindly I might appear to act to
my dear friend and brother Mr. Hake, and to ask God to give him a
suitable helper to succeed Miss Groves. On Aug. 15th, 1830, I therefore
wrote to her, proposing to her to become my wife, and on Aug. 19th, when
I went over as usual to Exeter for preaching, she accepted me. The first
thing we did, after I was accepted, was, to fall on our knees, and to
ask the blessing of the Lord on our intended union. In about two or
three weeks the Lord, in answer to prayer, found an individual, who
seemed suitable to act as housekeeper, whilst Mrs. Hake continued ill;
and on Oct. 7, 1830, we were united in marriage. Our marriage was of the
most simple character. We walked to church, had no wedding breakfast,
but in the afternoon had a meeting of Christian friends in Mr. Hake's
house and commemorated the Lord's death; and then I drove off in the
stagecoach with my beloved bride to Teignmouth, and the next day we went
to work for the Lord. Simple as our beginning was, and unlike the habits
of the world, for Christ's sake, so our Godly aim has been, to continue
ever since. Now see the hand of God in giving me my dearest wife:--1st,
that address of Miss Paget's was given to me under the ordering of God.
2nd, I must at last be made to call on her, though I had long delayed
it. 3rd, She might have provided a resting-place with some other
Christian friend, where I should not have seen Miss Groves. 4th, My mind
might have at last, after all, decided, not to make a proposal to her;
but God settled the matter thus in speaking to me through my
conscience--you know that you have begotten affection in the heart of
this Christian sister, by the way you have acted towards her, and
therefore, painful though it may be, to appear to act unkindly towards
your friend and brother, you ought to make her a proposal. I obeyed. I
wrote the letter in which I made the proposal, and nothing but one even
stream of blessing has been the result.

"Let me here add a word of Christian counsel. To enter upon the marriage
union is one of the most deeply important events of life. It cannot be
too prayerfully treated. Our happiness, our usefulness, our living for
God or for ourselves afterwards, are often most intimately connected
with our choice. Therefore, in the most prayerful manner, this choice
should be made. Neither beauty, nor age, nor money, nor mental powers,
should be that which prompt the decision; but 1st, Much waiting upon God
for guidance should be used; 2nd, A hearty purpose, to be willing to be
guided by Him should be aimed after; 3rd, True godliness without a
shadow of doubt, should be the first and absolutely needful
qualification, to a Christian, with regard to a companion for life. In
addition to this, however, it ought to be, at the same time, calmly and
patiently weighed, whether, in other respects, there is a suitableness.

For instance, for an educated man to choose an entirely uneducated
woman, is unwise; for however much on his part love might be willing to
cover the defect, it will work very unhappily with regard to the
children."


DANGEROUS ILLNESS OF MR. MUELLER'S DAUGHTER.

"In July, 1853, it pleased the Lord to try my faith in a way in which
before it had not been tried. My beloved daughter and only child, and a
believer since the commencement of the year 1846, was taken ill on June
20th.

"This illness, at first a low fever, turned to typhus. On July 3rd there
seemed no hope of her recovery. Now was the trial of faith. But faith
triumphed. My beloved wife and I were enabled to give her up into the
hands of the Lord. He sustained us both exceedingly. But I will only
speak about myself. Though my only and beloved child was brought near
the grave, yet was my soul in perfect peace, satisfied with the will of
my Heavenly Father, being assured that He would only do that for her and
her parents, which in the end would be the best. She continued very ill
till about July 20th, when restoration began.

"On Aug. 18th she was so far restored that she could be removed to
Clevedon for change of air, though exceedingly weak. It was then 59 days
since she was first taken ill. * * * * * *

"Parents know what an only child, a beloved child is, and what to
believing parents an only child, a believing child must be. Well, the
Father in Heaven said, as it were, by this His dispensation, 'Art thou
willing to give up this child to me?' My heart responded, As it seems
good to Thee, my Heavenly Father. Thy will be done. But as our hearts
were made willing to give back our beloved child to Him who had given
her to us, so He was ready to leave her to us, and she lived. 'Delight
thyself also in the Lord; and He shall give thee the desires of thine
heart.' Psalm xxxvii. 4. The desires of my heart were, to retain the
beloved daughter if it were the will of God; the means to retain her
were to be satisfied with the will of the Lord.

"Of all the trials of faith that as yet I have had to pass through, this
was the greatest; and by God's abundant mercy, I own it to His praise, I
was enabled to delight myself in the will of God; for I felt perfectly
sure, that, if the Lord took this beloved daughter, it would be best for
her parents, best for herself, and more for the glory of God than if she
lived: this better part I was satisfied with; and thus my heart had
peace, perfect peace, and I had not a moment's anxiety. Thus would it be
under all circumstances, however painful, were the believer exercising
faith."


THE DAILY BREAD.

"Aug. 3, 1844. Saturday. With the 12s. we began the day. My soul said:
'I will now look out for the way in which the Lord will deliver us this
day again; for He will surely deliver. Many Saturdays, when we were in
need, He helped us, and so He will do this day also.' Between nine and
ten o'clock this morning I gave myself to prayer for means, with three
of my fellow-labourers, in my house. WHILST WE WERE IN PRAYER, there was
a knock at my room-door, and I was informed that a gentleman had come
to see me. When we had finished prayer, it was found to be a brother
from Tetbury, who had brought from Barnstaple L1 2s. 6d. for the
Orphans. Thus we have L1 14s. 6d., with which I must return the
letter-bag to the Orphan-Houses, looking to the Lord for more.

"Aug. 6.--Without _one single penny_ in my hands the day began. The post
brought nothing, nor had I yet received anything, when ten minutes after
ten this morning the letter-bag was brought from the Orphan-Houses, for
the supplies of to-day.--Now see the Lord's deliverance! In the bag I
found a note from one of the labourers in the Orphan-Houses, enclosing
two sovereigns, which she sent for the Orphans, stating that it was part
of a present which she had just received unexpectedly, for
herself.--Thus we are supplied for to-day.

"Sept. 4.--Only one farthing was in my hands this morning. Pause a moment,
dear reader! Only one farthing in hand when the day commenced. Think of
this, and think of nearly 140 persons to be provided for. You, poor
brethren, who have six or eight children and small wages, think of this;
and you, my brethren, who do not belong to the working classes, but have,
as it is called, very limited means, think of this! May you not do, what
we do, under your _trials_? Does the Lord love you less than He loves
us? Does He not love all His children with no less love than that, with
which He loves His only begotten Son, according to John xvii. 20-23? Or
are we better than you? Nay, are we not in ourselves poor miserable
sinners as you are; and have any of the children of God any claim upon
God, on account of their own worthiness? Is not that, which alone can
make us worthy to receive anything from our Heavenly Father, the
righteousness of the Lord Jesus, which is imputed to those who believe
in Him? Therefore, dear reader, as we pray in our every need, of
whatever character it may be, in connection with this work, to our
Father in Heaven for help, and as He does help us, so is He willing to
help all His children who put their trust in Him.--Well, let us hear
then, how God helped when there was only one farthing left in my hands,
on the morning of Sept. 4, 1844.

"A little after nine o'clock I received a sovereign from a sister in the
Lord, who does not wish the name of the place, where she resides,
mentioned. Between ten and eleven o'clock the bag was sent from the
Orphan-Houses, in which in a note it was stated that L1 2s. was required
for to-day. SCARCELY HAD I READ THIS, when a fly stopped before my
house, and a gentleman, Mr. ----, from the neighbourhood of Manchester,
was announced. I found that he was a believer, who had come on business
to Bristol. He had heard about the Orphan-Houses, and expressed his
surprise, that without any regular system of collections, and without
personal application to anyone, simply by faith and prayer, I obtained
L2,000 and more yearly for the work of the Lord in my hands. This
brother, whom I had never seen before; and whose name I did not even
know before he came, gave me L2, as an exemplification of what I had
stated to him."


"THE POOR WITH YOU ALWAYS."

"Feb. 12, 1845.--After I had sent off this morning the money which was
required for the housekeeping of to-day, I had again only 16s. 2-1/2d.
left, being only about one-fourth as much as is generally needed for one
day, merely for housekeeping, so that there was now again a fresh call
for trusting in the Lord. In the morning I met again, as usual, with my
dear wife and her sister, for prayer, to ask the Lord for many blessings
in connection with this work, and for means also.

"About one hour after, I received a letter from Devonshire, containing
an order for L22 of which L10 was for the Orphans, L2 for a poor brother
in Bristol, and L10 for myself.--Besides having thus a fresh proof of
the willingness of our Heavenly Father to answer our requests on behalf
of the Orphans, there is this, moreover, to be noticed. For many months
past, the necessities of the poor saints among us have been particularly
laid upon my heart. The word of our Lord: 'Ye have the poor with you
always,' and 'whensoever ye will ye may do them good,' has again and
again stirred me up to prayer on their behalf, and thus it was again in
particular this morning. It was the coldest morning we have had the
whole winter. In my morning walk for prayer and meditation I thought
how well I was supplied with coals, nourishing food, and warm clothing,
and how many of the dear children of God might be in need; and I lifted
up my heart to God to give me more means for myself, that I might be
able, by actions, to show more abundant sympathy with the poor believers
in their need; and it was but three hours after when I received this
L10 for myself."


THE LORD DIRECTING THE STEPS.

"Feb. 1, 1847.--Before breakfast I took a direction in my usual
morning's walk, in which I had not been for many weeks, feeling drawn in
that direction, just as if God had an intention in leading me in that
way. Returning home I met a Christian gentleman whom formerly I used to
meet almost every morning, but whom I had not met for many weeks,
because I had not been walking in that direction. He stopped me and gave
me L2 for the Orphans. Then I knew why I had been led thus; for there is
not yet enough in hand, to supply the matrons to-morrow evening with the
necessary means for house-keeping during another week.

"Feb. 4.--Yesterday nothing had come in. This morning, just before I was
going to give myself to prayer about the Orphans, a sister in the Lord
sent a sovereign, which she had received, as she writes, 'From a friend
who had met the Orphan Boys, and was particularly pleased with their
neat and orderly appearance.' After having received this L1, I prayed
for means for present use, though not confining my prayers to that.
About a quarter of an hour after I had risen from my knees, I received a
Setter, with an order for L5. The donor writes, that it is 'the proceeds
of a strip of land, sold to the railway company.' What various means
does the Lord employ to send us help, in answer to our prayers!"


CONTINUED TRIALS OF FAITH AND PATIENCE.

With the enlargement of the work, by which some 330 persons needed to be
provided for, the trials of faith continued. Mr. Mueller writes:--

"If we formerly had no certain income, so now have we none. We have to
look to God for everything in connection with the work, of which often,
however, the pecuniary necessities are the smallest matter; but to Him
we are enabled to look, and _therefore_ it is, that we are not
disappointed."

"Oct. 7, 1852.--This evening there was only L8 left in hand for the
current expenses for the Orphans. Hitherto we had generally abounded.
But though much had come in, since the commencement of this new period,
yet our expenses had been greater than our income, as every donation
almost of which the disposal was left with me, had been put to the
Building Fund. Thus the balance in hand on May 26, 1852, notwithstanding
the large income since then, was reduced to about L8. I therefore gave
myself particularly to prayer for means, that this small sum might be
increased.

"Oct. 9.--This morning Luke vii came in the course of my reading before
breakfast. While reading the account about the Centurion and the raising
from death the widow's son at Nain, I lifted up my heart to the Lord
Jesus thus: 'Lord Jesus, Thou hast the same power now. Thou canst
provide me with means for Thy work in my hands. Be pleased to do so.'
About half an hour afterwards I received L230 15s.

"The joy which such answers to prayer afford, cannot be described. I was
determined to wait upon God only, and not to work an unscriptural
deliverance for myself. I have thousands of pounds for the Building
Fund; but I would not take of this sum because it was once set apart for
that object. There is also a legacy of L100 for the Orphans two months
overdue, in the prospect of the payment of which the heart might be
naturally inclined to use some money of the Building Fund, to be
replaced by the legacy money, when it comes in; but I would not thus
step out of God's way of obtaining help. At the very time when this
donation arrived, I had packed up L100 which I happened to have in hand;
received for the Building Fund, in order to take it to the Bank, as I
was determined not to touch it, but to wait upon God. My soul does
magnify the Lord for His goodness.

"June 13, 1853.--We were now very poor. Not indeed in debt, nor was even
all the money gone; for there was still about L12 in hand; but then
there was needed to be bought flour, of which we buy generally 10 sacks
at a time, 300 stones of oatmeal, 4 cwt. of soap, and there were many
little repairs going on in the house, with a number of workmen, besides
the regular current expenses of about L70 per week. Over and above all
this, on Saturday, the day before yesterday, I found that the heating
apparatus needed to be repaired, which would cost in all probability
L25. It was therefore desirable, humanly speaking, to have L100 for
these heavy extra expenses, besides means for the current expenses.

"But I had no human prospect whatever of getting even 100 pence, much
less L100. In addition to this, to-day was Monday, when generally the
income is little. But, in walking to the Orphan-House this morning, and
praying as I went, I particularly told the Lord in prayer, that on this
day, though Monday, He could send me much. And thus it was. I received
this morning L301 for the Lord's service, as might be most needed.--The
joy which I had cannot be described. I walked up and down in my room for
a long time, tears of joy and gratitude to the Lord raining plentifully
over my cheeks, praising and magnifying the Lord for His goodness, and
surrendering myself afresh, with all my heart, to Him for His blessed
service. I scarcely ever felt more the kindness of the Lord in helping
me.

"Nov. 9.--Our need of means is now great, very great. The Lord tries our
faith and patience. This afternoon, a brother and sister in the Lord,
from Gloucestershire, called to see me at the New Orphan-House, before
going through the house. After a few minutes I received from the sister
a sovereign, which she had been requested to bring to me for the
Building Fund; and she gave me from herself L1 for my own personal
expenses, and L1 for the Building Fund, and her husband gave me L5 for
the Orphans, and L5 for Foreign Missions.

"Thus the Lord has refreshed my spirit greatly; but I look for more, and
need much more.

"Nov. 12.--This evening, while praying for means, came a little parcel,
containing ten sovereigns, from a Christian lady, living not far from
the New Orphan-House. This was a very great refreshment to my spirit.

"Oct. 17, 1854.--This morning at family prayer, came, in the course of
reading, Exodus v, which shows that, just before the deliverance of the
Israelites out of Egypt, their trials were greater than ever. They had
not only to make the same number of bricks as before, but also to gather
stubble, as no straw was given them any longer. This led me, in
expounding the portion, to observe that even now the children of God are
often in greater trial than ever, just before help and deliverance
comes. Immediately after family prayer it was found, that by the
morning's post not one penny had come in for the work of the Lord in
which I am engaged, though we needed much, and though but very little
had come in during the three previous days. Thus I had now to remember
Exodus v, and to practice the truths contained therein. In the course of
the day nothing was received. In the evening I had, as usual, a season
for prayer with my dear wife, respecting the various objects of the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution, and then we left the New Orphan-House
for our home.

"When we arrived at our house, about nine o'clock, we found that L5 and
also 5s. had been sent from Norwich in two Post Office Orders for the
Building Fund, and that L8 3s. 11d. had been sent in for Bibles, Tracts,
and Reports, which had been sold. This called for thanksgiving. But a
little later, between nine and ten o'clock, a Christian gentleman called
and gave me L1 for the Orphans and L200 for foreign missions. He had
received these sums from an aged Christian woman, whose savings as a
servant, during her WHOLE life, made up the L200, and who, having
recently had left to her a little annual income of about L30, felt
herself constrained, by the love of Christ, to send the savings of her
whole life for foreign missions. * * *

"Our especial prayer had been again and again, that the Lord would be
pleased to send in means for missionary brethren, as I had reason to
believe they were in much need of help; and only at eight o'clock this
evening I had particularly besought the Lord to send help for this
object. By the last mail I had sent off L40 to British Guiana, to help
seven brethren there in some measure. This amount took the last pound in
hand for this object. How gladly would I have sent assistance to other
brethren also, but I had no more. Now I am in some degree supplied for
this object.

"July 12, 1854.--Our means were now again reduced to about L30, as only
about L150 had come in since June 15. In addition to this, we had very
heavy expenses before us. This morning, in reading through the book of
Proverbs, when I came to chapter xxii. 19--'That thy trust may be in the
Lord, &c.,' I said in prayer to Him: 'Lord, I do trust in Thee; but wilt
Thou now be pleased to help me; for I am in need of means for the
current expenses of all the various objects of the Institution.' By the
first delivery of letters I received an order on a London bank for L100,
to be used for all the various objects 'as the present need might
require.'"


ARE YOU PREPARED FOR ETERNITY?

"In looking over my account books, I meet again and again with the name
of one and another who has finished his course. Soon, dear reader, your
turn and mine may come. Are you prepared for eternity? Affectionately I
press this question upon you. Do not put it away. Nothing is of greater
moment than this point; yea, all other things, however important in
their place, are of exceedingly small importance, in comparison with
this matter. Do you ask, how you may be prepared for eternity, how to be
saved, how to obtain the forgiveness of your sins? The answer is,
believe in the Lord Jesus, trust in Him, depend upon Him alone as it
regards the salvation of your soul. He was punished by God, in order
that we guilty sinners, if we believe in Him, might not be punished. He
fulfilled the law of God, and was obedient even unto death, in order
that we disobedient, guilty sinners, if we believe in Him, might, on His
account, be reckoned righteous by God. Ponder these things, dear reader,
should you have never done so before. Through faith in the Lord Jesus
alone can we obtain forgiveness of our sins, and be at peace with God;
but, believing in Jesus, we become, through this very faith, the
children of God; have God as our Father, and may come to Him for all the
temporal and spiritual blessings which we need. Thus everyone of my
readers may obtain answers to prayers, not only to the same extent that
we obtain them, but far more abundantly.

"It may be that few, comparatively, of the children of God are called to
serve the Lord in the way of establishing Orphan-Houses, &c.; but all of
them may, yea, are called upon to trust in God, to rely upon Him, in
their various positions and circumstances, and apply the word of God,
faith, and prayer to their family circumstances, their earthly
occupation, their afflictions and necessities of every kind, both
temporally and spiritually; just as we, by God's help, in some little
measure seek to apply the word of God, faith and prayer to the various
objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad.
Make but trial of it, if you have never done so before, and you will
see how happy a life it is. * * * *

"Truly I prefer by far this life of almost constant trial, if I am only
able to roll all my cares upon my Heavenly Father, and thus become
increasingly acquainted with Him, to a life of outward peace and
quietness, without these constant proofs of His faithfulness, His
wisdom, His love, His power, His over-ruling providence, &c."


WAITING ONLY UPON GOD.

"Sept 6, 1854.--Received from Clerkenwell L50 to be used one-half for
missions, and the other half as I thought best. I took the one-half for
the support of the Orphans, and find the following remark in my journal
respecting this donation: 'What a precious answer to prayer!' Since Aug.
26th we have been day by day coming to the Lord for our daily supplies.
Precious, also, on account of Missionary brethren, whom I seek to help,
for whom there was nothing in hand when this donation was received."

Mr. Mueller adds a few remarks to this part of the Narrative:--

"1. Should anyone suppose, on account of its having been stated in the
previous pages that we were repeatedly brought low as to means, that the
Orphans have not had all that was needful for them; we reply that
_never_, since the work has been in existence, has there a meal-time
come, but the Orphans have had good nourishing food in sufficient
quantity: and never have they needed clothes, but I have had the means
to provide them with all they required.

"2. Never since the Orphan work has been in existence have I asked one
single human being for any help for this work; and yet, unasked for,
simply in answer to prayer, from so many parts of the world, as has been
stated, the donations have come in, and that very frequently at a time
of the greatest need."

Mr. Mueller writes under date, 1859:--

"Every Wednesday evening I meet with my helpers for united prayer; and
day by day I have stated seasons, when I seek to bring the work with its
great variety of spiritual and temporal necessities, before the Lord in
prayer, having perhaps each day 50 or more matters to bring before Him,
and thus I obtain the blessing. I ask no human being for help concerning
the work. Nay, if I could obtain L10,000 through each application for
help; by God's grace, I would not ask. And why not? Because I have
dedicated my whole life cheerfully to the precious service of giving to
the world and to the church, a clear, distinct, and undeniable
demonstration, that it is a blessed thing to trust in, and to wait upon,
God; that He is now, as He ever was, the Living God, the same as
revealed in the Holy Scriptures, and that if we know and are reconciled
to Him through faith in the Lord Jesus, and ask Him in His name for that
which is according to His mind, He will surely give it to us, in His
own time, provided that we believe that He will. * * * * *

"Nor has God failed me at any time. Forty years have I proved His
faithfulness, in this work."


IN THE LORD JEHOVAH IS EVERLASTING STRENGTH.

Under date Nov. 9, 1861, Mr. Mueller wrote:--

"Nov. 9. Saturday evening. When this week commenced, I received only L3
19s. by the first delivery. Shortly after there came in the course of my
reading, through the Holy Scriptures, Isaiah xxvi, 4, 'Trust ye in the
Lord for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.'--I laid
aside my Bible, fell on my knees, and prayed thus: I believe that there
is everlasting strength in the Lord Jehovah, and I do trust in Him; help
me, O Lord, for ever to trust in Thee. Be pleased to give me more means
this day, and much this week, though only so little now has come
in.--That same day, Nov. 3rd, I received L10 from Surbiton, L5 from a
donor residing in Clifton, L2 from a Bristol donor, and in the course of
the week altogether L457 came in; thus Jehovah again proved, that in Him
is everlasting strength, and that He is worthy to be trusted.--Dear
believing reader, seek but in the same way to trust in the Lord, if you
are not in the habit of doing so already, and you will find as I have
found thousands of times, how blessed it is. But if the reader should be
yet going on in carelessness about his soul, and therefore be without
the knowledge of God and His dear Son, then the first, and most
important thing, such a one has to do, is to trust in the Lord Jesus for
the salvation of his soul, that he may be reconciled to God, and obtain
the forgiveness of his sins."


JESUS CHRIST, THE SAME YESTERDAY, AND TO-DAY, AND FOREVER.

"May 26, 1861.--At the close of the period I find, that the total
expenditure for all the various objects was L24,700 16s. 4d., or L67
13s. 5-3/4d. per day, all the year round. During the coming year I
expect the expenses to be considerably greater. But God, who has
helped me these many years, will, I believe, help me in future also.

"You see, esteemed reader, how the Lord, in His faithful love helped us
year after year. With every year the expenses increased, because the
operations of the Institutions were further enlarged; but He never
failed us. You may say, however, 'What would you do, if He should fail
in helping you?' My reply is, that cannot be, as long as we trust in Him
and do not live in sin. But if we were to forsake Him, the fountain of
living waters, and to hew out to ourselves broken cisterns, which cannot
hold water, by trusting in an arm of flesh; or if we were to live in
sin, we should then have to call upon Him in vain, even though we
professed still to trust in Him, according to that word: 'If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.' Psalm lxvi, 18.

"Hitherto, by God's grace, I have been enabled to continue to trust in
Him alone; and hitherto, though failing and weak in many ways, yet, by
God's grace, I have been enabled to walk uprightly, hating sin and
loving holiness, and longing after increased conformity to the Lord
Jesus.

"Oct. 21 1868--As the days come, we make known our requests to Him, for
our outgoings have now been for several years at the rate of more than
One Hundred Pounds each day; but though the expenses have been so great,
He has never failed us. We have indeed, as to the outward appearance,
like the 'Burning Bush in the Wilderness;' yet we have not been
consumed. Moreover, we are full of trust in the Lord, and therefore of
good courage, though we have before us the prospect, that, year by year,
our expenses will increase more and more. Did all my beloved fellow
disciples, who seek to work for God know the blessedness of looking
truly to God alone, and trusting in Him alone, they would soon see how
soul refreshing this way is, and how entirely beyond disappointment, so
far as He is concerned. Earthly friends may alter their minds regarding
the work in which we are engaged; but if indeed we work for God, whoever
may alter His mind regarding our service, He will not. Earthly friends
may lose their ability to help us, however much they desire so to do;
but He remains throughout eternity the infinitely Rich One. Earthly
friends may have their minds after a time diverted to other objects,
and, as they cannot help everywhere, much as they may desire it, they
may, though reluctantly, have to discontinue to help us; but He is able,
in all directions, though the requirements were multiplied a million
times, to supply all that can possibly be needed, and does it with
delight, where His work is carried on, and where He is confided in.
Earthly friends may be removed by death, and thus we may lose their
help, but He lives for ever, He cannot die. In this latter point of
view, I have especially, during the past 40 years, in connection with
this Institution, seen the blessedness of trusting in the Living God
alone. Not one nor two, nor even five nor ten, but many more, who once
helped me much with their means, have been removed by death; but have
the operations of the Institution been stopped on that account? No. And
how came this? Because I trusted in God, and in God alone."


THOROUGHLY IN HEART PREPARED FOR TRIALS OF FAITH.

Under date July 28, 1874, Mr. Mueller wrote:--

"It has for months appeared to me, as if the Lord meant, by His dealings
with us, to bring us back to that state of things, in which we were for
more than ten years, from August, 1838, to April, 1849, when we had day
by day, almost without interruption, to look to Him for our daily
supplies, and, for a great part of the time, from meal to meal. The
difficulties appeared to me indeed very great, as the Institution is
now twenty times larger, than it was then, and our purchases are to be
made in a wholesale way; but, at the same time, I am comforted by the
knowledge, that God is aware of all this; and that, if this way be for
the glory of His name, and for the good of His church and the
unconverted world, I am, by His grace, willing to go this way, and to do
it to the end of my course. The funds were thus fast expended; but God,
our infinitely rich Treasurer, remains to us. It is this which gives me
peace. Moreover, if it pleases Him, with a work requiring about L44,000
a year, to make me do again at the evening of my life, what I did from
August, 1838, to April, 1849, I am not only prepared for it, but gladly
again I would pass through all these trials of faith, with regard to
means, if He only might be glorified, and His church and the world be
benefited. Often and often this last point has of late passed through my
mind, and I have placed myself in the position of having no means at all
left, and Two Thousand and One Hundred persons not only daily at the
table, but with everything else to be provided for, and all funds gone;
189 Missionaries to be assisted, and nothing whatever left; about one
hundred schools, with about nine thousand scholars in them, to be
entirely supported, and no means for them in hand; about Four Millions
of Tracts and Tens of Thousands of copies of the Holy Scriptures yearly
now to be sent out, and all the money expended. Invariably, however,
with this probability before me, I have said to myself: 'God, who has
raised up this work through me, God who has led me generally year after
year to enlarge it, God who has supported this work now for more than
forty years, will still help, and will not suffer me to be confounded,
because I rely upon Him, I commit the whole work to Him, and He will
provide me with what I need, in future also, though I know not, whence
the means are to come.'

"Thus I wrote in my journal on July 28, 1874. The reader will now feel
interested in learning how we fared under these circumstances.

"When I came home, last evening (July 27), I found letters had arrived,
which contained L193, among which there was one from a Missionary in
Foreign lands, helped by the funds of this Institution, who, having come
into the possession of some money, by the death of a relative, sent L153
0s. 4d. for Foreign Missions. This morning, July 28, came in L24 more,
so that, when I met this afternoon with several of my helpers for prayer
for means and various other matters, such as spiritual blessing upon the
various Objects of the Institution, for more rain in this very dry
season, the health of our fellow-labourers, etc., we had received, since
yesterday afternoon, altogether L217. We thanked God for it, and asked
for more. When the meeting for prayer was over, there was handed to me a
letter from Scotland, containing L73 17s. 10d., and a paper with 13s.
This was the immediate answer to prayer for more means.

"Aug. 12.--The income for this whole week, since Aug. 5, has been L897
15s. 6-1/2d.

"Sept. 16.--Just after having again prayed for the payment of legacies,
which have been left, I had a legacy receipt sent for the payment of a
legacy for L1,800.

"Sept. 23.--Income to-day L5,365 13s. 6d., of which there was sent in
one donation L5,327 7s. 6d. The Lord be praised!"


STRONG IN FAITH, GIVING GLORY TO GOD.

On March 27, 1881, Mr. Mueller found that no money remained in hand for
the School, Bible, Missionary and Tract Funds. Nearly L1,400 had been
spent for these Objects during the previous month. He writes:--

"What was now to be done, dear reader, under these circumstances, when
all the money for the above Objects was again gone? I reply, we did what
we have done for 47 years, that is, we waited continually upon God. My
dear fellow-labourers in Bristol, and my dear wife and myself in
America, brought our necessities again and again before the Lord.

"Here in the United States, besides our habitual daily prayer for help,
we had especial seasons 4, 5, and 6 times a day additionally, for
pouring out our hearts before our Heavenly Father, and making known our
requests unto Him, being assured that help would come: and we have not
waited upon the Lord in vain. This plan may be despised by some,
ridiculed by others, and considered insufficient by a third class of
persons; but, under every trial and difficulty, we find prayer and faith
to be our universal remedy; and, after having experienced for half a
century their efficacy, we purpose, by God's help, to _continue_ waiting
upon Him, in order to show to an ungodly world, and to a doubting
Church, that the Living God is still able and willing to answer prayer,
and that it is the joy of His heart to listen to the supplications of
His children. In Psalm ix. 10, the Divine testimony regarding Jehovah
is, 'They that know thy name will put their trust in Thee.' We know Him,
by His grace, and do therefore put our trust in Him.

"April 27.--On March 27th we had no means at all in hand for these
Objects, as stated under that date. We have now been helped through one
more month, in answer to prayer, and have been supplied with all we
needed, though that amounted to nearly L1000, and have L23 8s. 6-1/4d.
left.

"April 29.--A servant of the Lord Jesus, who, constrained by the love of
Christ, seeks to lay up treasure in heaven, having received a legacy of
L532 14s. 5d., gave L500 of it for these Objects.

"July 28, 1881.--The income has been for some time past only about the
third part of the expenses. Consequently, all we have for the support of
the Orphans is nearly gone; and for the first four Objects of the
Institution we have nothing at all in hand. The natural appearance now
is, that the work cannot be carried on. But I BELIEVE that the Lord
will help, both with means for the Orphans and also for the other
Objects of the Institution, and that we shall not be confounded; also,
that the work shall not need to be given up. I am fully expecting help,
and have written this to the glory of God, that it may be recorded
hereafter for the encouragement of His children. The result will be
seen.

"The foregoing was written at 7 A. M. July 28, 1881. As yet we have the
means to meet our expenses, and I expect that we shall not be
confounded, though for seven years we have not been so poor."

The result has indeed been seen, and will be seen. For more than 20
years since those words were written and Mr. Mueller had thus recorded
his confidence in the Lord's help, God HAS sustained the work, and in
May, 1902, there was a balance in hand of some thousands of pounds,
notwithstanding that more than L500,000 had been received and expended
since this entry was made in Mr. Mueller's journal on July 28, 1881.

During these 20 years faith and patience were at times greatly tried:

"Aug. 15, 1881.--The balance for the Orphans is now reduced to L332 12s.
7d., lower than it has been for more than twenty-five years. This sum we
have in hand to meet the daily expenses in connection with 2,100
persons. It is only enough for the average outgoings of 4-1/2 days. But
our eyes are upon the Lord. I look to my heavenly Provider. The total
income of to-day has been L28 5s. 2-1/2d.

"Aug. 22.--Part of a legacy, left years ago, L1,000, was paid, as the
answer to many prayers.

"Feb. 26, 1882.--The balance in hand to-day for the Orphans is L97 10s.
7-1/2d., viz., L24 more than the average expenses of one single day.

"March 2.--Our position now regarding the Orphan work is, praying day by
day 'Give us _this day_ our _daily_ bread'. For a considerable time we
have had day by day to look to the Lord for the supply of our _daily_
wants; but God has helped us thus far.

"April 20, 1882.--When in the greatest need we received from Edinburgh
L100 with this statement: 'The enclosed was intended as a legacy, but I
have sent it in my lifetime.'

"June 3.--From Wottan-under-edge L500. A glorious deliverance was this
donation, and a precious earnest of what God would do further for us.

"Oct. 21.--Received from Wottan-under-edge L1,000. * * * * * God, in
answer to our prayers, spoke to His dear child, and inclined his heart
to send to us more than ever. Thus He also gives proof, that during the
previous year, when we were so low as to funds, it was only for the
trial of our faith and patience, and not in anger; nor did He thereby
mean to indicate, that He would not help us any more. For my own part, I
_expected_ further great help from God, and I have not been confounded.

"Aug. 17, 1883.--Our balance was reduced this afternoon to L10 2s. 7d.
Think of this, dear reader! Day by day about 2,100 persons are to be
provided for in the Orphan Institution, and L10 2s. 7d. was all that was
in hand to do this. You see that we are just in the same position in
which we were 46 years since as to funds. God is our banker. In Him we
trust, and on Him we draw by faith. This was Saturday. In the evening
L30 was received. On Monday we received L129 further, but had to pay out
L60. On Tuesday we received L295, but had to pay out L180. * * * * *

"God is pleased continually to vary His mode of dealing with us, in
order that we may not be tempted to trust in donors, or in
circumstances, but in Him alone, and to keep our eye fixed upon Him.
This, by His grace, we are enabled to do, and our hearts are kept in
peace."

Some ten months later, when the balance in hand was only L41 10s., a
very little more than one-half of the average expenses for the Orphans
for one day, and there were sanitary operations advisable to be carried
out, the expenses of which would amount to upwards of L2,000, Mr. Mueller
received a legacy of L11,034 6s.

"June 7, 1884.--This is the largest donation I have _ever_ received at
_one time_. This legacy had been above six years in Chancery, and year
after year its payment was expected, but remained unsettled by the
Chancery Court. I kept on praying, however, and for six years prayed day
by day that the money might be paid, believing that God in His own time
(_which is always the best_), would help at last; for _many_ legacies in
Chancery I had prayed out of the Court, and the money was eventually
paid. In the present case, too, after faith and patience had been
sufficiently exercised, God granted this request likewise."

1893.--In the Fifty-fourth Report of the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution Mr. Mueller says:--

"The readers of the last report will remember, under what particular
trials we entered upon the last financial year of the Institution, from
May 26th, 1892, to May 26th, 1893; but we trusted in _God_; with
unshaken confidence we looked to _Him_, and we _expected_ that we should
somehow or other be helped. * * While thus we went on, my heart was at
peace habitually, being assured that all this was permitted by God, to
prepare a blessing for thousands, who would afterwards read the record
of His dealings with us, during the year from May 26th, 1892, to May
26th, 1893. With reference to our dear fellow-labourers, Mr. Wright and
I have seen already, while passing through the trial, how God has
blessed it to them.

"Aug. 30, 1892.--This evening, whilst reading in the Psalms, I came to
Psalm lxxxi, 10, and remembered the work of the Holy Spirit in my heart,
when reading this verse on Dec. 5, 1835, and the effect which this had,
not only on leading me to found the greatest Orphan Institution in the
world, but I thought also of the blessing which has thus been brought to
tens of thousands of believers and unbelievers all over the world.
Putting aside the Bible, therefore, I fell on my knees and asked God
that He would graciously be pleased to repeat His former kindness, and
to supply me again more abundantly with means. Accordingly in less than
half an hour, I received L50 from a Bristol Donor and from Redland a
large quantity of fish, in addition to L97 already received to-day as
the result of much prayer. By the last delivery, at 9 p. m., I received
L5 more also, and had thus L152 in all, this day, as the result of
prayer.

"Nov. 11.--There came in to-day, by the first two deliveries, only about
L8, but the Lord increased the income to more than L200 this day. I am
never discouraged by very little only coming in, but say to myself, and
also to my dear helpers, 'More prayer, more patience, and more exercise
of faith will bring greater blessing'; for thus I have invariably found
it, since October, 1830, now 63 years ago, when I first began this life
of entire dependence upon God for everything.

"March 1, 1893.--The income during this week, ending to-day, was L92 8s.
8-3/4d. for the Orphans, and L9 11s. 2d. for the other Objects, being
about the sixth part of our weekly expenses; but now the great trial of
our faith was nearly brought to a close, as will presently be seen.

"March 4.--_This very day_ God begins to answer our prayers, as we have
received a very good offer for the land we have to sell, even L1,000 per
acre. The beginning of the day was darker as to outward appearances
than ever: but we trusted in God for help. The first three deliveries of
letters brought us only L4, and the remaining three brought us so little
that the whole day's income was only L8 instead of L90, the amount we
require every day to meet all our expenses. But God has now helped us.
We have been able this evening to sell ten acres of land and two-fifths
of an acre at L1,000 per acre, and shall receive L10,405 altogether for
the whole of one field. The contract was signed at 8 o'clock this
evening."


MR. MUELLER'S DEPARTURE TO BE WITH CHRIST.

On the evening of Wednesday, March 9th, 1898, Mr. Mueller took part in
the usual meeting for prayer held in the Orphan-House No. 3; retired at
his usual hour to rest, and early on the following morning (the 10th of
March) alone, in his bed-room, breathed his last, realizing what had
long been with him a most joyous anticipation, viz., that "to depart and
to be with Christ is far better."

March 14.--This day Mr. Mueller's earthly remains were laid in the grave
of his first and second wives, at Arno' Vale Cemetery. The attendant
circumstances, throughout, were very remarkable and interesting to the
Christian mind chiefly as illustrating God's eternal principle--"Them
that honour Me I will honour." The man who in life sought not his own
glory, became in death the one to whom all classes delighted to show
respect and honour.

From the masses of sympathizing spectators that lined the streets, from
the tearful eyes, and the audible prayerful ejaculations that escaped
the lips of bystanders (many of them the poorest of the poor), as the
orphans filed past, following the hearse; from the suspension of all
traffic in the principal streets, the tolling of muffled bells, and the
half-masted flags, and from the dense crowds in the cemetery that
awaited the arrival of the funeral company, it seemed as if the whole
city had spontaneously resolved to do honour to the man who had not
lived for himself, but for the glory of God and the good of his fellows.

For some 21 months before Mr. Mueller's death the trials of faith and
patience were great. Mr. James Wright, Mr. Mueller's successor, writes:

"He who is pleased, sometimes, to teach His servants 'how to _abound_,'
sees it _best_ for them, at other times 'to be instructed how to suffer
need.' For many of the 64 years during which this work has been carried
on, the former was our experience; we abounded and richly abounded,
latterly, and especially during the last 2 or 3 years it has been the
very reverse. _Pressing need_ has been the _rule_; a balance in hand,
over and above our need, the rare exception. Yet we have never been
forsaken."

"Sept. 23, 1897.--Residue of the legacy of the late G. J., Esq., L2,679
18s. 7d. This sum was received when we were in the _deepest need_; and
after it had pleased the Lord to allow a very protracted trial of faith
and patience; but see, beloved reader, He did not disappoint nor
forsake us, as He _never_ does those who really trust in Him. The _joy_
of _such_ a deliverance cannot be tasted without the experience of the
previous _trial_.

"Feb. 26, 1898.--The following entry, under this date, is in Mr.
Mueller's own hand-writing:

"The income to-day, by the two first deliveries, was L7 15s. 11d. Day by
day our great trial of faith and patience continues, and thus it has
been, more or less, now, for 21 months, yet, by Thy grace, we are
sustained."

March 1, 1898.--The following, again, is from a memorandum in Mr.
Mueller's own hand-writing, under this date:

"For about 21 months with scarcely the least intermission the trial of
our faith and patience has continued. Now, to-day, the Lord has
refreshed our hearts. This afternoon came in, for the Lord's work,
L1,427 1s. 7d. as part payment of a legacy of the late Mrs. E. C. S. For
3 years and 10 months this money had been in the Irish Chancery Court.
Hundreds of petitions had been brought before the Lord regarding it, and
now at last, this portion of the total legacy has been received."

Thus the Lord, in love and faithfulness, greatly refreshed the heart of
His servant, only nine days before taking him home to be with Himself.




APPENDIX A

FIVE CONDITIONS OF PREVAILING PRAYER


Entire dependence upon the merits and mediation of the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the only ground of any claim for blessing. (See John xiv. 13,
14; xv. 16, etc.)

2.--Separation from all known sin. If we regard iniquity in our hearts,
the Lord will not hear us, for it would be sanctioning sin. (Psalm lxvi.
18.)

3.--Faith in God's word of promise as confirmed by His oath. Not to
believe Him is to make Him both a liar and a perjurer. (Hebrews xi. 6;
vi. 13-20.)

4.--Asking in accordance with His will. Our motives must be godly: we
must not seek any gift of God to consume it upon our lusts. (1 John v.
14; James iv. 3.)

5.--Importunity in supplication. There must be waiting on God and
waiting for God, as the husbandman has long patience to wait for the
harvest. (James v. 7; Luke xviii. 1-8.)




APPENDIX B

THE CAREFUL AND CONSECUTIVE READING OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES


Concerning this subject Mr. Mueller says: "I fell into the snare, into
which so many young believers fall, the reading of religious books in
preference to the Scriptures. I could no longer read French and German
novels, as I had formerly done, to feed my carnal mind; but still I did
not put into the room of those books the best of all books. I read
tracts, missionary papers, sermons, and biographies of godly persons.
The last kind of books I found more profitable than others, and had they
been well selected, or had I not read too much of such writings, or had
any of them tended particularly to endear the Scriptures to me, they
might have done me much good.--I never had been at any time in my life
in the habit of reading the Holy Scriptures. When under fifteen years of
age, I occasionally read a little of them at school; afterwards God's
precious book was entirely laid aside, so that I never read one single
chapter of it, as far as I remember, till it pleased God to begin a work
of grace in my heart. Now the Scriptural way of reasoning would have
been: God himself has condescended to become an author, and I am
ignorant about that precious book, which His Holy Spirit has caused to
be written through the instrumentality of His servants, and it contains
that which I ought to know, and the knowledge of which will lead me to
true happiness; therefore I ought to read again and again this most
precious book, this book of books, most earnestly, most prayerfully, and
with much meditation; and in this practice I ought to continue all the
days of my life. For I was aware, though I read it but little, that I
knew scarcely anything of it. But instead of acting thus, and being led
by my ignorance of the word of God to study it more, my difficulty in
understanding it, and the little enjoyment I had in it, made me careless
of reading it (for much prayerful reading of the Word, gives not merely
more knowledge, but increases the delight we have in reading it); and
thus, like many believers, I practically preferred, for the first four
years of my divine life, the works of uninspired men to the oracles of
the living God. The consequence was, that I remained a babe, both in
knowledge and grace. In knowledge I say; for all _true_ knowledge must
be derived, by the Spirit, from the Word. And as I neglected the Word, I
was for nearly four years so ignorant, that I did not _clearly_ know
even the _fundamental_ points of our holy faith. And this lack of
knowledge most sadly kept me back from walking steadily in the ways of
God. For it is the truth that makes us free, (John viii. 31, 32,) by
delivering us from the slavery of the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of
the eyes, and the pride of life. The Word proves it. The experience of
the saints proves it; and also my own experience most decidedly proves
it. For when it pleased the Lord in Aug. 1829, to bring me really to the
Scriptures, my life and walk became very different. And though even
since that I have very much fallen short of what I might and ought to
be, yet, by the grace of God, I have been enabled to live much nearer to
Him than before.

"If any believers read this, who practically prefer other books to the
Holy Scriptures, and who enjoy the writings of men much more than the
word of God, may they be warned by my loss. I shall consider this book
to have been the means of doing much good, should it please the Lord,
through its instrumentality, to lead some of His people no longer to
neglect the Holy Scriptures, but to give them that preference, which
they have hitherto bestowed on the writings of men. My dislike to
increase the number of books would have been sufficient to deter me from
writing these pages, had I not been convinced, that this is the only way
in which the brethren at large may be benefited through my mistakes and
errors, and been influenced by the hope, that in answer to my prayers,
the reading of my experience may be the means of leading them to value
the Scriptures more highly, and to make them the rule of all their
actions. * * *

"If anyone should ask me, how he may read the Scriptures most
profitably, I would advise him, that:

"I.--Above all he should seek to have it settled in his own mind, that
God alone, by His Spirit, can teach him, and that therefore, as God will
be enquired of for blessings, it becomes him to seek God's blessing
previous to reading, and also whilst reading.

"II.--He should have it, moreover, settled in his mind, that, although
the Holy Spirit is the _best_ and _sufficient_ teacher, yet that this
teacher does not always teach immediately when we desire it, and that,
therefore, we may have to entreat Him again and again for the
explanation of certain passages; but that He will surely teach us at
last, if indeed we are seeking for light prayerfully, patiently, and
with a view to the glory of God.

"III.--It is of immense importance for the understanding of the word of
God, to read it in course, so that we may read every day a portion of
the Old and a portion of the New Testament, going on where we previously
left off. This is important--1, Because it throws light upon the
connection; and a different course, according to which one _habitually_
selects particular chapters, will make it utterly impossible ever to
understand much of the Scriptures. 2, Whilst we are in the body, we need
a change even in spiritual things; and this change the Lord has
graciously provided in the great variety which is to be found in His
word. 3, It tends to the glory of God; for the leaving out some
chapters here and there, is practically saying, that certain portions
are better than others: or, that there are certain parts of revealed
truth unprofitable or unnecessary. 4, It may keep us, by the blessing of
God, from erroneous views, as in reading thus regularly through the
Scriptures we are led to see the meaning of the whole, and also kept
from laying too much stress upon certain favourite views. 5, The
Scriptures contain the whole revealed will of God, and therefore we
ought to seek to read from time to time through the whole of that
revealed will. There are many believers, I fear, in our day, who have
not read even once through the whole of the Scriptures; and yet in a few
months, by reading only a few chapters every day they might accomplish
it.

"IV.--It is also of the greatest importance to meditate on what we read,
so that perhaps a small portion of that which we have read, or, if we
have time, the whole may be meditated upon in the course of the day. Or
a small portion of a book, or an epistle, or a gospel, through which we
go regularly for meditation, may be considered every day, without,
however, suffering oneself to be brought into bondage by this plan.

"Learned _commentaries_ I have found to store the _head_, with many
notions and often also with the truth of God; but when the _Spirit_
teaches, through the instrumentality of prayer and meditation, the
_heart_ is affected. The former kind of knowledge generally puffs up,
and is often renounced, when another commentary gives a different
opinion, and often also is found good for nothing, when it is to be
carried out into practice. The latter kind of knowledge generally
humbles, gives joy, leads as nearer to God, and is not easily reasoned
away; and having been obtained from God, and thus having entered into
the heart, and become our own, is also generally carried out."




APPENDIX C

PROVING THE ACCEPTABLE WILL OF GOD


It is very instructive and helpful to see the way in which Mr. Mueller
proved the acceptable will of the Lord, when exercised in heart about
the enlargement of the Orphan work, so that not only 300 but 1000
Orphans might be provided for.

"Dec. 11, 1850.--The especial burden of my prayer therefore is, that God
would be pleased to teach me His will. My mind has also been especially
pondering, how I could know His will satisfactorily concerning this
particular. Sure I am, that I shall be taught. I therefore desire
patiently to wait for the Lord's time, when He shall be pleased to shine
on my path concerning this point.

"Dec. 26.--Fifteen days have elapsed since I wrote the preceding
paragraph. Every day since then I have continued to pray about this
matter, and that with a goodly measure of earnestness, by the help of
God. There has passed scarcely an hour during these days, in which,
whilst awake, this matter has not been more or less before me. But all
without even a shadow of excitement. I converse with no one about it.
Hitherto have I not even done so with my dear wife. From this I refrain
still, and deal with God alone about the matter, in order that no
outward influence, and no outward excitement may keep me from attaining
unto a clear discovery of His will. I have the fullest and most peaceful
assurance, that He will clearly show me His will. This evening I have
had again an especial solemn season for prayer, to seek to know the will
of God. But whilst I continue to entreat and beseech the Lord, that He
would not allow me to be deluded in this business, I may say I have
scarcely any doubt remaining on my mind as to what will be the issue,
even that I should go forward in this matter.

"As this, however, is one of the most momentous steps that I have ever
taken, I judge that I cannot go about this matter with too much caution,
prayerfulness, and deliberation. I am in no hurry about it. I could wait
for years, by God's grace, were this His will, before even taking one
single step towards this thing, or even speaking to anyone about it;
and, on the other hand, I would set to work to-morrow, were the Lord to
bid me do so. This calmness of mind, this having no will of my own in
the matter, this only wishing to please my Heavenly Father in it, this
only seeking His and not my honour in it; this state of heart, I say, is
the fullest assurance to me that my heart is not under a fleshly
excitement, and that, if I am helped thus to go on, I shall know the
will of God to the full. But, while I write thus, I cannot but add at
the same time, that I do crave the honour and the glorious privilege to
be more and more used by the Lord. I have served Satan much in my
younger years, and I desire now with all my might to serve God, during
the remaining days of my earthly pilgrimage. I am forty-five years and
three months old. Every day decreases the number of days that I have to
stay on earth. I therefore desire with all my might to work. There are
vast multitudes of Orphans to be provided for. * * *

"I desire that thus it may be more abundantly manifest that God is still
the hearer and answerer of prayer, and that He is the living God now, as
He ever was and ever will be, when He shall, simply in answer to prayer,
have condescended to provide me with a house for 700 Orphans, and with
means to support them. This last consideration is the most important
point in my mind. The Lord's honour is the principal point with me in
this whole matter; and just because that is the case, if He would be
more glorified by my not going forward in this business, I should, by
His grace, be perfectly content to give up all thoughts about another
Orphan-House. Surely, in such a state of mind, obtained by the Holy
Spirit, Thou, O my Heavenly Father, will not suffer Thy child to be
mistaken, much less to be deluded! By the help of God I shall continue
further, day by day, to wait upon Him in prayer concerning this thing,
till He shall bid me act.

"Jan. 2, 1851.--A week ago I wrote the preceding paragraph. During this
week I have still been helped, day by day, and more than once every
day, to seek the guidance of the Lord about another Orphan-House. The
burden of my prayer has still been, that He, in His great mercy, would
keep me from making a mistake. During the last week the Book of Proverbs
has come, in the course of my Scripture reading, and my heart has been
refreshed, in reference to this subject, by the following passages:
'Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own
understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy
paths.' Prov. iii. 5, 6. By the grace of God I do acknowledge the Lord
in my ways, and in this thing in particular; I have therefore the
comfortable assurance that He will direct my paths concerning this part
of my service, as to whether I shall be occupied in it or not. Further:
'The integrity of the upright shall preserve them; but the perverseness
of fools shall destroy them.' Prov. xi. 3. By the grace of God I am
upright in this business. My honest purpose is to get glory to God.
Therefore I expect to be guided aright. Further: 'Commit thy works unto
the Lord and thy thoughts shall be established.' Prov. xvi. 3. I do
commit my works unto the Lord, and therefore expect that my thoughts
will be established.--My heart is more and more coming to a calm, quiet,
and settled assurance, that the Lord will condescend to use me yet
further in the Orphan Work. Here, Lord, is Thy servant!"

Mr. Mueller wrote down eight reasons against and eight reasons for
establishing another Orphan-House for Seven Hundred Orphans.

The following is his last reason for so doing:

"I am peaceful and happy, spiritually, in the prospect of enlarging the
work as on former occasions when I had to do so. This weighs
particularly with me as a reason for going forward. After all the calm,
quiet, prayerful consideration of the subject for about eight weeks, I
am peaceful and happy, spiritually, in the purpose of enlarging the
field. This, after all the heart searching which I have had, and the
daily prayer to be kept from delusion and mistake in this thing, and the
betaking myself to the Word of God, would not be the case, I judge, had
not the Lord purposed to condescend to use me more than ever in this
service.

"I, therefore, on the ground of the objections answered, and these eight
reasons FOR enlarging the work, come to the conclusion that it is the
will of the blessed God, that His poor and most unworthy servant should
yet more extensively serve Him in this work, which he is quite willing
to do."

"May 24.--From the time that I began to write down the exercises of my
mind on Dec. 5th, 1850, till this day, ninety-two more Orphans have been
applied for, and seventy-eight were already waiting for admission
before. But this number increases rapidly as the work becomes more and
more known.

"On the ground of what has been recorded above, I purpose to go forward
in this service, and to seek to build, to the praise and honour of the
living God, another Orphan-House, large enough to accommodate seven
hundred Orphans."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANSWERS TO PRAYER ***


******* This file should be named 25891.txt or 25891.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/8/9/25891



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

