Project Gutenberg's Fragments From France, by Captain Bruce Bairnsfather

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fragments From France

Author: Captain Bruce Bairnsfather

Release Date: July 2, 2008 [EBook #25951]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRAGMENTS FROM FRANCE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






_By Bruce Bairnsfather_

Bullets and Billets

Fragments from France

A Few Fragments from His Life




FRAGMENTS FROM FRANCE


BY

CAPTAIN BRUCE BAIRNSFATHER

AUTHOR OF "BULLETS AND BILLETS"


[Illustration]


          G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
          NEW YORK AND LONDON
          The Knickerbocker Press
          1917




FOREWORD

_By the Editor of "The Bystander."_


[Illustration: W]HEN Tommy went out to the great war, he went smiling,
and singing the latest ditty of the halls. The enemy scowled. War, said
his professors of kultur and his hymnsters of hate, could never be waged
in the Tipperary spirit, and the nation that sent to the front soldiers
who sang and laughed must be the very decadent England they had all
along denounced as unworthy of world-power.

I fear the enemy will be even more infuriated when he turns over the
pages of this book. In it the spirit of the British citizen soldier,
who, hating war as he hated hell, flocked to the colours to have his
whack at the apostles of blood and iron, is translated to cold and
permanent print. Here is the great war reduced to grim and gruesome
absurdity. It is not fun poked by a mere looker-on, it is the fun felt
in the war by one who has been through it.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN BRUCE BAIRNSFATHER.]

Captain Bruce Bairnsfather has stayed at that "farm" which is portrayed
in the double page of the book; he has endured that shell-swept "'ole"
that is depicted on the cover; he has watched the disappearance of that
"blinkin' parapet" shown on one page; has had his hair cut under fire as
shown on another. And having been through it all, he has just put down
what he has seen and heard and felt and smelt and--laughed at.

Captain Bairnsfather went to the front in no mood of a "chiel takin'
notes." It was the notes that took him. Before the war, some time a
regular soldier, some time an engineer, he had little other idea than to
sketch for mischief, on walls and shirt cuffs, and tablecloths. Without
the war he might never have put pencil to paper for publication. But the
war insisted.

It is not for his mere editor to forecast his vogue in posterity.
Naturally I hope it will be a lasting one, but I am prejudiced. Let me,
however, quote a letter which reached Captain Bairnsfather from
somewhere in France:

          "Twenty years after peace has been declared there
          will be no more potent stimulus to the
          recollections of an old soldier than your
          admirable sketches of trench life. May I, with all
          deference, congratulate you on your humour, your
          fidelity, your something-else not easily
          defined--I mean your power of expressing in black
          and white a condition of mind."

I hope that this forecast is a true one. If this sketch book is worthy
to outlast the days of the war, and to be kept for remembrance on the
shelves of those who have lived through it, it will have done its bit.
For will it not be a standing reminder of the _ingloriousness_ of war,
its preposterous absurdity, and of its futility as a means of settling
the affairs of nations?

When the ardent Jingo of the day after to-morrow rattles the sabre, let
there be somewhere handy a copy of "Fragments from France" that can be
opened in front of him, at any page, just to remind him of what war is
really like as it is fought in "civilised" times.

Captain Bairnsfather has become a household word--or perhaps one should
say a trench-hold word. Who is ever the worse for a laugh? Certainly not
the soldier in trench or dug-out or shell-swept billet. Rather may it be
said that the Bairnsfather laughter has acted in thousands of cases as
an antidote to the bane of depression. It is the good fortune of the
British Army to possess such an antidote, and the ill-fortune of the
other belligerents that they do not possess its equivalent.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN BRUCE BAIRNSFATHER

This picture was taken at the Front, less than a quarter of a mile from
the German trenches. Captain Bairnsfather has come "straight off the
mud," and is wearing a fur coat, a Balaclava helmet, and gum boots.
Immediately behind him is a hole made by a "Jack Johnson" shell.]

A Scots officer, writing in the _Edinburgh Evening News_, hits the true
sentiment towards Bairnsfather of the Army in France when he writes:

          "To us out here the 'Fragments' are the very
          quintessence of life. We sit moping over a smoky
          charcoal fire in a dug-out. Suddenly someone, more
          wide-awake than others remembers the 'Fragments.'
          Out it comes, and we laugh uproariously over each
          picture. For are these not the very things we are
          witnessing every day, incidents full of tragic
          humour? The fed-up spirit you see on the faces of
          Bairnsfather's pictures is a sham--a mask beneath
          which there lies something that is essentially
          British."

[Illustration]

In a communication received by Captain Bairnsfather an eminent Member of
Parliament writes: "You are rising to be a factor in the situation, just
as Gillray was a factor in the Napoleonic wars." The difference is,
however, that instead of turning his satire exclusively upon the enemy,
as did Gillray, Captain Bairnsfather turns his--good-humouredly
always--on his fellow-warriors. This habit of ours of making fun of
ourselves has come by now to be fairly well understood by even the most
sensitive and serious-minded of our continental friends and neighbours.
It hardly needs nowadays to be pointed out that it is a fixed condition
of the national life that wherever Britons are working together in any
common object, whether in school, college, profession, or even warfare,
they must never _appear_ to be regarding their occupation too seriously.
Those who know us--and who, nowadays, has the excuse for not knowing us,
seeing how very much we have been discussed?--understand that our
frivolity is apparent and not real. Because we have the gift of
laughter, we are no less appreciative of grim realities than are our
scowling enemies, and nobody knows that better in these days than those
scowling enemies themselves.

Their hymns of hate and prayers for punishment have been impotent
expressions of exasperation at our coolness, deliberation, and
inflexible determination--qualities they had deluded themselves before
the war into believing would prove all a sham before the first blast of
frightfulness. They told themselves that, a war once actually begun, the
imperturbable pipe-smoking John Bull would be transformed into a
cowering craven. More complete confusion of this false belief is nowhere
to be found than in these "Fragments." It ranks as a colossal German
defeat that successive bloodthirsty assaults upon us by land, sea, and
air should produce a Bairnsfather, depicting the "contemptible little
Army," swollen out of all recognition, settling humorously down to war
as though it were the normal business of life.

"Fed up"? Yes, that is the word by which to describe, if you like, the
prevalent Bairnsfather expression of countenance. But the kind of
weariness he depicts is the reverse of the kind that implies "give up."
_Au contraire, mes amis!_ The "fed-up" Bairnsfather man is a fixture.
"_J'y suis_," he might exclaim, if he spoke French, "_et il m'embete que
j'y suis. Je voudrais que je n'y sois pas. Mais j'y suis, et, mes bons
camarades, par tous les dieux, j'y reste!_"

If the enemy should read in the words "fed up" a sign that our tenacity
is giving out, he reads it wrong; grim will be the disillusionment of
any hopes he may build upon his misreading, and even grimmer the anger
of those whom he may have deluded.

These _verdammte Englaender_ are never what they seem, but are always
something unpleasantly different. We are the Great Enigma of the war,
and in our mystery lies our greatest strength. Let us be careful not to
lose it. Those who would have us simplify ourselves upon the continental
model, and present to the world a picture of sombre seriousness, are
asking us to change our national character. Cromwell asked the painter
to paint him, "warts and all." Bairnsfather sketches us--smiles and all.
And who would take the smiles off the "dials" of the figures you will
see on the pages that follow?

[Illustration: Where to Live--[ADVT.]

IN ONE OF THE CHOICEST LOCALITIES OF NORTHERN FRANCE.

TO BE LET (three minutes from German trenches), this attractive and

          WELL-BUILT DUG-OUT,

containing one reception-kitchen-bedroom and UP-TO-DATE FUNK HOLE (4ft.
by 6ft.), all modern inconveniences, including gas and water. This
desirable Residence stands one foot above water level, commanding an
excellent view of the enemy trenches.

          EXCELLENT SHOOTING (SNIPE AND DUCK).

--Particulars of the late Tenant, Room 6, Base Hospital, Bonlog c.]


[Illustration: "Where did that one go to?"]


[Illustration:

          What is this slimy dismal hole
          Where oft I'm lurking like a mole
          And cursing Germans heart and soul?
                              My Dug-Out

          Where is it that beneath the floor
          The water's rising more and more
          And where the roof's a broken door?
                              My Dug-Out

          Where is it that I try to sleep
          Betwixt alarms, when up I leap
          And dash through water four feet deep?
                              My Dug-Out

          Where is it that I'll catch a chill
          And lose my only quinine pill
          And probably remain until----
                              I'm dug out?
                              My Dug-Out

My Dug-Out: A lay of the trenches.]


[Illustration: That Evening Star-shell.

          "Oh, star of eve, whose tender beam
          Falls on my spirit's troubled dream."

--_Wolfram's Aria in "Tannhaeuser."_]


[Illustration: "They've evidently seen me."]


[Illustration: Situation Shortly Vacant.

In an old-fashioned house in France an opening will shortly occur for a
young man, with good prospects of getting a rise.]


[Illustration: The Tactless Teuton.

A member of the Gravediggers' Corps joking with a private in the
Orphans' Battalion, prior to a frontal attack.]


[Illustration: "Well, if you knows of a better 'ole, go to it."]


[Illustration: Will you be----

mine!

A Proposal in Flanders.

The point of Jean's pitchfork awakens a sense of duty in a mine that
shirked.]


[Illustration: No Possible Doubt Whatever.

Sentry: "'Alt! Who goes there?"

He of the Bundle: "You shut yer ---- mouth, or I'll ---- come and knock
yer ---- head off!"

Sentry: "Pass, friend!"]


[Illustration: "Gott strafe this barbed wire."]


[Illustration: So Obvious.

The Young and Talkative One: "Who made that 'ole?"

The Fed-up One: "Mice."]


[Illustration: The Fatalist.

"I'm sure they'll 'ear this damn thing squeakin'."]


[Illustration: A Maxim Maxim.

"Fire should be withheld till a favourable target presents itself."]


[Illustration: Our Adaptable Armies.

Private Jones (late "Zogitoff," the comedy wire artist) appreciably
reduces the quantity of hate per yard of frontage.]


[Illustration: A.D. Nineteen Fifty.

"I see the War Babies' Battalion is a coming out."]


[Illustration: Frustrated Ingenuity.

Owing to dawn breaking sooner than he anticipated, that inventive
fellow, Private Jones, has a trying time with his latest creation, "The
Little Plugstreet," the sniper's friend.]


[Illustration: Keeping His Hand In.

Private Smith, the company bomber, formerly "Shinio," the popular
juggler, frequently causes considerable anxiety to his platoon.]


[Illustration: "---- ---- these ---- ---- rations."]


[Illustration: Dear ----

"At present we are staying at a farm..."]


[Illustration: The Eternal Question.

"When the 'ell is it goin' to be strawberry?"]


[Illustration: Directing the Way at the Front.

"Yer knows the dead 'orse 'cross the road? Well, keep straight on till
yer comes to a p'rambulator 'longside a Johnson 'ole."]


[Illustration: The Late Comer.

"Where 'ave you been? 'Avin' your bloomin' fortune told?"]


[Illustration: The Innocent Abroad.

Out since Mons: "Well, what sort of a night 'ave yer 'ad?"

Novice (but persistent optimist): "Oh, alright. 'Ad to get out and rest
a bit now and again."]


[Illustration: "There goes our blinkin' parapet again."]


[Illustration: "We shall attack at Dawn"

"Never mind about that now, drink this."

"The Push"--in Three Chapters.

By one who's been "Pushed."]


[Illustration: "The Spirit of our Troops is Excellent."]


[Illustration: The Things that Matter.

Scene: Loos, during the September offensive.

Colonel Fitz-Shrapnel receives the following message from "G. H.
Q.":--"Please let us know, as soon as possible, the number of tins of
raspberry jam issued to you last Friday."]


[Illustration: The Soldier's Dream.

A "Bitter" disappointment on waking.]


[Illustration: The Thirst for Reprisals.

"'And me a rifle, someone. I'll give these ----s 'ell for this!"]


[Illustration: The Ideal and the Real.

What we should like to see at our billets--and (inset) what we do see.]


[Illustration: "Watch me make a fire-bucket of 'is 'elmet."]


[Illustration: "That 16-inch Sensation."]


[Illustration: That Sword.

How he thought he was going to use it----]


[Illustration: ----and how he did use it.]


[Illustration: What It Really Feels Like.

To be on patrol duty at night-time.]


[Illustration: "The same old moon."]


[Illustration: "My dream for years to come."]


[Illustration: Coiffure in the Trenches.

"Keep yer 'ead still, or I'll 'ave yer blinkin' ear off."]


[Illustration: Another Maxim Maxim.

"Machine guns form a valuable support for infantry."]


[Illustration: Our Democratic Army.

Member of Navvies' Battalion (to Colonel): "I say, yer mate's dropped
'is cane."]


[Illustration: Five days leave! Taxi!]


[Illustration: Never Again!

"In future I snipe from the ground."]


[Illustration: Thoroughness.

"What time shall I call you in the morning, sir?"

(Colonel Chutney, V.C., home on short leave, decides to keep in touch
with dug-out life.)]


[Illustration: That Hat.

"Pop out and get it, Bert."

"Pop out yerself."]


[Illustration: Springtime in Flanders.

"Personally, I think this is just what you want for laying your eggs in,
but, as Bairnsfather says, 'If you knows of a better 'ole, go to it.'"]


[Illustration: The Dud Shell--Or the Fuse-Top Collector.

"Give it a good 'ard 'un, Bert; you can generally 'ear 'em fizzing a bit
first if they are a-goin' to explode."]


[Illustration: "What's all this about unmarried men?"]


[Illustration: The Historical Touch.

"Well, Alfred, 'ow are the cakes?"]


[Illustration: His Initiation.

No. 99988 Private Blobs (on sentry-go) feels that he has at last
stumbled across the true explanation of that somewhat cryptic
expression, "There'll be dirty work at the cross-roads to-night!"]


[Illustration: When One Would Like to Start an Offensive on One's Own.

RECIPE FOR FEELING LIKE THIS--Bully, biscuits, no coke, and leave just
cancelled.]


[Illustration: Trouble With One of the Souvenirs.

"'Old these a minute while I takes that blinkin' smile off 'is dial."]


[Illustration: The Conscientious Exhilarator.

"_Every encouragement should be given for singing and
whistling._"--(Extract from a "Military Manual.")

That painstaking fellow, Lieut. Orpheus, does his best, but finds it
uphill work at times.]


[Illustration: Its only a tumble down nest But--

The Nest.

"'Ere, when you're finished, I'll borrow that there top note of yours to
clean the knives with."]


[Illustration: Those Superstitions.

Private Sandy McNab cheers the assembly by pointing out (with the aid of
his pocket almanac) that it is Friday the 13th and that their number is
one too many.]


[Illustration: The Professional Touch.

"Chuck us out that bag o' bombs, mate; it's under your 'ead."]


[Illustration: Happy Memories of the Zoo.

"What Time do they Feed the Sea-Lions, Alf?"]


[Illustration: Observation.

"'Ave a squint through these 'ere, Bill; you can see one of the ----'s
eatin' a sausage as clear as anythin'."]


[Illustration: Immediate and Important!

Never has Private Smith's face felt so large and smooth as when he hands
his Captain the following message at what he feels is an unsuitable
moment: "The G.O.C. notices with regret the tendency of all ranks to
shave the upper lip. This practice must cease forthwith."]


[Illustration: Sir Plantagenet Smythe, at the battle of VIN ORDINAIRE
"On! On! ye Noble English!"

2nd Lieut. P. Smith, at the taking of "dead-pig" farm "Come on you
chaps! We'll show these ----s Which side their ---- bread's buttered!"

Other Times, Other Manners.

The Decline of Poetry and Romance in War.]


[Illustration: His Dual Obsession.

Owing to the frequent recurrence of this dream, Herr Fritz von
Lagershifter has decided to take his friends' advice: Give up sausage
late at night and brood less upon the possible size of the British Army
next spring.]


[Illustration: The Communication Trench.

PROBLEM--Whether to walk along the top and risk it, or do another mile
of this.]


[Illustration: Letting Himself Down.

Having omitted to remove the elastic band prior to descent, Herr Franz
von Flopp feels that the trial exhibition of his new parachute is a
failure.]


[Illustration: Old Saws and New Meanings----By Bairnsfather.

There is certainly a lot of truth in that Napoleonic maxim, "An army
moves on its stomach."]


[Illustration: Nobbled.

"'Ow long are you up for, Bill?"

"Seven years."

"Yer lucky ----, I'm duration."]


[Illustration: The Intelligence Department.

"Is this 'ere the Warwicks?"

"Nao. 'Indenburg's blinkin' Light Infantry."]


[Illustration: Valuable Fragment from Flanders: It All Comes to This in
Time.

"This interesting fragment, found near Ypres (known to the ancients as
Wipers), throws a light on a subject which has long puzzled science,
i.e., what was the origin and meaning of those immense zigzag slots in
the ground stretching from Ostend to Belfort? There is no doubt that
there was some inter-tribal war on at this period."--_Extract from_
"_The Bystander_," A.D. 4916.]


[Illustration: In Nineteen Something: General Sir Ian Jelloid at Home.

Having picked up this cherished possession for a mere song at a sale
near Verdun, the General has now let his country seat, "Shrapnel Park,"
and says he finds the new abode infinitely cheaper, and not a bit
draughty, if you keep the breech closed.]


[Illustration: In and Out (I).

That last half-hour before "going in" to the same trenches for the 200th
time.]


[Illustration: In and Out (II).

That first half-hour after "coming out" of those same trenches.]


[Illustration: THE 1ST BLOBSHIRE RIFLES EXPERT GAS & BOMB MANIPULATORS
TRENCHES TAKEN AT SHORTEST NOTICE COUNTER ATTACKS QUOTED FOR OUR
SPECIALITY: HOLDING MINE CRATERS FOR 24 HOURS

TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS "PLUMAPPLE" PLUGSTREET

Pushfulness at Plug Street.

Colonel Ian Jelloid, of the Blobshire Rifles, being an energetic and
businesslike man, believes in advertising as an antidote to stagnant
warfare.]


[Illustration: His Secret Sorrow.

"I reckon this bloke must 'ave caught 'is face against some of them
forts at Verdun!"]


[Illustration: Are you there?

"Only just"

"S.O.S."

The Hard Lines of Communication.]


[Illustration: The New Submarine Danger.

"They'll be torpedoin' us if we stick 'ere much longer, Bill."]


[Illustration: This interesting view for 6 months ... or

This for half an hour

War!

--As it is for most of us.]


[Illustration: A Matter of Moment.

"What was that, Bill?"

"Trench mortar."

"Ours or theirs?"]


[Illustration: The Saint.

That indiscriminating orb, the moon, gives Private Scattergood a saintly
appearance, sadly out of keeping with his thoughts. He's filling 100
sandbags at 11 p.m.]


[Illustration: Those Tubular Trenches.

"Is this right for 'eadquarters?"

"Yes, change at Oxford Circus."]


[Illustration: "Of course, personally I dont think there is anyone
there"

"Nor do I"

Thinking it over subsequently in Boulogne,--an impression of
overcrowding predominates in recollections of "straighthing" that bit of
the line.

"We Look Before----And After."]


[Illustration: Con Moto Perpetuo.

"OUR BERT" (going on leave--having asked a question, and having listened
to three minutes' unintelligible eloquence): "And 'ow does the chorus
go?"]


[Illustration: Real Sympathy.

"I wish you'd get something for that ---- cough of yours. That's the
second time you've blown the blinkin' candle out!"]


[Illustration: Entanglements.

"Come on, Bert, it's safer in the trenches."]


[Illustration: "How long have you got Fred?"

"LEAVE."]


[Illustration: There are times when Private Lightfoot feels absolutely
convinced that it's going to be a War of Exhaustion.]


[Illustration: Chat on 'Change.

"You owes me two francs and I owes you one that's got into the lining of
me coat; that makes it right, don't it?"]


[Illustration: General Sir Frampton Prendergasp R.S.V.P. P.T.O. SOS a
rising and successful general, who is plotting an offensive

The General . . . Cyrus Moffat

Nancy Prendergasp, his daughter, who has gone in for nursing, unknown to
her father. She is in love with ----

Featuring Miss Sybil Fane

DICK MANVERS a lance Corporal in the pay department, who, after
extensive & painful researches, has invented a new bomb

"DICK"

Steven Fairbrother

Dick shows his new bomb to the General who decides to use it in the
offensive

But is overheard and seen by Captain ADRIAN BLACK an unscrupulous
adventurer in the pay of a powerful Government

That night he is seen by Nancy substituting PLUM & APPLE for The new
explosive

END OF PART I

PART II

WILL FOLLOW IMMEDIATELY

Flanders Film Mfg Co--Milwaukee, Wisconsin. U.S.A.]

[Illustration: The Offensive begins. The new bomb is found to be equally
explosive in spite of Captain Black's dark deed

Nancy, who fears disaster, steals her Father's private Howitzer and
races to the Offensive

Black throws every obstacle in her way

"Dont you know me Dick?"

The General, who has been doing a bit on his own, becomes the unwilling
witness of a touching scene

The General having heard their story, orders the arrest of Captain Black

How Dick Manvers Got His Star.

Every familiar feature of the Film is happily caricatured by Captain
Bairnsfather in his amusing page of pictures. The hero, the heroine
(with smile), the villain, the heavy father, all of the most approved
pattern--everything down to the meticulous inaccuracy characteristic of
the American film in matters of detail, is shown with the good-natured
sarcasm befitting a master of satire as well as of humour, while the
story tells itself with breathless enthusiasm.]


[Illustration: The Whip Hand.

Private Mulligatawny (the Australian Stock-whip wonder) frequently
causes a lot of bother in the enemy's trenches.]


[Illustration: Christmas Day: How it dawned for many.]


[Illustration: "Under the spreading chestnut tree the village smithy
stands."]


[Illustration: Veni 1914

Vidi 1915

Vici! 1916

Augusts Three.

To each year its type.]



[Illustration: Overheard in an Orchard.

Said the Apple to the Plum: "Well, anyway, old man, they can never ask
us what we did in the great war!"]


[Illustration: LEARN To FIGHT

Anyone with a taste for Fishing, or Moth Collecting can learn to fight.

Anyone can put a hook in a worm, or a pin in a moth. WE DEVELOP THAT
INSTINCT, and by our Postal Course of Instruction, will help you to earn
big money by fighting

Subjects Taught:--

Bayonet work, bombing, & asphyxiation.

This sketch shows the work of a former pupil. Try this exercise yourself
on a friend, and tell us the result. We will at once tell you your
chances of success.

A lieutenant writes:--

Unfortunately I had not got as far as your chapter on Upper Cuts or I
feel sure I should not be where I am now

yrs truly

Clearing Station GezainCourt.

Bruce Bairnsfather

The demand for fighters exceeds the supply

Write today

The Asphyxobomb School of Instruction

[Advt] Hooge.


Tips for Tommies.

Now that the war has become a world business, we must at any moment
expect the appearance of this sort of thing in our papers.]


[Illustration: Whilst the preliminary bombardment is on, one gets the
idea that this is what's happening to the enemy machine guns.

Yet somehow or other, when one starts for that 220 yards handicap across
the turnip field, it feels something like this.

Bruce Bairnsfather

The Offensive.

What it looks like--and what it feels like.]


[Illustration: "The Imminent, Deadly Breach."

"Mind you don't fall through the seat of yer trousers, 'Arry!"]


[Illustration: Two minds with but a single thought, two hearts that beat
as one.

Telepathy.

"Two minds with but a single thought."]


[Illustration: Trouville-sur-Somme.

"Tell 'er to 'op it, Bert. I'm sittin' on a bit o' shell or
somethin'."]


[Illustration: Omar the Optimist.

          "Here with a loaf of bread beneath the row,
          A muttered curse, but ne'er a whine, and thou--
          Beside me, singing in the wilderness,
          The wilderness is Paradise enow."]


[Illustration: "Where do yer want this put, Sargint?"]


[Illustration: Coming to the Point.

"Let's 'ave this pin of yours a minute. I'll soon 'ave these winkles out
of 'ere."]


[Illustration: A Castle in the Air.

"A few more, Bert, and that there chateau won't be worth livin' in."]


[Illustration: The Freedom of the Seas.

"I wish they'd 'old this war in England--don't you, Bill?" (No
answer.)]


[Illustration: In Dixie-Land.

"Well, Friday--'ow's Crusoe?"]


[Illustration: Alas! Poor Herr Von Yorick!

Fricourt--July, 1916.]


[Illustration: Those Signals.

THE VIGILANT ONE: "I say, old chap, what does two green lights and one
red one mean?"

RECUMBENT GLADIATOR (just back from leave): "Two cremes de menthe and a
cherry brandy!"]


[Illustration: His Christmas Goose.

"You wait till I comes off dooty!"]


[Illustration: Urgent.

"Quick, afore this comes down!"]


[Illustration: That tin hat feels something like this on the way to the
Offensive

And about like this when you get there

My Hat!

Helmets, Shrapnel, One.]


[Illustration: The Candid Friend.

"Well, yer know, I like the photo of you in your gas mask best."]


[Illustration: The Long and the Short of It.

UP LAST DRAFT: "I suppose you 'as to be careful 'ow you looks over the
parapet about 'ere."

OUT SINCE MONS: "You needn't worry, me lad; the rats are going to be
your only trouble."]


[Illustration: "Old Moore" at the Front.

"As far as I can make out from this 'ere prophecy-book, Bill, the
seventh year is going to be the worst, and after that every
fourteenth!"]


[Illustration: Supra-Normal.

Captain Mills-Bomme's temperature cracks the thermometer on seeing his
recent daring exploits described as "On our right there is nothing to
report."

(_He and his battalion had merely occupied three lines of German
trenches, and held them through a storm of heavy Lyddite for forty-eight
hours._)]


[Illustration: 'old these ---- biscuits a minute while I 'as a go at
this ---- stuff

"Where the ---- 'ell are ye comin to!"

"---- your ---- eyes you can ---- well carry these ---- things yerself"

"yer ---- well wants elephants for this job"

Tactical Developments.

Private 9998 Blobs has always thought a machine for imitating the sound
of ration parties (and thus drawing fire) an excellent idea, but simply
hates his evening for working it.]


[Illustration: Bang Bang

Crash

Bang

Crash

That "Out Wiring" Sensation.]


[Illustration: Natural History of the War

The Flanders Sea Lion (Leo Maritimus).

"An almost extinct amphibian, first discovered in Flanders during the
Winter of 1914-15. Feeds almost exclusively on Plum and Apple Jam and
Rum. Only savage when the latter is knocked off."]


[Illustration: Things that Irritate.

Private Wm. Jones is not half so annoyed at accidentally falling down
the mine crater as he is at hearing two friends murmuring the first
verse of "Don't go down the mine, Daddy."]


[Illustration: Still Keeping His Hand In.

Private Smith (late Shinio, the popular juggler) appreciably lowers the
protective value of his section's shrapnel helmets by practising his
celebrated plate and basin spinning act.]


[Illustration: Those ---- Mouth-Organs.

"Keep away from the 'ive, Bert; 'e's goin' to sting yer!"]


[Illustration: Garcong! the bill, tres vite!

That Provost-Marshal Feeling.

A sensation only to be had at a Base--in other words, a base
sensation.]


[Illustration: Blighty!]


[Illustration: Those Raiders at the Seat of War.

"I wish the 'ell you'd put a cork on that blinkin' pin of yours,
Bert!"]


[Illustration: Romance, 1917.

"Darling, every potato that I have is yours" (engaged).]


[Illustration: Modern Topography.

"Well, you see, here's the church and there's the post-office."]


[Illustration: "There Was a Young Man of Cologne."

(I've forgotten the rest of the poem, but it's something about "a bomb"
and "If only he'd known.")]


[Illustration: In the Support Trench.

Old Bill has practically decided to get Private Shinio (the
ex-comedy-juggler and hand-balancer) transferred to another platoon.]


[Illustration: It's the Little Things that Worry.

What is so particularly annoying to Private Lovebird is, that he would
not have had this bother with his dug-out if his leave had not been
postponed.]


[Illustration: That Periscope Sensation.

"I wonder if I oughtn't to tell the captain about that thing sticking up
in the sea over there."]


[Illustration: At the Brewery Baths.

"You chuck another sardine at me, my lad, and you'll hear from my
solicitors."]


[Illustration: A Miner Success.

"They must 'ave 'ad some good news or somethin', Alf; you can 'ear 'em
cheerin' quite plain."]


[Illustration: Birds of Ill Omen.

"There's evidently goin' to be an offensive around 'ere, Bert."]


[Illustration: If Only They'd Make "Old Bill" President of Those
Tribunals.

"Well, what's your job, me lad?"

"Making spots for rocking-horses, sir."

"Three months."

"Exemption, sir?"

"Nao, exemption be ----d! Three months' hard!"]


[Illustration: "Stars is funny things aint they Bill"

"Yes--funny!"

The Stargazers.

--and their return to earth.]


[Illustration: Down at the Ration Dump.

"Call me a Tank again, my lad, and I'll knock yer ---- 'ead off!"]


[Illustration: The Glorious Fifth.

"'Ere, Guy Fawkes--buzz off!"]


[Illustration: "Yes, you are, one pound nineteen and elevenpence
overdrawn, and that includes next month's pay"

Cox's.

When one feels rather in favour of floating a War Loan of one's own.]


[Illustration: This Muddy War.

"These 'ere staff cars do splash a lot, don't they, Bill?" (No
answer.)]


[Illustration: Unappetising.

Moments when the Savoy, the Alhambra, and the Piccadilly Grill seem very
far away (the offensive starts in half an hour).]


[Illustration: Fred's got leave!

That Leave Train

Second lieutenant Enoch Arden arrives on leave

Fred!

"The train was a bit late darling"

That "Leave" Train.]


[Illustration: One often hears the question:--

"What could Napoleon have done in the Great War?"

He could certainly not have gone in for this

It would have to be this, or nothing

Other Times----Other Manners.]


[Illustration: The Tourists, 19..?

"Remember this place, Bert?"

"Yes, it's where we used to chuck the fish to you, ain't it, Bill?"]


[Illustration: Alas! My poor Brother!

(_In this cartoon Captain Bairnsfather refers to the report that the
corpses of German soldiers fallen in battle were utilised in a
Corpse-Conversion Factory for the purpose of providing fats for the
Fatherland._)]


[Illustration: Can-Tank-erous.

"'Ere! Where the 'ell are ye comin' with that Turkish bath o' yours?"]


[Illustration: Curfew.

What particularly annoys Lieutenant Jones, R.F.A. (who thought he could
get a better view from the belfry), is that irritating prediction which
keeps passing through his head, "The curfew shall not ring to-night."]


[Illustration: TAISEZ VOUS! MEFIEZ VOUS  LES OREILLES ENSEMBLE VOUS
ECOUTENT

On the "Leave" Train.

You will never quite realise how closely we are bound to our French Ally
until you have had the good fortune to travel on one of those "leave"
trains--six a side, windows shut, fifty miles to go, and eighteen hours
to do it!]


[Illustration: Getting the Local Colour.

In that rare and elusive period known as "Leave" it is necessary to
reconstruct the "Atmosphere" of the front as far as possible in order to
produce the weekly "Fragment."]


[Illustration: The Ghost of Dead Pig Farm--19..?

At midnight, an indignant, husky voice is heard to say: "B---- these
blinkin' sandbags."]


[Illustration: George versus Germany.

Should Mr. Robey be at any time called upon to go to the Front, he must
be careful how he does this: "I'm surprised at you, Ludendorff!"]


[Illustration: A Puzzle for Paderewski.

"It's a pity Alf ain't 'ere, Bert; 'e can play the piana wonderful."]


[Illustration: "Substitutes" in the Field.

"I thought you said your uncle was a sending you an umbrella."]


[Illustration: Leave.

Dep.: Paddington 2.15. Arr. Home 4.]


[Illustration: ROLLS-DAIMLER, 1917.--Four-seated Coupe body (tres
coupe). Hardly been used, beautifully finished (almost completely). One
dickey seat (_very_ dickey), detachable rims (two already detached).
Only driven 10 miles (Albert to Gommecourt). Excellent shock absorber
(has absorbed any amount). In exceptional condition. L650 (or good bath
chair). BARGAIN.--Captain Somepush, No. 2, Red Cross, Rouen.]


[Illustration: Merely a Warning.

You dirty dog

To those who may be contemplating picking up a Government car cheaply
after the war. Insist on seeing photograph. Don't be satisfied by just
reading the advertisements.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's notes:

With the three noted exceptions, punctuation anomalies were retained to
match the original drawings. The exceptions are in the books printed
explanations, not in any cartoon.

Page 5, period added to illustration caption ("Jack Johnson" shell.)

Page 112, single opening quote changed to double. ("You wait till I)

Page 125, period added to title of picture to match rest of format (That
Provost-Marshal Feeling.)

Pages 93 and 98 were halves of the same comic. They were reattached to
aid readability. The original text can be found in the html version.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fragments From France, by
Captain Bruce Bairnsfather

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRAGMENTS FROM FRANCE ***

***** This file should be named 25951.txt or 25951.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/9/5/25951/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
