The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Oaths, Signs, Ceremonies and Objects of
the Ku-Klux-Klan., by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Oaths, Signs, Ceremonies and Objects of the Ku-Klux-Klan.
       A Full Expose. By A Late Member

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 22, 2008 [EBook #26105]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OATHS, SIGNS OF KU-KLUX-KLAN ***




Produced by Gerard Arthus and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)









    THE

    K. K. K.

    [Illustration: THE CONSECRATING BOWL.]

    EXPOSED!

    BY A MEMBER.




    THE OATHS,
    SIGNS, CEREMONIES AND OBJECTS
    OF THE
    KU-KLUX-KLAN.

    A FULL EXPOSE.

    BY A LATE MEMBER.

    WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.

    CLEVELAND.
    1868.




Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1868, in the Clerk's
Office of the District Court of the United States for the Northern
District of Ohio.




PERSONAL.


It does not matter who is the writer of the following pages. If it did,
no inducement likely to be offered, would tempt him to publish his name.
He has no desire to be tracked out by the Brothers of the Southern
Cross, and he knows too much of their deathless hatred and hound-like
pertinacity, their numbers, and the ramifications of their organization,
already encroaching on southern Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, to
carelessly take the slightest risk of anything of the kind.

It is due to the public, however, that one who pretends to make an
exposure like this, in which the whole nation is interested, should
offer some plausible explanation of the means by which he became
possessed of the information. For this explanation the reader is
referred to the narrative following.

As to the truthfulness of the exposure, the writer is content to leave
its vindication to the events of the future, confident that so far as
the workings of the K. K. K. are ever discovered, they will confirm the
main facts as given here. Of course there are many minor points on which
it is not likely there will ever be more positive testimony than that
here given. This must be so from the nature of the case, as will plainly
appear in the following pages.




MY INITIATION.


After the war, which had not benefited my purse extravagantly, I
wandered off into the interior of Georgia, and finally engaged in
business in one of the interior counties. I knew the southern people
pretty well before the war, had been much among them, and was familiar
with their habits, prejudices, etc. For my own convenience and safety,
when I went into business I passed as a Kentuckian, and thereby
avoided many personal and business annoyances. At first this was not
particularly disagreeable, as no very decided opinions were expected
while the country was still thoroughly under the national armies.
Gradually, however, it became worse and worse, until at length, to
keep up my pretensions, and save my business, I was compelled to
profess the most ultra southern views and prejudices. I thought that
there would never be further active opposition to the national
authority, and so submitted to the situation, rather than lose what
little I had by leaving it. To sell it for anything worth taking, was
simply impossible in the state of the country. So much for the way I
came to know what is about to be told.

In the summer of 1867, one of my neighbors called one morning, and
said that an important meeting was to come off that night, at a house
about three miles from our town. Every good Southerner, he said, was
interested, and he wanted me to go. Of course I had heard of
organizations throughout the South, and knew from the manner of this
man's talk, that something of the kind was in the wind now. I knew,
too, that it would not do to disregard the appeal to "every good
Southerner," and so I went with him.

The meeting was not at any house, however. Half a mile from the house he
had named, my escort turned his horse into a bridle-path, leading up
into a wild, hilly district, and I followed, of course. A mile or so on
this path, away from any habitation, my companion suddenly slackened his
horse's pace, and proceeded very cautiously, bidding me be silent. In a
few minutes I distinctly heard the click of a musket lock, as the piece
was brought to a full cock. It was too dark to see anything. My
companion carried an Enfield rifle, and instantly stopping his horse, he
cocked his piece and pulled the trigger, almost without a pause. Of
course I was somewhat alarmed and astonished; but before I could do more
than stop my horse, my escort dismounted, handed me his reins, and
whispering that I was to remain there, walked slowly forward toward the
spot where I had heard the first click of the gun-lock. In a moment or
so he returned as quietly, and we proceeded as silently as before. As we
passed the spot where I supposed a sentinel to be standing, there was no
one there! Whatever had been there had vanished, and as I turned to say
something about it to my escort, I saw that he too had gone! It was
another man riding by my side, his face covered partly by a
handkerchief, drawn tightly across the nose. It was too dark in those
woods to see much, but to the best of my knowledge I had never seen my
new escort before. This operation was repeated twice within three
quarters of a mile, and each time I was silently turned over to a new
guard, whose face was partially covered, like that of the first.

I was thoroughly alarmed, and more than half suspected that I had been
tried and condemned beforehand, and was now being led away to be
murdered. There was nothing to be done but to go on, for I was
completely lost in the woods, and knew nothing of how soon I might
stumble on a dozen enemies, if I should attempt to escape.

Finally my guard halted in a dense thicket, and told me in a low tone to
dismount and hitch my horse, while he did the same. Then he once more
cocked his piece, and at the sound at least a score of gun-locks, in the
hands of men all round us, but concealed in the darkness, were cocked
and the triggers pulled, as I have described in the case of meeting the
first sentinel. It was still as death when we halted, but I now heard
horses which were hitched about us, so that I knew the whole party came
there mounted. They began to come around us too, moving slowly, and as
silently as possible, each man having his gun, and a handkerchief or
something of the kind over his face. The man who brought me there spoke
to several of the dimly-seen figures, but so low I could not hear. Then
one stepped toward me, leaving the others standing in a circle about us.
This was the captain of the band, and he at once proceeded to my
initiation, not a word being spoken by any one but him, and the whole
formula being of course repeated from memory, for the place was dark as
night could make it. The following was the form, not half of which I
could have remembered from hearing it at that time, but which has since
become familiar by attendance at the initiations of others:

CAPTAIN.--(Addressing me, the candidate for initiation.) "When a noble
people are crushed by the servile minions of a tyrant, will they submit
tamely and basely?"

CANDIDATE.--"No."

CAPTAIN.--"When a noble cause is lost in the field, when its spotless
banners are trailed in the dust by the base hordes of the oppressor,
when appeal to the God of Battles is no longer possible, should the
friends of that cause fold their arms in abject submission?"

CANDIDATE.--"No."

CAPTAIN.--"When the homes of a noble people are devastated by fire and
pillage, when their women are violated by a brutal soldiery, should that
people mete out the same to the destroyers?"

CANDIDATE.--"Yes."

CAPTAIN.--"When a brave people are trampled in the dust by tyrants, what
is their remedy?"

[The whole band answer this by cocking their pieces and snapping the
hammers, and the Captain then interprets as follows:]

"Silence, Darkness, and Cold Lead! Do you agree?"

CANDIDATE.--"Yes!"

CAPTAIN.--"To be of us and not with us, is Treason, and the reward of
Treason is DEATH! Every Southron belongs to us, by birth, by education,
by the love of liberty inhaled with the balmy breezes of the sunny
South, by the hatred of the northern clans imbibed with his mother's
milk, by the inherent detestation of hypocrisy and the myriad social and
political abominations of the North! You are of us, you must be with us!
THE REWARD OF TREASON IS DEATH! You are prepared to take the oath."

[The Captain here recites the following oath, the candidate repeating it
after him:]

"By all the loved memories of my native land, by all the hallowed
associations of home and family, by the memory of friends and brothers
slain, by the lurid flames of war and desolation spread over our happy
homes by the Lincoln hordes, I swear that by day-light and darkness, at
all times and on all occasions, THE STEEL SHALL PAY THE DEBT OF STEEL,
THE LEAD SHALL RECOMPENSE FOR LEAD, THE SOUTHERN CROSS SHALL YET DEFY
THE WORLD!"

The Southern Cross in the order has a double significance. It represents
the dagger of the assassin as well as the cross.

The Captain then declares:

"WELCOME THE NEW BROTHER OF THE SOUTHERN CROSS!"

And thereupon the band make the challenging sign of the order, by
cocking and snapping their gun-locks. The Captain then proposes the
second oath, the candidate repeating it, as follows:

"By southern homes despoiled and broken, by southern women outraged, by
the lingering torments of northern prisons, by all the desolation
brought on our people by famine, pestilence and sword, I swear that
DESOLATION SHALL ANSWER DESOLATION, PESTILENCE SHALL PAY FOR PESTILENCE,
UNTIL THE SOUTHERN CRESCENT SPAN THE CONTINENT, AND CARRY OVER THE NORTH
THE FURIES THAT HAVE DESOLATED THE SOUTH."

The Captain then declares again:

"WELCOME THE NEW BROTHER OF THE SOUTHERN CRESCENT!"

And the band respond as before.

Then comes the third and final oath, as follows:

"By all that is sacred, I swear to remember Jackson, and Johnston, and
the thousands dead; the humiliation of Davis, and Lee, and Bragg, and
Beauregard; the noble deeds of Southrons on many a gory field; and by
the memory of all these, I swear to be TRUE TO THE LONE STAR OF THE
SOUTH, TILL THESE AND ALL OUR WOES ARE A THOUSAND TIMES AVENGED!"

The Captain again declares:

"WELCOME THE NEW BROTHER OF THE LONE STAR OF THE SOUTH!"

And the band respond as before.

The Captain then spoke the following adjuration:

"Let the heavens be lit with the lurid flames of worse than fratricidal
war! Let the dagger, the bullet, the flames and the pestilence, smite
every vulnerable point! Let the desolation of death reign in the
Northern homes enriched by plunder of the South! Let the audacious
minions of the tyrants in our country be met in silence and darkness,
struck down by a power they see not! Remember the oath! The Crescent is
broad enough to include all the enemies of the South! The Lone Star
shines brightest in the darkness! The Dagger is the emblem of the silent
work! Remember the oath! Bring the consecrating bowl."

The last sentence was responded to by one of the band, and something
like a bowl was put into my hands.

"Dip your finger in the consecrating drink!" said the Captain.

I did as directed, and the Captain then continued:

"Now drink it to the dregs, to the enemies of the South!"

I raised the bowl to my lips, and drank its contents. It was like
nothing I had ever tasted before. It was sickening, yet I could not tell
what it was! Instantly the band closed around us, standing two or three
deep, and the Captain struck a match. Holding the little blazing stick
to the hand I had dipped in the bowl, he bid me look.

THE FINGER WAS STAINED AS WITH BLOOD!

He then bid me look at the bowl.

IT WAS A HUMAN SKULL!

[Illustration: THE CONSECRATING BOWL.]




MAKING A NEW COMPANY.


Some weeks after my initiation, I was detailed with an older Brother, to
attend to the formation of a new company in a neighboring county. As
usual, the source of the order was unknown, except that it came from the
captain of our band. The order and detail were announced by our captain,
no comment made, and myself and comrade in the duty started next night,
in obedience to the order, for the location of the new company, in the
adjoining county. He knew the mode of procedure in these cases, and I
left the direction of all to him. We reached the place in the morning,
and did nothing during the day. At night, by his direction, I notified a
well known citizen, in much the same manner I had been notified myself
before initiation, and we started after dark, out of the town. My
comrade, with another citizen, was with me. Reaching a lonely spot in
the country, we turned our horses off the road into a wild tract, and
being far from all habitations, at length stopped in the woods. Here we
separated, I taking my man, and my comrade his, and going perhaps a
quarter of a mile apart. We were both armed with Enfield rifles. The two
men to be initiated on this occasion brought no arms with them. Had they
done so they would have been required to lay them aside before the
initiation commenced.

The mode of initiation of these men, who were to form the nucleus of a
new company, was substantially that already narrated, as experienced by
myself, except, of course, that there was no attendant band, and the
final ceremony of the Consecrating Drink was deferred till half a dozen
others had been initiated, when it was administered to all at the same
time.

The instructions in the formation of a new band or Company, are to
select two prominent citizens at first, as we did in this case, and
after they are initiated they are used to bring in others, until the
band is strong enough to do its own business. A special instruction to
the Brothers detailed for the formation of a new band, is, that if the
persons selected for initiation refuse any of the oaths, or falter in
their devotion to the cause, they are to be killed on the spot. This is
the reason why two Brothers are always sent together, and take but two
for initiation at first, and they are required to be unarmed while the
oaths are proposed. At no time are two persons initiated at the same
place, even when the band numbers fifty or a hundred. There is but one
fate for any one who refuses the oaths. He is never seen again. The
Brothers of the Southern Cross visit on him the reward of
traitors--Death!

[Illustration: THE SIGN OF RECOGNITION.]




THE K. K. K.


The Order or Society commonly known as the Ku-Klux-Klan, has no such
name among its members. That is an approximation in letters and sound to
the challenging signal of the Order. For instance, when a Brother
approaches the spot where a band is assembled, the sentinels, always
concealed, challenge him by bringing their rifles to a full cock. That
operation, as every one knows, produces two sounds or clicks, one when
the hammer reaches the half cock, and the other when it comes to the
full cock. These sounds or clicks are represented by "Ku-Klux." The
"Klan" is the sound of the hammer on the nipple of the piece when the
trigger is pulled, and the hammer snapped. Bringing the piece to full
cock is the challenge, and the answer is given by the challenged party
full-cocking his piece, and instantly pulling the trigger, snapping the
hammer.

The Society really has NO NAME! It is never spoken of by its members,
among themselves, as the Ku-Klux-Klan, or by any other name. The three
emblems, the Cross, the Crescent, and the Lone Star, are used in the
oaths of initiation, and to bring the companies together; but they do
not, either singly or together, give the order any name recognised among
its members as the proper distinctive designation of the association.

The Order has NO WRITTEN RECORDS. Not a line will ever be found of the
official records of the Society, for it has none! No muster rolls can be
produced, for there are none! No orders or communications are ever
written, but on the contrary, every thing of the kind is strictly
prohibited. The Brothers work in silence and in darkness! There are no
witnesses against them but human witnesses, who are always liable to
their vengeance as traitors! No tell-tale paper-and-ink witness will
ever appear against them by their own acts!

At the meetings of the oldest companies, the Brothers always appear with
their faces partially covered. If the meeting is in a building of any
kind, there is never a light to show the faces of those assembled; and
if there be a fire, the Brothers keep away from its light as much as
possible. Always, when practicable, the meetings are held in some
wilderness, and no meeting is ventured upon for any general business,
that requires the presence of more men than might accidentally meet,
without the utmost precaution in the way of sentinels, etc.

The organization includes fully officered companies, regiments and
brigades. Of course every brother knows the officers of his own company,
but that is all he is supposed to know. The commander of the company
knows where his orders come from, and that is all he is expected to
know. The matter is never discussed, but every one understands that the
officers are men who have seen service in the late war, and are
qualified for their positions. When a new company is organized, its
officers are appointed by the commander of the regiment to which it is
to belong, and the order of appointment is transmitted through the
captain of a neighboring company, who details men to organize the new
one.

The orders for my company I knew came from Columbus, and that, of
course, was the headquarters of the regiment to which I belonged. I
never knew the name of our Colonel, but he was an old brigade commander
in Longstreet's corps.

<tb>

[Illustration: THE SOUTHERN CROSS.]




MODE OF RECOGNITION


When a Brother desires to ascertain whether a stranger belongs regularly
to the order, he must not pursue the inquiry in the presence of others.
Engaging the stranger in conversation, the brother finally says:

"I reckon you're a true Southerner?"

If the stranger answers directly, "Yes," the Brother continues:

"May be, then, you've been tested?"

The word "tested" refers to the initiation of the order. If the stranger
be also a Brother, he replies:

"I know what is the work of Silence and Darkness."

The Brother then with the right hand makes the sign of recognition, as
given in the illustration, and the other responds by repeating the
motion, and bringing the fore-finger and thumb together, the whole
representing the hammer of a gun as it is cocked and snapped.

The Brothers are cautioned against the use of these signs without cause,
and no one is allowed to seek out members by the above means, merely for
the gratification of curiosity.

The sign of the Crescent is used for summoning meetings of the companies
at irregular times, and when business of importance is to be attended to
at once. In towns and hamlets this sign is made anywhere, so that it is
likely to be seen on a fence, or sketched with a stick on a walk; and
sometimes leaves torn in two, so that the halves resemble rude
crescents, are dropped about where they will attract the attention of
the Brothers, while no one else will notice them.

It must be understood that the companies never meet to discuss any
proposition. That is done without a general meeting, which is only
called when some initiation is to take place, or when some action
requiring the whole or part of the band has been decided on.

A general rallying cry is provided for cases of emergency, as, for
instance, if a party of Brothers were engaged in any expedition, and
should encounter such resistance as to make aid necessary. The cry is:
"THE CROSS! THE CROSS! THE CROSS!" I never knew this cry to be used, but
when the time comes for active and extended operations in cities, it
will be.




THE WORK DONE.


In the code of the Brothers of the Southern Cross, every loyal
Southerner is a traitor, and every loyal Northerner is a born enemy.
The command is to "smite every vulnerable point," and enough is
published every week to show that "vulnerable points" are found every
day, when the Brothers put an enemy out of the way. Details are made
from the companies when the death of any person has been decided on.
The precise time for the act is never given with the order--the
Brothers wait the favorable moment for their work of Silence and
Darkness. Always enough men are detailed to cover all possible
contingences of ordinary resistance. When once detailed for such
service, a Brother is never free until it is done, even if no
opportunity occurs for months.

Every State in the South has its perfect organization of these
Brothers, and the order is yet in its infancy. Members are at work in
the Northern border States, organizing among those who are Southern
born, or who are known to side with the South against the North. This
is the principal point where the "lurid flames" are to be brought to
the aid of the South, though the Brothers have already been in every
Northern city of any prominence and accessibility. The "pestilence"
will go broadcast over the whole North; how, may be readily imagined
from the events of the late war.

Any favorable opportunity during the impeachment proceeding, or
afterward, would see this slumbering volcano throughout the South
burst forth with frightful violence. Impeachment, or the coming
presidential election, will, it is calculated, furnish an opportunity
when the national power will be so embarrassed as to allow the new
outbreak to get head before it can be met.

Let the people of the North be warned!




THE GRAND SIGNAL.


There is a central organization of the Order--a sort of Executive
Council--composed of the commanders of districts, a district being
usually a State. This executive body is called the Grand Council, and
has no fixed place of meeting. It met once in Nashville, and the last
time, in March, at Augusta, Ga. Two or three months ago there were but
thirteen members of this Council, there being then no greater number of
districts. New districts, however, are being constantly added.

The sole business of the Council, so far, is to extend the organization,
and watch for the grand crisis in national affairs, when the Brothers
need no longer work in secret, and in fear of their necks. The order
will strike simultaneously in a thousand places when the day comes, and
will leap into light, an army completely organized. The signal for the
grand strike at every point, is THE LONE STAR. When that emblem appears
throughout the South, placarded in cities and towns, published in
newspapers, carried everywhere by mail and telegraph and courier, the
time for the open triumph of the Brothers will come within three days!
Then will "the heavens be lit with the lurid flames of worse than
fratricidal war!" It will be the day of doom for loyalty in the South,
and many a Northern home will be put in mourning. Such is the plan.

[Illustration: A BROTHER ON DUTY.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Oaths, Signs, Ceremonies and
Objects of the Ku-Klux-Klan., by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OATHS, SIGNS OF KU-KLUX-KLAN ***

***** This file should be named 26105.txt or 26105.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/1/0/26105/

Produced by Gerard Arthus and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
