The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Heart of the Rose, by Mabel A. McKee

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Heart of the Rose

Author: Mabel A. McKee

Release Date: August 10, 2008 [EBook #26254]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEART OF THE ROSE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Stephen Blundell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 The Heart
 of the Rose


        By
        MABEL A. McKEE


           [Device]


  NEW YORK  CHICAGO  TORONTO
 Fleming  H.  Revell  Company
  LONDON    AND    EDINBURGH




 Copyright, 1913, by
 FLEMING H. REVELL
 COMPANY ...


 New York: 158 Fifth Avenue
 Chicago: 17 North Wabash Ave.
 London: 21 Paternoster Square
 Edinburgh: 75 Princes Street




The Heart of the Rose


He was her brother. The thought gave her the same thrill this morning as
it had given her on a morning seventeen years back, when the old family
doctor had laid a tiny bundle in her arms and said, "You'll have to be
his sister and mother both, Elizabeth."

Her twelve years then hung heavily on her; her little face, stained
with the marks of recent tears, took on a warmer glow as she touched the
baby's hand. She had unfolded the baby blanket and slipped on his first
little clothes. And as she dressed him, she felt a sense of loss; with
every fresh garment he seemed to become less of an angel and more of a
human being. The same feeling of loss was now in her heart as she folded
his great Indian blankets, slipped his photographs into the case and
filled the nooks and crevices of his trunk with "little surprises" to
drive away the first bitter longings for home. She lifted a thick white
wool sweater; it brought the memory of a little soft flannel shirt. She
buried her face in its folds and murmured in a tearful voice, "Why, he
is my man brother and I am sending him from home to college."

       *       *       *       *       *

His foot sounded on the stairway; his clear boyish voice called, "Beth,
where are you?"

Before she could answer he entered the room. Throwing several bundles
onto the bed, he gave a sigh of relief. He tugged impatiently at the
strings as he explained: "These are some things the girls made me. It's
great to be going away, isn't it? Why, I feel just like I was getting
out of a cage; I feel like I was going to fly. Say, what is this,
anyway?"

He held up a small book, shaped to resemble the bud of a flower. It was
made of white water-colour paper and every leaf was fastened to the
other leaves by small white cords. On the front was the picture of a
baby; on the back was a pair of black kid doll shoes.

"Where did you get it?" his sister asked.

"Rose gave it to me; she told me a long time ago that she was making me
a book of memories; that I was to open just one page a week. That's my
baby picture, all right, but why on earth has she put those doll
slippers on the back? And why is it shaped in this funny way? What
makes girls such queer creatures, anyway, Beth?"

She laughed. "I guess, Floyd, if this is a book of memories, that last
page is to picture the last great event of your life--your graduation
night. Don't you remember how your new patent leathers pinched your
feet, so that you limped across the platform after your diploma? It is
shaped like a rosebud, for it is like that. Every week you will open a
new petal, and finally, when you have opened them all, it will be a
full-blown rose. When you come back Rose will have unfolded a few
petals, too."

"Well, I am going to unfold every one of these right now. I never could
wait that long to see what is in the centre. Of course I have a vague
idea, but I want to be sure. So in two minutes we will know this
mystery."

"No," she said firmly, taking the book from his hand. "What would the
book mean to you then, Floyd? Every particle of the pleasure--the
expectation--would be gone. It took Rose a long time to make this book
and you surely would not destroy its value in a few minutes. She even
formed every leaf like a petal, so that it would give you the pleasure
of watching it unfold like a real rose. It is just a symbol of
herself--a little bud of promise."

"She's great to think of all that; I like her. Oh, she and Dorothy are
going to stop a minute to-night; Dot has something for me and I want
them to see some of my things. But I do want to open this book. I guess
I will give it to you to keep until I am ready to shut this trunk, so it
won't be such a temptation. But let's eat pretty soon; I am simply
starved."

At the supper table he talked incessantly of his departure. One moment
he wished that she could go along; the next he exulted over the idea of
being in a house with a crowd of fellows. While he talked a boy came to
the door and was dragged in by a ruthless hand. While they ate
quantities of hot waffles they talked of the "fellows and girls." For
the most part they talked of the girls. The sister heard new phrases--a
new language; he had always used a different one to her. They spoke of
girls as "four-flushers," as "easies," as "stiffs" and "stand-patters."
Occasionally Floyd stopped in the centre of a remark and nodded his head
warningly towards his sister, but the talkative John rambled on,
speaking in a free and easy way of the girls he had grown up with.

During the last year Floyd had ceased to talk to his sister about his
girl friends, and they seldom came to his home. In her presence his
comrades talked continually of school; but if she was busy near she
could hear them laughing and chatting in tones different from the ones
they used when she was there. She had tried in every way she could to
attract them to her home, for formerly they had come in great crowds.
But Floyd did not seem to want them; he preferred going to their homes.
At times she wondered if she had been in their way when they had come.

When the two girls came she greeted them warmly; they had belonged to
the crowd which had come in the past often for cookies and for help in
long, knotty problems. Then, thinking they might not remain if she was
present, she went into the next room. Through the open door she watched
them. She could not help watching; she had been deprived of all her
girlhood and now she wanted to enjoy theirs.

Dorothy, a dimpled, laughing girl with great, brown eyes and masses of
curls which were always rumpled, threw her hat into a chair and was soon
seated between the two boys, showing them the posters she had made for
Floyd. The sister saw Floyd move very close to the girl and lay his hand
on her shoulder with a caressing movement; she caught the glance that
he gave--a glance full of bold admiration and meaning. Rose stood near
the table, watching the other girl. In her eyes was a look of longing,
and yet it was mingled with fear. The three on the sofa soon drew her
into their circle, John was open in his admiration of both girls; he
tried to distribute his caresses with an impartial hand, but the little
Rose drew away with that expression of dread in her eyes. Floyd was not
so bold; he lightly laid his hand on her hand, and when she did not
resent it clasped it more firmly. Her face flushed, but she suffered the
hand to remain.

Elizabeth was called from the room by some visitors. When they had
finally gone she came back to her former seat. She saw a new brother, a
different one from the one she knew. He was talking in a boisterous
tone.

"When are you going to kiss me good-bye, Dot?" he asked.

"Right at the station," she answered laughingly.

"Honour bright?" He asked.

"Honour bright," she promised.

"You are all right," he exclaimed. "Rose is too bashful for that." Then
he hinted, "But you see I am going to take her home to-night."

Rose coloured as he gave her a significant look. She pushed his hand
from her arm and walked to the piano. But there was a wavering, an
uncertainty in her face. He had been her comrade so long and she really
liked him.

The watching sister made a quick decision. When the girls rose to go,
she stood up saying, "Floyd, I want you and John to watch the house. I
have to see Rose's mother to-night; to-morrow you can see the girls
again."

There came a flush of annoyance on the boyish face, followed by one of
anger. He knew his sister had been listening. But he was still too loyal
to criticize her to John, who, when they were alone, openly denounced
her for her meddling.

       *       *       *       *       *

When she returned Floyd was alone. He sat sulky and silent. She busied
herself with the household cares for a few minutes. Soon she went over
to the lounge and sat down beside him. She put her arm around him and
kissed his forehead. "Let's don't be angry on our last night," she
begged.

"Why did you do it?" he asked. "I know you heard what I said to Rose,
but what is she to you?"

"A great deal," she responded, "but not so much as the boy I love so
dearly--the boy I have been a mother to, and yet I haven't been a true
mother, for I never have talked to you of these things because they were
hard. You see I have failed in my duty."

Instantly he was all tenderness. He drew her down into his boyish long
arms and laid his head against hers. "You have not failed in anything,
you darling!" he cried. "But it wouldn't hurt me. I'm a man. All the
fellows do that way."

"How do you know?"

"They tell about it. We don't all talk about it in a crowd, but just
when we are together, like John and me."

"Does John treat Rose that way?"

The boy grew warm in a minute. "He'd better not; he went too far to suit
me to-night."

"Why did he?" she asked quietly. "You were rather free towards
Dorothy."

"Dorothy is different; she's a--she's--well, she's a jolly good fellow,
but Rose--well, I like Rose, and every fellow better keep his hands off
her. I don't want a girl all the fellows can love; but I'm different.
Those things don't hurt a fellow; he's coarser and--well, it's expected
of him."

"But they do hurt you," she said. "The little book of memories that Rose
gave you this afternoon told a story of its own. I am going to tell you
this story."

He looked away into the distance, and she began.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Once there was a man who went into a garden. All around him were
beautiful roses of all colours. But he chose a little white bud for his.
He chose it because it was pure and white, but most of all because it
was closed. No other person could see into its heart. While he was
waiting for it to unfold he walked around to enjoy the other flowers. He
studied their colouring and he breathed their perfume. For a long time
he enjoyed this; then he wanted to get nearer to these roses, to handle
them. Other travellers were handling them and they seemed to enjoy
themselves more than he did. So he touched one rather timidly; others he
was not so careful with. At last he grew tired and wandered back to his
own rosebud and lo! it had opened. It stood the whitest and most
fragrant rose in the garden, and its heart was the dewiest and most
tender. But he remembered the crimson roses and it seemed too white.
Then he could not detect its fragrance, for he had killed his sense of
smell by its abuse with the other roses, some of which stood as high and
beautiful as before, but others were left bruised and broken by his
ruthless desire to please, yes, to indulge himself. As he plucked his
own rose, he was aware of no sense of joy over it, except from pride,
for many travellers cast him envious glances. But he could not see its
unusual beauty; he could not get the fragrance from its heart, because
his sense of sight had been dulled by the brilliancy of the other
flowers and his sense of smell by their odour.

"Nor did he think of the little buds in the garden that he had touched
and then left. They would perhaps open, but the petals he had touched
would always be brown and torn. The passers-by might not see them when
the flowers had opened and revealed their hearts, but the men who had
plucked them would--not at once, but when they had become less entranced
and were seeking for defects. Then perhaps they would throw the roses
away. But the man who had the perfect rose--the one which was perfect
because it had been well protected--did not know of the havoc he had
wrought. He was too much interested in wondering why he did not enjoy
his rose, why it seemed so commonplace and really tiresome. He did not
know that it was he who had become unable to appreciate it, through his
own indulgence begun in an idle moment, while he had waited for his
flower to blossom."

       *       *       *       *       *

She paused to look into his face. He was listening. Then she went on:

"You say you are a man; you have only thought of one side; you have only
wanted the perfect rose. You may get one, but if you do it will be one
which has been carefully guarded. You are not intending to break or
bruise the other roses; you are just going to handle them because the
other boys do. You will enjoy their fragrance, but you will leave
wounded petals. Then after a time, if you travel far enough into the
garden, you will grow indifferent to the havoc you are doing and will
carelessly crush the flowers. You may grow so cruel that you will enjoy
it. There are men who do, and they started out as free from intention to
harm as you were to-night. You caressed Dorothy; John caressed her. The
next boy who comes along will find it easier to be free with her, and
unless there is some one who cares enough to guard her she will be torn
from the stem before she has blossomed. If you had kissed Rose to-night
it would have been easy for you to kiss her again. You haven't yet, have
you?"

He shook his head.

"I am so glad," she continued. "It will be so much better for her. If
she permits you these familiarities she will permit others the same
ones. She may soon become as reckless as Dorothy, and then we dare not
think of the future. You can see now what a wonderful flower she
promises to make. She is a perfect little bud. Would you not hate to
think that you were spoiling the promise of that bud?"

"Forgive me for being so cross," he begged.

"Yes, dear," and she kissed his lips. "But we are going to look at your
side now. God made you so that you have certain desires, certain
cravings, that you are to control. Many men will say that they are only
to be satisfied, but we know better. The first kiss you give to a girl
thrills you--really it is one of the greatest minutes of your life. The
next girl you kiss seems less of a pleasure. Then after a while it
becomes a mere habit; it loses all sense of enjoyment--the holiness has
long since been done away with. Stronger desires than kissing arise and
soon you are not the man God intended you to be. You will have a low
idea of women. Even your wife, if you get the sweetest and purest in the
world, will not seem so to you. Marriage will not be a sacred
fulfillment; it will be a commonplace event."

His arms had tightened around her, but he was silent.

"And," she continued, "your future career as a man will be touched. You
cannot think clearly or act quickly when any of the senses of your body
have been impaired. Lust kills ambition, ability and power. I do not
mean that every boy who starts in this way has the same fatal ending,
but a great many do. There is the half-way place where many men stop;
yet you will find they are not real men. It will be so much holier and
better to stay at the beginning."

She sat silent, waiting for him to speak. At last he did. "Of course,
Beth, I wouldn't want to go even half-way, now; I wouldn't even want to
touch"--and a tender smile played around his lips--"any roses but one.
But I cannot see yet why I can't let her know that I care for her; I
will be constant. I want to like her and I want her to like me."

She drew a sharp breath. "You mean you will crush the petals of your own
rose, and then enjoy the heart when it is opened. When you come back you
may not even want to see that heart; you are just a boy. If you do,
there will be times when you will see those crushed petals and be
sorry. You may blame yourself, but you will probably blame Rose. You may
grow so discontented that you will blame another man. If you know she
allowed you these caresses, these little familiarities, you will think
she would allow others."

He spoke with pride. "I know Rose."

"We will look at it from her side. After she realizes those petals have
been crushed by you she may be afraid of the future. She may be afraid
that you have wandered far into the garden and come back to her a
worn-out traveller. She may be afraid that you will not appreciate her
and that you will not deal rightly with her."

He laughed. "I am not afraid of that."

"Other girls just as constant in their friendship as Rose have felt that
way," she said in a low voice.

"What do you mean?" he asked.

"My dear boy, I have a few wilted petals and I know how they feel. You
see, I was like you are. There was no one to guard me and I did just
what any girl will do who does not think. But I realized in time to save
myself from only a few brown ones, and I want to save every girl I can.
We were young and thought we knew our hearts. My, how they changed! But
they couldn't change those bruised petals."

He gave a hurt cry, but he saw a face free from suffering. It held only
love for him.

"Floyd, I want to give the world a noble man. That is the dearest wish
of every woman. I want to give some woman a pure husband; and oh, my
darling boy, I want to give you life in its best and purest forms. I put
the first little garment on your little body; I changed you from a
little angel to a human being, and I must care for that human being."

"You angel!" he murmured.

She lifted his chin and looked into his clear eyes.

"I promise," he said in a low tone.

"It will not be easy, dear. You will have to refuse to listen to other
boys, you will have to read only good books and you will have to think
pure thoughts. Rose's little book will help you. You can see the baby
that I am trying to keep pure and help me do it; you can see those doll
shoes and remember how you suffered on the night you wanted to be happy,
because you wanted to do as 'the fellows' did. You were so anxious to
know what was in the heart of the rose book. I do not know, but she did
tell me this. On the second petal--and you must look at it every day--is
the little picture of Sir Galahad which your first teacher gave you. Do
you remember it?"

The boy smiled dreamily as he quoted--

    "My strength is as the strength of ten,
    Because my heart is pure."


_Printed in the United States of America_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Heart of the Rose, by Mabel A. McKee

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEART OF THE ROSE ***

***** This file should be named 26254.txt or 26254.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/2/5/26254/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Stephen Blundell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
