The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Arts of Persia, by H. Kevorkian

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Arts of Persia
       & Other Countries of Islam

Author: H. Kevorkian

Release Date: August 28, 2008 [EBook #26473]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ARTS OF PERSIA ***




Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall, Linda Cantoni, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Transcriber's Note: The main text in this book is interspersed with
numerous illustrations and accompanying text. In this e-book, the
illustrations and accompanying text are set off from the main text by
lines of asterisks. For the reader's convenience, where the original
indicates that the main text is continued on another page (e.g.,
[CONTINUED ON PAGE THREE]), the page on which it is continued is marked
with a page number, e.g., [PAGE 3].]




SPECIAL EXHIBITION


THE ARTS OF PERSIA

& OTHER COUNTRIES OF ISLAM


H. KEVORKIAN COLLECTION

[Illustration]

FROM THURSDAY, APRIL TWENTY-SECOND
TO SATURDAY, MAY FIFTEENTH, INCLUSIVE
ON THE ENTIRE THIRD FLOOR


THE ANDERSON GALLERIES
489 PARK AVENUE AT FIFTY-NINTH STREET, NEW YORK
1926


THE ENTIRE THIRD FLOOR GALLERIES
FROM THURSDAY, APRIL TWENTY-SECOND
TO SATURDAY, MAY FIFTEENTH, INCLUSIVE
[OPEN WEEK-DAYS, 9-6; SUNDAYS, 2-5 P.M.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: STUCCO BAS-RELIEF, PAINTED IN POLYCHROME. EXCAVATED AT
RAY (RHAGES) ANTERIOR TO THE XIITH CENTURY]

This exhibition has been arranged with a desire to meet the
convenience of those who are interested in manifestations of the arts
of different countries over which ISLAM held sway at one time or other
in the past. An effort has been made to show under one roof
representative examples of works produced at different epochs and
stages of the civilizations referred to, so that they may be seen, and
perhaps studied, with the minimum expenditure of time.

Fine examples of many branches of the arts of these peoples are in
permanent exhibitions at the Metropolitan Museum, New York, and the
museums of great cities throughout the country. It is difficult to
find adequate words to describe the enchanting atmosphere of the halls
at the Metropolitan Museum where Near Eastern art is installed; and
the same can truly be said of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, and the
University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia. These exhibitions
must inevitably contribute to the enjoyment and education of countless
visitors to these institutions, and will continue to do so in
increasing degree to the enjoyment of generations to come.

The present exhibition does not comprise a vast number of objects. Its
claim to attention lies in the fact that it includes an important
series of really first class works which are also of great historical
importance. There will be on view as well some comparatively new types
of objects of aesthetic and archaeological interest, obtained as the
result of recent excavations.

The briefness of time available precluded the possibility of compiling
a catalogue, as was at first intended. The present booklet is issued
to explain the scope of the exhibition, and extend a cordial
invitation to visit it.

H.K.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: MUHAMMAD (THE PROPHET) WITNESSES ALI (HIS SON-IN-LAW
AND SUCCESSOR) DEFEAT AMR BEN ABDWAD]

One of the eight illustrations for a XIIIth Century Persian Manuscript
entitled, "HISTORY OF TABARI", compiled A.H. 310 (A.D. 922). The
present copy is a subsequent one of the Persian version, translated by
AL B'ALA'MI, A.H. 352.

It is interesting to note that TABARI records in the book here
referred to, that three messages were sent by MUHAMMAD to KHUSRAW
PARNIZ, imparting the divine warnings. One of the messages, as
recorded in an old Manuscript entitled NIHAYAT UL-IRAB, reads:

"In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. From MUHAMMAD
the Apostle of God to KHUSRAW son of HURMAZD. But to proceed. Verily I
extol unto thee God, beside whom there is no other God. He it is who
guarded me when I was an orphan, and made me rich when I was
destitute, and guided me when I was straying in error. Only he who is
bereft of understanding, and over whom calamity triumphs, rejects the
message which I am sent to announce. O KHUSRAW, submit and thou shalt
be safe, or else prepare to wage with God and with his Apostle a war
which shall not find them helpless. Farewell."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

The rise of ISLAM and its rapid advent to power, is perhaps the most
surprising chapter of the history of mankind. The great empires,
Persian and Byzantine, which were subjected to the urgent onslaught of
this rising power may have been in an enfeebled condition as a result
of excess of despotism and internal dissensions, as historians affirm;
but that the element of the power must have been in the rationality of
the principles contained in the teaching, there can be no doubt.

"It was undoubtedly to ISLAM, that simple yet majestic creed of which
no unprejudiced student can ignore the grandeur, that Arabs owed the
splendid part which they were destined to play in the history of
civilization. In judging of the Arabian Prophet, western critics are
too often inclined to ignore the condition from which he raised his
country, and to forget that many institutions which they condemn were
not introduced but only tolerated by ISLAM. The early Muslims were
very sensible of the immense amelioration in their life effected by
MUHAMMAD'S teachings. What this same amelioration was is well shown in
the following passage from the oldest extant biography of the
Prophet," says Professor G. Browne in his memorable work on Persia,[1]
and quotes IBN HISHAM (A.H. 213: A.D. 828) in support.

[Footnote 1: "Literary History of Persia," by Edward G. Browne, M.A.,
M.B., Vol. I, page 186.]

"During the first half of the seventh century," says DOZY in

[CONTINUED ON PAGE THREE]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ACCESSION AT KUFA, A.D. 749, OF ABU'L-ABBAS ABDULLAH
AS-SAFFAH FIRST CALIPH OF THE HOUSE OF ABBAS]

One of eight illustrations for a XIIIth Century Manuscript entitled,
"HISTORY OF TABARI", compiled A.H. 310 (A.D. 922). The present copy is
a subsequent one of the Persian version, translated by AL B'ALA'MI,
A.H. 352.

"It was a dynasty abounding in good qualities, richly endowed with
generous attributes, wherein the wares of science found a ready sale,
the merchandise of culture was in great demand, the observances of
religion were respected, charitable bequests flowed freely ... and the
frontiers were bravely kept."--AL-FAKHRI (historian of fame of the
XIIIth Century) on the ABBASID Dynasty.

       *       *       *       *       *

[PAGE 3]

his excellent work on ISLAM,[2] "everything followed its accustomed
course in the Byzantine as in the Persian Empire. These two states
continued always to dispute the possession of western Asia; they were,
to all outward appearance, flourishing; the taxes which poured into
the treasuries of their Kings reached considerable sums, and the
magnificence, as well as the luxury of their capitals had become
proverbial. But all this was but in appearance, for secret disease
consumed both empires; they were burdened by a crushing despotism; on
either hand the history of the dynasties formed a concatenation of
horrors, that of the state a series of persecutions born of
dissensions in religious matters. At this juncture it was that, all of
a sudden, there emerged from deserts hardly known and appeared on the
scene of the world a new people, hitherto divided into innumerable
nomad tribes, who, for the most part, had been at war with one
another, now for the first time united. It was this people,
passionately attached to liberty, simple in their food and dress,
noble and hospitable, gay and witty, but at the same time proud,
irascible, and, once their passions were aroused, vindictive,
irreconcilable and cruel, who overthrew in an instant the venerable
but rotten empire of the Persians, snatched from the successors of
Constantine their fairest provinces, trampled under their feet a
Germanic kingdom but lately founded, and menaced the rest of Europe,
while at the same time, at the other end of the world, its victorious
armies penetrated to the Himalayas. Yet it was not like so many other
conquering peoples, for it preached at the same time a new religion.
In opposition to the dualism of the Persians and a degenerate
Christianity, it announced a pure monotheism which was accepted by
millions of men, and which, even in our own time, constitutes the
religion of a tenth part of the human race."

[Footnote 2: Translated into French by Victor Chauvin under the title
of "Essai sur l'Histoire de l'Islamisme" (Leyden and Paris, 1879).]

The teachings of MUHAMMAD were not of a nature to arouse

[CONTINUED ON PAGE FIVE]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: POLYCHROME ENAMELLED GLASS MOSQUE LAMP OF THE XIIITH
CENTURY]

Very few examples of this highly advanced art survive. They represent
an extremely aristocratic manifestation of art and were executed by
order of MAMELUKE CALIPHS of Egypt, and dedicated by them to their
great Mosques, individually inscribed in magnificent calligraphy.

       *       *       *       *       *

[PAGE 5]

intolerance.[3] History does not record the practice of compulsory
conversion in the scheme of conquest of early converts. "It is often
supposed," says Professor BROWNE, "that the choice offered by the
warriors of ISLAM was between the QUR'AN and the SWORD; this, however,
is not the fact." There are innumerable evidences to the contrary
which history records.[4] It appears that the exemplary behavior of
the Arabs, under their newly acquired faith, was the main factor not
only in the success of their scheme of conquest, but also in the
impression which it made on the defeated in determining them to adopt
the faith which produced such upright warriors.

[Footnote 3: "Righteousness is not that ye turn your faces to the East
and to the West, but righteousness is this: Whosoever believeth in
God, and the last day, and the angels, and the book, and the prophets;
and whoso, for the love of God, giveth of his wealth unto his kindred,
and unto orphans, and the poor, and the traveller, and to those who
crave alms, and for the release of the captives; and whoso observeth
prayer and giveth in charity; and those who, when they have
covenanted, fulfil their covenant; and who are patient in adversity
and hardship, and in times of violence: these are the righteous and
they that fear the Lord."--QUR'AN, SURA II.]

[Footnote 4: The treaty concluded by HABIB B. MASLAMA with the people
of DABIL in Armenia ran as follows: "In the name of God the merciful,
the clement. This is a letter from HABIB B. MASLAMA to the people of
DABIL, Christians, Magians, and Jews, such of them as are present and
such of them as are absent. Verily I guarantee the safety of your
lives, properties, churches, temples and city walls; ye are secure,
and it is incumbent upon us faithfully to observe this treaty so long
as you observe it and pay the poll-tax and the land-tax. God is
witness, and he sufficeth as a witness."--QUR'AN, V. 104. Concerning
the acceptance of the Poll-Tax from ZOROASTRIANS, as well as from Jews
and Christians. A. VON KREMER'S "Kulturgeschichte d. Orients," Vol. I,
page 59.]

The tremendous political upheaval that the evolution of ISLAM brought
in its train to the affairs of the world does not fall within the
scope of this paper. A highly important fact, however, must not be
lost sight of, that by consolidating and unifying the tottering states
a new civilization was founded which knew how to turn to account the
culture of the ancient states conquered. In this overwhelming
transformation Persia came in, from the outset, to play the most
conspicuous and important part. The

[CONTINUED ON PAGE NINE]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ROYAL IVORY BOX, WITH METAL MOUNTING. HISPANO-ARABIAN
ART, XIITH-XIIITH CENTURY DECORATED IN ENAMEL AND GOLD, DEPICTING
INSIGNIA OF SUCCESSORS OF UMAYYAD CALIPHS OF SPAIN, AND QUR'ANIC
ROSETTES AND KUFIC CALLIGRAPHY OF THE HIGHEST DISTINCTION]

[Illustration: FAIENCE CYLINDRICAL VASE, WITH RELIEF AND LUSTRE
DECORATION. FROM FOSTAT (ANCIENT CAIRO), DYNASTY OF FATIMID
ANTI-CALIPHS (A.D. 974-1171)]

[Illustration: AN EARLY SAFAWID PAINTING (CIRCA A.D. 1525) OF
EXQUISITE RHYTHM, DEPTH AND DIGNITY]

       *       *       *       *       *

[PAGE 9]

artistic productions of the MUHAMMADAN world that have come down to us
as living monuments, substantiate this statement without a shadow of
doubt, which makes it unnecessary to resort to recorded history,
although its pages abound with incontestable evidences.[5]

[Footnote 5: "Thus it is by no means correct to imply that the two or
three centuries immediately following the MUHAMMADAN conquest of
Persia were a blank page in the intellectual life of its people. It
is, on the contrary, a period of immense and unique interest, of
fusion between the old and the new, of transformation of forms and
transmigration of ideas, but in no wise of stagnation or death.
Politically, it is true, Persia ceased for a while to enjoy a separate
national existence, being merged in that great MUHAMMADAN EMPIRE which
stretched from GIBRALTAR to the JAXARTES; but in the intellectual
domain she soon began to assert the supremacy to which the ability and
subtlety of her people entitled her. Even the forms of State
organization were largely adapted from Persian models."--AL-FAKHRI
(ed. AHLWARDT, page 101), on the organization of the DIWANS or
Government offices.

"In the finance department not only was the Persian system adopted, but
the Persian language and notation continued to be used till the time
of AL-HAJJAJ B. YUSUF (about A.D. 700)."--EDWARD G. BROWNE, "Literary
History of Persia", Vol. I, page 204.]

It would be difficult to offer an explanation for the underlying unity
and integrity of character manifest in the artistic expression of the
MUHAMMADAN countries, of vast geographical range, without a clear
understanding of the vital force contained in the teachings of the
Arabian Apostle, and the characteristics of his people, destined to
carry those teachings from one end of the earth to the other. For this
reason the foregoing brief survey has been ventured.

There can be no doubt that the pivot around which the artistic
activities of MUHAMMADAN countries revolved, was Persia.[6] She was to
attain the function of the SUN, element of

[CONTINUED ON PAGE SEVENTEEN]

       *       *       *       *       *

ILLUSTRATIONS FOR TITLE-PAGES OF A SHAHNAMA (EPIC OF KINGS) of the
XVth Century.

Representing TIMUR-I-LANG (A.H. 736-807) attending a festival. The
name and the full titles of TIMUR appear in excellent Thuluth
lettering round the border of the rug upon which the monarch sits.

This important Manuscript was presented by the Emperor of Russia to
the Ambassador of Persia at St. Petersburg, A.D. 1829. The
Ambassador's autograph inscription reads:

"The SHAHNAMA graciously presented by H.M. the Emperor at my third
visit--may it be omen of good fortune. MUHAMMAD ALI IBNI GHAFOURI
Ambassador, 22nd of RAJAB, A.H. 1245."

"TIMUR BEG was seated in a portal, in front of the entrance of a
beautiful Palace; and he was sitting on the ground.... The lord was
seated cross-legged, on silken embroidered carpets, amongst round
pillows. He was dressed in a robe of silk, with white headdress on his
head, on the top of which there was a spinel ruby, with pearls and
precious stones round it. As soon as the ambassadors saw the lord,
they made a reverential bow, placing the knee on the ground, and
crossing the arms on the breast; then they went forward and made
another and then a third, remaining with their knees on the ground.
The lord ordered them to rise and come forward.... Three MIRZAS, or
secretaries, ... came and took the ambassadors by the arms, and led
them forward until they stood before the lord.... He asked after the
King, saying, 'How is my son the King? is he in good health?' When the
ambassadors had answered, TIMUR BEG turned to the knights who were
seated around him, amongst whom were one of the sons of TOKTAMISH, the
former Emperor of TARTARY, several chiefs of the blood of the late
Emperor of SAMARQUAND, and others of the family of the lord himself,
and said, 'Behold, here are the ambassadors sent by my son, the King
of Spain, who is the greatest King of Franks, and lives at the end of
the world. These Franks are truly great people, and I will give my
benediction to the King of Spain, my son."--From the Diary of RUY
GONZALEZ DI CLAVIJO, principal of the embassy despatched A.D. 1404 to
the Court of SAMARQUAND by Henry III of Castile, Spain.

CLAVIJO describes the beautiful gardens with their tiled palaces where
banquets were given. The ambassador, who was invited, marvelled at the
gorgeous tents, one of which "was so large and high that from a
distance it looked like a castle, and it was a very wonderful thing to
see, and possessed more beauty than it is possible to describe". It is
interesting to notice that SHARAF-U-DIN mentions the presence of the
Ambassadors, "for," he writes, "even the smallest of fish have their
place in the sea". Truly a delightful touch!--History of Persia, by
SIR PERCY SYKES, Vol. II, page 133.

[Illustration: ILLUSTRATIONS FOR TITLE-PAGES OF A SHAHNAMA (EPIC OF
KINGS) OF THE XVTH CENTURY]

"On the extreme of the western side of the royal precincts opening on
to the CHAHAR BAGH are a garden and building. The Garden was
previously called "BAGH I BULBUL" (Garden of Nightingales).--LORD
CURZON, History of Persia.

"Night drawing on, all the pride of SPAHAUN was met in the CHAUR BAUG
and grandees were airing themselves, prancing about with their
numerous trains, striving to outdo each other in pomp and
generosity."--DR. FRYER, recorded A.D. 1677.

CHARDIN, who was at Ispahan at the time of SHAH SULEIMAN'S reign
(1667-1694), records in his "VOYAGES", Vol. VIII, page 43:

"When one walks in these places expressly made for the delights of
love and when one passes through all these cabinets and niches, one's
heart is melted to such an extent that to speak candidly, one always
leaves with a very ill grace. The climate without doubt contributes
much towards exciting this amorous disposition, but assuredly these
places, although in some respects little more than cardboard castles,
are nevertheless more smiling and agreeable than our most sumptuous
palaces."

LORD CURZON says (History of Persia, Vol. II, page 37) that "Even
CHARDIN, enthusiastic but seldom sentimental, was inspired to an
unwonted outburst by the charms of HASHT BAHISHT".

[Illustration: VIEW OF CHAHAR BAGH (FOUR GARDENS) AND HASHT BAHISHT
(PAVILION OF EIGHT PARADISES) AT ISPAHAN. CONSTRUCTED BY SHAH SULEIMAN
SAFAWI ABOUT A.D. 1670. REPRODUCTION FROM "LA PERSE, LA CHALDEE ET LA
SUSIANE" (1887) BY DIEULAFOY]

PAIR OF DOORS FROM THE PAVILION OF CHAHAL SITUN (Hall of Forty
Pillars) built by SHAH ABBAS the Great (A.D. 1588-1629).

These are decorated with representations of scenes from the Royal
Court of the great Shah, painted minutely by Court artists.

"They transport us straight to the Court of the lordly ABBAS and his
predecessors or successors on the throne.... We see the King engaged
at some royal festivity enjoying the pleasure of the Bowl."--LORD
CURZON, History of Persia, Vol. II, page 34.

KER PORTER, who saw the Palace of Chahal Situn in its perfect
condition, records: "The exhaustless profusion of its splendid
materials reflected not merely their own golden lights on each other,
but all the variegated colours of the Garden, so that the whole
surface seemed formed of polished silver and mother of pearl set with
precious stones."

LORD CURZON, who visited it soon after its last repair in 1891, quotes
KER PORTER and by way of contrast says: "The bulk of this superb
decoration which still remains in the THRONE ROOM behind, to point
bitter contrast, had on the walls of the LOGGIA been ruthlessly
obliterated by the brush of the painter, who had left in its place
pink wash; had I caught the Pagan, I would gladly have suffocated him
in a barrel of his own paint."--History of Persia, Vol. II, page 33.

[Illustration: PAIR OF DOORS FROM THE PAVILION OF CHAHAL SITUN (HALL
OF FORTY PILLARS) BUILT BY SHAH ABBAS THE GREAT (A.D. 1588-1629)]

[Illustration: RIZA ABBASI, FAVORED COURT ARTIST, PORTRAYS EUROPEANS
AT THE COURT OF SHAH ABBAS THE GREAT (A.D. 1588-1629)]

Detail of exquisitely painted woodwork from the Pavilion of CHAHAL
SITUN (Hall of Forty Pillars), the Palace at Ispahan built by SHAH
ABBAS.

The young Shah, who was pleased with the leader of the party
(Europeans), gave him royal gifts, Sir Anthony Sherley records (1598),
including "forty horses all furnished, two with exceeding rich
saddles, plated with gold, and set with rubies and turquoises." To
these he added camels, tents, and a sum of money.

       *       *       *       *       *

[PAGE 17]

her old faith, source of sustaining energy; and continued to radiate
into these planets of countries and races of the System, her
all-stimulating cultural beams, the reflection of which is discernible
in all artistic manifestations of those countries. In the field of
literature, which is so little known in the western world, the
influence is even greater than in the visual art with which we are
concerned. MUHAMMADAN literature, be it Arabic, Turkish, or Persian,
is PERSIAN in spirit and feeling.[7]

[Footnote 6: "The ascendancy of the Persians over the Arabs, that is
to say of the conquered over the victors, had already for a long while
been in course of preparation; it became complete when the ABBASIDS,
who owed their elevation to the Persians, ascended the throne (A.D.
749). The most distinguished personages at court were consequently
Persians. The famous BARMECIDES were descended from a Persian noble
who had been superintendent of the Fire Temple at BALKH. AFSHIN, the
all-powerful favorite of the Caliph AL-MUTASIM, was a scion of the
Princes of USRUSHNA in Transoxiana."--DOZY, "Histoire de
l'Islamisme".]

[Footnote 7: "With the rise of PERSIAN influence, there opened an era
of culture, toleration, and scientific research. The practice of oral
tradition was also giving place to recorded statement and historical
narrative,--a change hastened by the scholarly tendencies introduced
from the East."--SIR WILLIAM MUIR, on the rise of the Abbasid
Dynasty.]

The fusion of MUHAMMADAN doctrine with this Aryan (Persian) culture of
old,[8] is an important event in the history of Art. For out of this
fusion came forth into being a new phase of artistic expression
completely different, in form and spirit, from its predecessors.
Probably of equal importance is the fact that, although practised by
divers races and subjected to many developments, fluctuations and
variations, it has retained throughout the centuries its identical
characteristics. What was the vital force that brought about this
cultural evolution and unification? The answer appears to be RELIGION,
as we shall see.

[Footnote 8: "PERSIAN influence increased at the court of the CALIPHS,
and reached its zenith under AL-HADI, HARUNU'R-RASHID, and AL-MAMUN.
Most of the ministers of the last were PERSIANS or of PERSIAN
extraction. In BAGHDAD, PERSIAN fashions continued to enjoy an
increasing ascendancy. The old PERSIAN festivals of the NAWRUZ,
MIHRGAN, and RAM were celebrated. PERSIAN raiment was the official
court dress, and the tall, black, conical PERSIAN hats were already
prescribed as official by the second ABBASID Caliph (in A.H. 153: A.D.
770). At the court the customs of the SASSANIAN Kings were imitated,
and garments decorated with golden inscriptions were introduced, which
it was the exclusive privilege of the ruler to bestow. A coin of the
Caliph AL-MUTAWAKKIL shows us this Prince actually clothed in true
PERSIAN fashions".--VON KREMER, Streitzuge, page 32.]

The foundation of the MUHAMMADAN EMPIRE was RELIGION. It was to the
Holy Standard that the nations bent

[CONTINUED ON PAGE TWENTY-THREE]

       *       *       *       *       *

     _"Lips sweet as sugar on my pen bestow,
     And from my book let streams of odour flow."_

     --J'AMI.

ILLUSTRATED AND ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPT

The complete volume of "YUSUF-OU-ZALIKHA", the popular poem by the
famous mystic poet J'AMI, based on the Biblical story of JOSEPH and
POTIPHAR'S WIFE. The scribe, MIR ALI SULTANI.

The colophon reads:

"Terminated by the sinner, humble MIR ALI SULTANI the penman, may God
forgive his sins and shelter his faults. Terminated in the month of
MOHARRAM AL HARAM in the year A.H. 944 (in letters) (A.D. 1537) in the
glorious city of BUKHARA."

The Dedication in the handwriting of the scribe, in ornate gold
lettering, reads:

"For his majesty, the AUGUST, the just, the possessor of virtues, the
great KHAGAN GHAZI ABD-UL-AZIZ BAHADUR KHAN, may his domain last
forever."

The autograph of the Emperor SHAH JAHAN, the "GREAT MOGUL", on the
magnificently decorated mount reads:

"In the name of God compassionate and merciful this YUSUF-OU-ZALIKHA
treasured on the occasion of BLESSED ACCESSION." (A.D. 1627)

In confirmation of the foregoing, it is of great interest that
JAHANGIR makes special reference in his memoirs (Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri) to
an incident, as of highest importance, that he was presented by
ABD-AL-RAHIM KHAN, KHAN-I-KHANAN, with a superb copy of J'AMI'S poem
YUSUF-OU-ZALIKHA, transcribed by MIR ALI SULTANI, "Prince of Penmen",
and that the gift was appraised at "a thousand Muhr".

[Illustration: COMPLETE ILLUSTRATED AND ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPT OF
"YUSUF-OU-ZALIKHA", BY THE FAMOUS MYSTIC POET J'AMI]

ONE OF THE ILLUSTRATIONS TO THE MANUSCRIPT YUSUF-OU-ZALIKHA

ZALIKHA in old age, broken and in poverty, meets YUSUF in the market
place in Egypt.

     _"Where is thy youth, and thy beauty, and pride?"
     "Gone, since I parted from thee," she replied.
     "Where is the light of thine eye?" said he.
     "Drowned in blood-tears for the loss of thee."
     "Why is that cypress tree bowed and bent?"
     "By absence from thee and my long lament."
     "Where is thy pearl, and thy silver and gold,
     And the diadem bright on thy head of old?"..._

     --Quotation from YUSUF-OU-ZALIKHA (J'AMI).
     Translation of R.T. GRIFFITH.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: CHISELLED SILVER BOWL, DECORATED IN FILIGREE AND
POLYCHROME ENAMEL. PERSIAN WORK OF THE XVITH CENTURY, PROBABLY
EXECUTED IN ASIA MINOR FOR A PRINCELY OTTOMAN PATRON]

       *       *       *       *       *

[PAGE 23]

and professed unqualified allegiance. A powerful political unity came
into existence and continued for a period of SIX centuries
uninterrupted. The nations of this united kingdom of ISLAM were thus
merged into one unit, under the stimulus of one formal religion,
freely transmigrating local ideas. Arts and culture were transformed,
but the evolution thus caused by the Religion was essentially
political in nature.

"There is no God but GOD," said the APOSTLE OF ARABIA, but the poet
reflected awhile, and his rejoinder was: "The Ways of God are as the
number of SOULS OF MEN."

The Prophet's religion was rational, its principles attainable; it
secured for the poet social amelioration and physical comfort, but
there was a voice from the depth of his soul that he could not
silence. It was the voice of mystery; he was concerned with the
problems of the "Wherefore, the Whence, and the Whither".... Was he
not a Son of the land which PLOTINUS visited to learn mystery of the
Orient of Old?[9]

[Footnote 9: "Il prit un si grand gout pour la philosophie qu'il se
proposa d'etudier celle qui etait enseignee chez les Perses et celle
qui prevalait chez les Indiens. Lorsque l'empereur Gordien se prepara
a faire son expedition contre les Perses, Plotin, alors age de
trente-neuf ans, se mit a la suite de l'armee. Il avait passe dix
annees entieres pres d'Ammonius. Gordien ayant ete tue en Mesopotamie,
Plotin eut assez de peine a se sauver a Antioche."--PORPHYRY ON
PLOTINUS: Translation of the Enneads of Plotinus (Bouillet; Paris,
1857).]

We have to look therefore to the RELIGION, "The Ways" of whose God
"are as the number of Souls of Men", to perceive the true nature of
the evolution of the artistic expression of these people.

Souls with irresistible cravings for Mysticism, poets, artists,
philosophers and the like, discovered for the first time from
MUHAMMAD'S formal teachings, which contained certain esoteric
elements, that the senses, unreal and phenomenal, have yet an
important mission to fulfill in the task which aims to escape from
SELF (which is an illusion and the root of SIN, PAIN, and SORROW) and
to attain the height where the eternal beauty,

[CONTINUED ON PAGE TWENTY-SEVEN]

       *       *       *       *       *

"PORTRAIT OF MEHDI ALI GULI KHAN, COMMANDER OF FORTRESS, BY
RAMDAS"--A.D. 1630.

A leaf from the National Portrait Album conceived by the Emperor
AKBAR, and amplified and executed by JAHANGIR and SHAH JAHAN. The
volume consists of portraits of the Royal Family of the GREAT MOGULS
and their principal supporters. These historic personages are
represented in the centre as single individuals, with their chief
officials and retainers in the border around them.

RAMDAS, a Hindu artist, was one of AKBAR'S artists who worked under
JAHANGIR and SHAH JAHAN. His signed works include the following:

BABURNAMA in the British Museum and South Kensington Museum.
AKBARNAMA in South Kensington Museum.
RAZMNAMA in the State Library, Jaipur, India.
TIMURNAMA in the Oriental Public Library, Bankipur, India.

[Illustration: "PORTRAIT OF MEHDI ALI GULI KHAN, COMMANDER OF
FORTRESS, BY RAMDAS"--A.D. 1630]

[Illustration: SILK FABRIC--A RARE EXAMPLE OF THE KIND PRODUCED BY THE
ROYAL LOOMS AT ISPAHAN, WHICH FLOURISHED UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF
SHAH ABBAS THE GREAT (A.D. 1588-1629)]

"Oct. 18th, 1666.--To Court. It being ye first time his Ma'ty
(CHARLES II of England) put himself solemnly into Eastern fashion of
vest, changeing doublet, stiff collar, bands and cloake, into a comley
dress, after ye Persian mode. I had sometime before presented an
invective against our so much affecting the French fashion, to his
Majesty, in which I took occasion to describe the comelinesse and
usefulness of the Persian clothing, in ye very same manner his
Ma'ty now clad himself."--JOHN EVELYN (A.D. 1666), celebrated
historian and diarist.

       *       *       *       *       *

[PAGE 27]

which is but ONE, reveals itself through countless phenomena which are
but reflections of ONE. "The PHANTASMAL is the BRIDGE to the REAL,"
says the mystic, and the immortal lines of J'AMI read:

     _"Though in this world a hundred tasks thou tryest,
     'Tis Love alone which from thyself will save thee.
     Even from earthly love thy face avert not,
     Since to the real it may serve to raise thee.
     Ere A, B, C, are rightly apprehended,
     How canst thou con the pages of the_ QUR'AN?
     _A sage (so heard I) unto whom a scholar
     Came craving counsel on the course before him,
     Said, 'If thy steps be strangers to love's pathways,
     Depart, learn Love, and then return before me,
     For, shouldst thou fear to drink wine from form's Flagon,
     Thou canst not drain the draughts of the Ideal.
     But yet beware, Be not by form belated,
     Strive rather with all speed the bridge to traverse.
     If to the bourn thou fain wouldst bear thy baggage,
     Upon the bridge let not thy footsteps linger."_[10]

[Footnote 10: "Religious Systems of the World" (Swan Sonnenschein,
1892).]

The unreality of things material, the illusion of Self and desires,
the perception that all living things and apparent phenomena reflected
but one all-embracing GOOD and BEAUTY, was the philosophy of Hindu and
all Oriental mystics of old; but they attempted to destroy the self
and desires (Source of Sin) uncompromisingly and unreasonably. It was
a philosophy "cold" and "bloodless", as Professor BROWNE points out,
in trenchant terms. The MUHAMMADAN mystic became conscious that the
stream cannot be crossed without the aid of the BRIDGE constructed for
this purpose.

Here (as it seems to us) lies the KEYNOTE, the mainspring of
inspiration of artistic expression, which (for the lack of better
designation) might be termed MUHAMMADAN ART: A merging of physical and
spiritual, of worldly magnificence and eternal bliss.

[CONTINUED ON PAGE THIRTY-ONE]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRINCES OF THE HOUSE OF TIMUR

EMIR TIMUR (TIMUR-I-LANG) on the throne (A.D. 1335-1405)

On the right of the throne:

BABUR A.D. 1526-1530
HUMAYUN A.D. 1530-1556
AKBAR A.D. 1556-1605
JAHANGIR A.D. 1605-1627
SHAH JAHAN A.D. 1627-1658

On the left are three sons of SHAH JAHAN:

DARA SHIKOH
SHAH SHUJA
AURENGZIB
(who succeeded Shah Jahan)

MUGHAL Painting from the Imperial Library of DELHI, A.D. 1640

[Illustration: THE PRINCES OF THE HOUSE OF TIMUR

MUGHAL PAINTING FROM THE IMPERIAL LIBRARY OF DELHI, A.D. 1640]

TALAR (HALL OF AUDIENCE) RUG

From the looms of ISPAHAN or the adjoining city of JOSHAGAN. Made
during the reign of SHAH SULEIMAN (A.D. 1667-1694), upon the model of
CHAHAR BAGH Royal Garden at ISPAHAN, on the grounds of which the Royal
Pavilion of HASHT BAHISHT (Eight Paradises) stands. The Rug measures
29 feet by 9 feet 5 inches.

LORD CURZON in his History of Persia, Vol. II, page 38, gives the
following description of the Garden of CHAHAR BAGH:

"At the upper extremity a two storeyed PAVILION connected by a
corridor with the SERAGLIO of the palace, so as to enable the ladies
of the harem to gaze unobserved upon the merry scene below, looked out
upon the centre of the avenue. Water conducted in stone channels ran
down the centre, falling in cascades from terrace to terrace, and was
occasionally collected in great square or octagonal basins where cross
roads cut the avenues. On either side of the central channel was a row
of chenars and a paved pathway for pedestrians, then occurred a
succession of open parterres, usually planted or sown. Next on either
side was a second row of chenars, between which and flanking walls was
a raised causeway for horsemen. At intervals corresponding with the
successive terraces and basins, arched doorways with recessed open
chambers overhead conducted through these walls into the various royal
or noble gardens that stretched on either side and were known as the
gardens of the throne; nightingale, vines, mulberries, Dervishes, etc.
Some of these pavilions were places of public resort and were used as
coffee houses, where when the business of the day was over the good
burghers of Ispahan assembled to sip that beverage and inhale their
Kalians the while. At the bottom quays lined the banks of the river
and were bordered with the mansions of the nobility."

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

[PAGE 31]

A desire to reach to our higher instincts through the vehicle of our
senses is apparent in all forms in which these masters sought to
express themselves; we feel that, in their entrancing rhythmical
compositions, in their incomparable poetry of flowing melodious words,
in all their literature, in the inimitable colors and lyrical lines of
all branches of representation of visual art. We feel the presence of
an element prevailing throughout, and underlying every form of
expression, an element which may be described in a word, "HUMAN".

It is stated that the PERSIAN spirit and feeling were reflected in all
forms of artistic expression of the MUHAMMADAN world. It is not,
however, intended that other nations and countries over which ISLAM
held sway, contributed nothing in the building of the influences of
each were felt in varying degrees in the transmigration of ideas
continued to take place between the nations, and the influences of
each were felt in varying degrees in the transformation that resulted.
In the fusion referred to, the influence of the PERSIAN culture was
predominant, a fact so transparent, as to require (we may assume) no
emphasis.

It is not intended to deal here with particular aspects or divers
branches of arts in which the genius of these artists found
expression. In offering briefly these lines as to the general aspect
of the Art of the MUHAMMADAN world, the intention is to offer an
explanation to those who may not be familiar with its history.

H. KEVORKIAN

[Illustration]








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Arts of Persia, by H. Kevorkian

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ARTS OF PERSIA ***

***** This file should be named 26473.txt or 26473.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/4/7/26473/

Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall, Linda Cantoni, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
