The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bertie and the Gardeners, by Madeline Leslie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Bertie and the Gardeners
       or, The Way to be Happy

Author: Madeline Leslie

Release Date: August 31, 2008 [EBook #26497]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BERTIE AND THE GARDENERS ***




Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 _THE WOODLAWN SERIES._

 Bertie and the Gardeners:

 OR,

 THE WAY TO BE HAPPY.

 BY

 MRS MADELINE LESLIE.

 AUTHOR OF "AUNT HATTIE'S LIBRARY FOR BOYS AND
 GIRLS," ETC.

 CHICAGO:

 HENRY A. SUMNER & COMPANY
 1880.




 Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1868, by

 A. R. BAKER,

 In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of Massachusetts.




[Illustration: Winnie catching the Snow-flakes.
                    Vol. VI., p. 103]




[Illustration: THE WOODLAWN SERIES.]




TO

HARRY, NELLIE, AND WILLIE SAMPSON;

ALSO,

To the Memory of their Deceased Brothers and Sister,

BERTIE, FRANKEY AND EMMA,

THESE LITTLE BOOKS ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED.

If the perusal prompt them and other readers to imitate the virtues of
our hero in his efforts to _be_ good, and to _do_ good, the wishes of
the author will be realized.




 BERTIE; OR, THE WOODLAWN SERIES.

 BY MRS. MADELINE LESLIE.

 16 mo. 6 vols., Illustrated.

   I. BERTIE'S HOME.

  II. BERTIE AND THE CARPENTERS.

 III. BERTIE AND THE MASONS.

  IV. BERTIE AND THE PLUMBERS.

   V. BERTIE AND THE PAINTERS.

  VI. BERTIE AND THE GARDENERS.




 CONTENTS.


                    CHAPTER I.
 THE NEW FARMER,                                       11

                    CHAPTER II.
 THE SICK WORKMAN,                                     21

                    CHAPTER III.
 THE MERRY GARDENER,                                   30

                    CHAPTER IV.
 VISITORS TO WOODLAWN,                                 40

                    CHAPTER V.
 THE SORROWING FATHER,                                 51

                    CHAPTER VI.
 CLEARING THE CREEK,                                   64

                    CHAPTER VII.
 PAT'S VISIT HOME,                                     74

                    CHAPTER VIII.
 LETTER FROM PAT,                                      84

                    CHAPTER IX.
 BERTIE'S SPELLING MATCH,                              97

                    CHAPTER X.
 BERTIE'S PRESENTS,                                   107

                    CHAPTER XI.
 THE HEART AND HAND,                                  118

                    CHAPTER XII.
 VIOLETS AND VIOLETTA,                                127

                    CHAPTER XIII.
 BERTIE'S REWARD,                                     138

                    CHAPTER XIV.
 BERTIE AND THE NEWSBOY,                              148

                     CHAPTER XV.
 THE LAST CHAPTER,                                    155




Bertie and the Gardeners.




CHAPTER I.

THE NEW FARMER.


The new house at Woodlawn was nearly completed; and Mr. Curtis now set
to work in earnest, clearing the grounds of the rubbish, in order to
make the terraces and lay out his avenue in front.

Those who have read the other books about Bertie, will know that two
wide avenues, enclosed by handsome iron gates, had been already made;
one winding along on the shores of Lake Shawsheen, the other entering
from a higher point which led through a grove toward the house where
the enchanting view of lawn and water burst at once on the vision.

But in the vicinity of the house, no grading had been done, on account
of the vast amount of bricks, lime, mortar-bins, wood and chips lying
scattered in every direction.

The house, elegant in proportion and finish, stood about a hundred
rods in front of a high, grassy mound, upon the top of which a cluster
of chestnut-trees cast a pleasant shade.

The rich, green turf on the lawn which sloped to the lake, was dotted
with magnificent old trees undisturbed for a century. Back of the
house, or rather beyond the barn, was another swell or mound, which
like the first, was so regular in its form as almost to excite the
belief that it was artificial. Indeed, from the fact that two
tomahawks were found buried in the spot where the barn stood, Mr.
Curtis inferred that it might have been used for the grand council of
the Indian tribe, and that here they buried all hostilities.

"Certainly," Mrs. Curtis remarked, "this was a pleasant view to take
of it," and as there was no one to dispute the fact, the larger mound
was called "Peace Mountain."

Mr. Curtis, or the Squire, as the Oxford villagers called him, was
now in his element. Every pleasant morning he might be seen, his
wife leaning on his arm, walking over the premises, planning the
improvements to be made, and often Bertie and Winifred accompanied
them.

When the weather was not so clear, the gentleman and his son hurried
from one part of the grounds to the other, directing Tom Grant, or
measuring with a ten-foot pole.

There was a nice sunny plat containing sixteen acres back of Peace
Mountain, which had been ploughed earlier in the season, to be in
readiness next year for a garden and orchard. Besides this there were
to be heart-shaped and diamond-shaped figures and circlets cut in the
lawn, near the house, for flowers of every hue.

It was now October, and the most must be made of the fine weather.
Ploughing and preparing the ground for agricultural purposes, was what
the farmers in the neighborhood were accustomed to, and therefore help
was easily to be obtained.

Through the summer, Mr. Curtis had borne in mind that he should need a
skilful farmer to till his land, one who understood the science as
well as the art of farming to the best advantage. He greatly approved
Thomas Grant's industry, and the zeal he manifested in all that
concerned his master's interests; but he feared the man was so
attached to the old ways of managing land, that he would be unwilling
to avail himself of the improved implements of agriculture, or the
new-fangled notions, as he called mowing-machines, horse-rakes,
sowing-machines, etc., etc.

But one noon, while his oxen were eating their dinner, Mr. Curtis
found him sitting under the shade of a tree, examining with great
interest the latest report of the State Agricultural Society.

Turning to a picture of a Devon cow, he exclaimed:

"Well, Squire, if Adam carried such cows as that with him when he went
outside of Eden, I think he might have set up another paradise To my
thinking, Squire, nothing can beat that cow."

Mr. Curtis threw himself on the grass, wishing to test Tom's ideas of
farming; and after conversing half an hour, resolved to hire him for
his farmer.

But still it was necessary for the gentleman to employ a gardener, one
who loved flowers and had a taste for landscape gardening.

"I must advertise, Cecilia," he said one day to his wife; "I want
exactly the right kind of a man for there is a great opportunity to
improve and beautify the place."

While his papa and mamma were talking, Bertie sat on a cricket before
a wooden chair which he had borrowed of Mrs. Taylor from the kitchen.
Winnie was by his side, and he was teaching her to make a penny spin
around so that it looked like a ball.




CHAPTER II.

THE SICK WORKMAN.


Neither Mr. nor Mrs. Curtis noticed that their son listened to the
conversation; but he did, and remembered it.

The next day he harnessed Whitefoot into his donkey carriage as soon
as he had read his chapter, with his mamma, and drove away with all
speed to Woodlawn.

Mr. Fuller and most of the workmen had left; but Joe Allen and his
father were busy in the conservatory which they were just finishing.
It was a beautiful building, the centre much higher than the rest, to
be filled with climbing roses, vines, etc.; the sides sloped off until
they were only high enough to allow free entrance at the doors. It was
finished in a highly ornamental manner, and in the distance resembled
a heathen pagoda.

This was Joe's first effort at architecture; and he was proud of it.
When he left Oxford he was going directly to Mr. Bryant's with whom
his kind friend Mr. Curtis had made arrangements for him to study and
perfect himself in his chosen pursuit.

Joe was not at work when Bertie found him; he was giving directions to
the man who had brought a load of marble blocks for the walks.

The little fellow found he would be busy for some time; so he
sauntered on to the back of the building till he came to the painter
Mr. Dodge, who was engaged in setting some panes of glass which had
been broken. He smiled directly when he saw Bertie, but he did not
speak, and presently the child noticed he was very pale. Occasionally
he put his handkerchief to his mouth; and the little fellow was
frightened when he saw that it was spotted with blood.

"Oh, dear!" he exclaimed, "you are sick. You must go home, and send
for the Doctor."

"I confess I don't feel like moving a mountain this morning," answered
Dodge, with a sickly laugh; "I'm on my last job at painting. Did you
know it?"

"What do you mean?"

"I wasn't brought up to be a painter; and it doesn't agree with me."

"What did you do before?"

"Oh, I turned my hand to anything! I took up painting because it paid
best at the time, and I had my mother and sister to support."

"What shall you do then?"

"I don't know." He laid down his putty knife and leaned back, wiping
his mouth again.

"I know you're sick," Bertie urged anxiously, "and I'm going to call
my papa."

"No, don't! I've had such turns before; but they do make me weak as a
baby."

But the child was alarmed, and had already gone. When he returned the
painter had risen and was slowly walking toward the house on his way
to his boarding place.

"My son," said Mr. Curtis, "call Whitefoot and harness him into the
carriage as quick as you can."

"Sit down on the boards, Dodge, until he brings the donkey round.
Bertie tells me you think painting disagrees with you."

"Yes, sir, I am sure it does. I half promised my mother never to do
another day's work at it; but when Torrey was hurt I couldn't refuse
Mr. Fuller; he's been a good friend to me in times past."

"What would you choose for an employment?"

"Out-door work, sir, was what I was brought up to. I shall try to get
something at that. There's nothing more healthy for the lungs than
being over horses and cattle."

The gentleman noticed that the effort of talking seemed to give the
man pain, and instantly checked him from saying more.

"You must stop at once," he urged in a firm voice. "Such warnings as
that," pointing to the blood-stained handkerchief, "are not to be
trifled with. I shall send a physician to see you; and I will talk
with you again."

At noon Mr. Curtis found that the woman who boarded Mr. Dodge
couldn't keep him while he was sick; and arrangements were made at
once to remove him to the chamber in Mrs. Taylor's farm-house which
Patrick Riley had left.

The next day he was so much worse that his mother was sent for; and
thus an acquaintance commenced which continued for life.




CHAPTER III.

THE MERRY GARDENER.


Mrs. Dodge was the widow of a clergyman. At her husband's death she
was left destitute; and until Albert was able to labor for her
support, she kept school, filling up every moment out of school hours,
in sewing for the slop-shops.

In this way she injured her health, and her son insisted she should
hire a couple of rooms, take his sister from an uncle's where she was
not happy, and keep house for him.

Her health was now entirely restored, and she had resolved to
advertise for a situation as housekeeper, and thus relieve her son of
the burden of her own and her daughter's support.

The longer Mrs. Curtis knew Mrs. Dodge, the better she was convinced
that she was exactly the person to relieve her of her household care.


They sent to the city for Nelly the daughter, and found she was old
enough to be of service as a chamber girl. Nancy was to retain her old
place as nurse, so that only a cook was needed to make the corps
complete.

It was not long before Albert was able to return to the city. He was
delighted that his mother and sister were provided for, and kept Mr.
and Mrs. Taylor laughing from morning till night; and yet Mr. Curtis
suspected there was something on his mind that troubled him.

The night before he was to leave he requested an interview with the
Squire, when with some embarrassment he said:

"Bertie told me to-day that you were looking for a gardener. If I can
fit myself for the business by next spring, will you let me try it?"

"Do you know any thing about flowers?"

"I worked one winter for a gentleman who cultivated flowers and fruit
for sale. He had violets and carnation-pinks and roses, and in other
houses he had strawberries and mushrooms, and lettuce. I think as far
as I went I learned the business thoroughly."

"Capital! and do you understand about laying out grounds? I mean small
plats for flowers."

"I can't say, sir, how I should please you or the lady; but I could
draw you a plan of what I've been wanting to see in front of the
house. Perhaps you could judge something by that."

Mr. Curtis sat thinking for a time, and then Albert said with his
old, merry twinkle:

"I'd like first rate to work for you, Squire; and I suppose mother
would like to have me where she can look after me a little. I needn't
promise, I'd try to do my best, for you know that already. I'd work
for considerable less wages for the sake of being near Bertie."

"But your Mission School! what will become of that?"

Albert's face grew serious. "That's the only thing I regret, in
leaving the city," he said. "There's so much to be done for the poor
children wandering about the streets, I am sorry to leave my school;
but the doctor says my life depends on quitting my present business."

As Mr. Curtis still seemed absorbed in thought, the young man added
presently: "If you give me any encouragement I shall go back to Hantz
where I once worked. Before you would need me in the spring I could
learn something if I tried."

"Does Bertie know of your wish?"

"No, sir, I was afraid you'd consent to try me just to please him; and
I want you to feel yourself that I'm worth trying."

This was said with a laugh.

"Well," answered the gentleman, "I'll think of it, and possibly I may
give you an answer in the morning. But, as you are going to leave the
city, you mustn't give up trying to do good. Workmen are needed in the
country as well as the city."

It was Mr. Curtis' intention to move into his new house the first week
in November. Upholsterers were already engaged inside in fitting
carpets, and making ready for the furniture to be removed from their
city home.

Mrs. Dodge, therefore, was going to give up her rooms, sell her plain
furniture, and be ready to return as soon as possible. She knew
nothing of her son's application to Mr. Curtis and felt considerable
anxiety on his account. Her delight, therefore, may be imagined when
after they were seated in the cars on their return to the city he
informed her that the Squire had engaged him for a gardener, and thus
they would all be together once more.




CHAPTER IV.

VISITORS TO WOODLAWN.


I suppose some of my young readers will be glad to know that Torrey
recovered entirely from his accident, and had returned to his painting
in the city. Perhaps there was no one of the workmen, aside from the
Allens, who parted with Bertie with so much regret as he did, for
there was no one who owed him so much for his kindness.

When the little fellow called to bid him good-by and to send a book by
Mrs. Torrey to Edgar, the man caught his hand, exclaiming:

"I'm getting to like all children for your sake. At any rate nobody
will ever hear me say again that children are a bother."

"Tell Edgar, please," urged the boy, "that I'm so glad to hear he is
patient; and that the doctors think there is hope he will be well.
Papa says he can stay there as long as he wishes, without any pay. I
mean to ask Miss Lerow to go with me and see him when I'm in the city
next time."

Mrs. Torrey promised to go to the girls' ward the first time she
visited Edgar and ask for Susy Hunt and the tame linnet. The bird had
arrived safely at the Hospital and proved a great amusement to the
patients. Miss Lerow wrote a short note in answer, which I shall copy.

     "DEAR BERTIE:--This morning when I carried the cage into Mrs.
     Ayer's ward there was great rejoicing. Susy and Marianne, that
     bright eyed girl you spoke to near the door, laughed aloud and
     clapped their hands, and exclaimed:

     "'Bertie didn't forget. He did send his bird. Oh, Miss Lerow will
     you please thank him, and say we like it ever so much!'

     "Mrs. Ayers says, 'Tell that blessed little boy I'll take the
     best care of his linnet. Tell him the cage is hung on the hook
     where all the children can see it; and the pretty creature is
     chirping as merrily as if it had always been here.'

     "So, my dear little friend, you will be pleased that your
     self-denying act has given pleasure to so many suffering
     children, and that they think of you with gratitude. Your friend,

                         "CARRIE LEROW."

One pleasant afternoon Bertie and his sister were riding through the
street, when a handsome carriage came slowly toward them.

"There's Whitefoot, and that dear little boy Mr. Carpenter told us
about," exclaimed a young girl, who was no other than Emma Blagden.

The donkey trotted on until the two carriages met, when a pleasant
voice called out:

"Stop a minute, please. Is your name Herbert Curtis?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"How do you do, Whitefoot?" exclaimed the young girl, springing to the
ground and throwing her arms around the donkey's neck.

"Oh, you stupid creature not to know your old mistress!" she went on,
as the animal took no notice of her caresses.

"I'm very glad to see you," Bertie began, his eyes sparkling with
pleasure. "Will you please go and see mamma?"

"Have you moved into the new house yet," inquired the lady who had
asked them to stop.

"No, ma'am. Mamma is over there though; and she would be very glad to
see you, and thank you for sending me the bird."

"Oh, yes!" cried Emma. "Where is the linnet? I dare say she'd know
me."

"I'm sorry; but I lent my bird to a little girl in the hospital. It
does amuse the children there so much to watch it."

"Did you tire of it, then?"

"Oh, no, indeed! I like it dearly; but they have to be in their cots,
you know; and it makes them feel better to have something to look at."

"Shall we waive ceremony and call at Woodlawn?" asked the lady of her
husband.

"Just as you say," answered the gentleman smiling.

"Well, Bertie, if you think your mamma is not too much engaged, we
will call for a few moments. You may drive Whitefoot on, and we will
follow."

"Oh, mamma! Mr. Carpenter didn't tell half the beauties of the
scenery," exclaimed Emma, gazing from the carriage window; "and we
thought that he exaggerated. Only look at the water glistening through
the trees; and then the reflection of that weeping willow in the lake
is so perfect."

Bertie drove quickly to the front door, and lifting Winnie from her
seat, ran into the house to announce the visitors.

It was a pleasant call, though a short one, the only seats being the
stairs. Then Bertie persuaded his sister to stay with Nancy, who was
washing windows; and he took mamma in his donkey carriage and
accompanied their new friends over the nicely gravelled road to the
lake.

There were a pair of swans, now, which had grown so tame that they
would sail up close to the shore and pick up the crumbs the children
threw to them.




CHAPTER V.

THE SORROWING FATHER.


In another volume of this series, I have told you about Mr. Cahart
who brought the stone steps from the granite quarry. He had a son who
gave him great trouble, and whom he promised that that he would send to
Oxford for Bertie to take to his mamma, hoping she would do him good.

Every day for a long time the little fellow expected the boy would
come up the avenue at Woodlawn. But nothing had ever been seen or
heard from him; and now more than a month had passed.

One lovely afternoon during the pleasant season called the Indian
summer, Mr. Curtis invited his wife, Bertie and Winnie to ride with
him to the quarry where he wished to pay the balance of his bill, part
of which Bertie had paid Mr. Cahart.

The lady gladly consented and told Nancy to dress the children as
soon as possible.

The country never had looked so delightful to Mrs. Curtis as now that
the fields were dressed in their gay, autumn attire. Their road lay
through rich woods of maple, birch and oak, brilliant in their red and
yellow hues.

Mrs. Curtis could scarcely express her delight.

"Oh, there is a branch so perfect! I must have that!" or, "Lawrence,
it's too bad to trouble you again; but it does seem wicked to pass so
many beauties. They would look so lovely in our new house."

And Lawrence, the most indulgent of husbands, would check up his gay
horses, and spring from the carriage and break off branch after branch
as she directed.

Herbert had inherited all his mother's love for the beauties of
nature, as well as her enthusiasm. His cheeks glowed and his blue eyes
sparkled as she piled her treasures in his lap, charging him to guard
them with care.

At length they reached the town and drove at once to the hotel, where
Mr. Curtis left them, promising to return in fifteen or twenty
minutes.

The air was so fine that Mrs. Curtis preferred to sit in the carriage,
which she could easily do as the hostler stood at the horses' heads.

The children were chatting gayly when a loud geeing was heard; and
presently an ox-team was seen slowly approaching from the direction of
the granite quarry.

"Oh, mamma!" said Bertie greatly excited, "there's Mr. Cahart. I do
hope he will stop and speak to me. I want to know why his son did not
come to Woodlawn as he promised."

The child leaned as far as he could from the carriage, hoping to
attract attention; but the man did not once glance toward him. His
face looked very sober, as if his heart were sore.

Just as the great load of granite was opposite the carriage Bertie
shouted in an excited tone:

"Mr. Cahart! Oh, Mr. Cahart! Please stop! I want to see you!"

Mrs. Curtis was surprised at the effect of her son's voice on the man.
He started, gazed about him, and then spying the little fellow in the
carriage, came quickly toward them, seizing the small hand Bertie so
cordially held out, and exclaiming with great energy:

"Aye, aye, boy, I'm powerful glad to see you!"

"This is my mamma," explained Bertie. "We came to pay Mr. Fuller's
bill, and I hoped I should see you somewhere; but why didn't you let
your son come to see us?"

Mr. Cahart's face worked convulsively. For a moment he seemed unable
to articulate one word; but presently recovering himself he said, with
a gasp:

"I've never set eyes on that boy since."

"Why, I'm so sorry, where is he?"

"Run off."

"Oh, dear! how could he do so?"

"Did you never find where he had gone?" inquired Mrs. Curtis in a
deeply sympathizing tone.

"I followed him to the city, ma'am, found he'd sailed the morning
before, in company with one of his mates, the worst boy in town."

The last words were accompanied by a groan.

"Where was the vessel bound?" asked the lady.

"For the West Indies, ma'am. She's due next week; but I'm afeard that
during the voyage my boy has learned nothing but wickedness in
company with those rough, swearing sailors."

Mrs. Curtis thought this so probable that she could not think of a
word to comfort the poor father's heart, and Bertie could only gaze
sorrowfully in his face.

The man turned away, and made a step towards his oxen, but then came
back and said abruptly:

"I never shall forget your boy, ma'am. His words led me to the Bible.
Bad as wife and I have taken on since our only child ran away from
us, we should have been a great deal worse but for the words of
comfort we found in God's book."

"I am truly rejoiced to hear you say that," exclaimed Mrs. Curtis,
warmly. "If you have learned to pray, you will find comfort in leaving
your child in the hands of the almighty Friend whose eye has followed
him in all his wanderings. Remember the heart of our Saviour yearns
over the creatures for whom he has shed his blood."

"Thank you, ma'am," faltered the man, his eyes growing dim. "I wish
wife could have heard you talk; but I shall tell her every word I can
remember. I don't mind saying to you, that wife and I were never so
nigh each other as since we began to pray. There used to be high words
between us, I accusing her of humoring the boy; and she calling me a
hard old tyrant. But each of us sees now that we were both in the
wrong. If we'd taught him the Bible from the first, he would have
stuck to it. There's the promise, 'Train up a child in the way he
should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.'"

At this moment Mr. Curtis was seen hurrying toward them; and Mr.
Cahart with a "God bless your boy, ma'am," turned abruptly away.




CHAPTER VI.

CLEARING THE CREEK.


Albert Dodge, the new gardener passed ten days while he was recruiting
his health, in visiting gardens and green houses, trying to improve
his taste and gain all the information in his power. He had agreed
with Mr. Curtis to return to Oxford as soon as the family were settled
at Woodlawn and remain as long as the weather would allow out-door
work. When the frost forbade further improvements, he was to leave and
spend three months in the employ of Hantz, the celebrated florist.

But one morning the very last of October, as Mr. Curtis was sauntering
along near the lake, absorbed in a project he had just formed, the
daily coach stopped before the gate, and who should spring from it but
Albert Dodge.

This young man, as I have already described, had such a merry face
that few could meet him without a warmth in the region of the heart.
Certainly his new master could not, and advancing cordially he held
out his hand, exclaiming:

"I was just thinking of you, and wishing you were at hand to help me
plan a little. I want to do something with this brook."

"I came on purpose to offer a suggestion, sir. I've been here and
there on an exploring tour; and I am happy to say I have found no
place which has so many natural advantages as _ours_."

He laid some stress on the word; his eye twinkling, and then added:

"It is my intention to make myself so important to you, that you will
never part with me. I already feel almost as much interest in Woodlawn
as if the deeds stood registered in the name of Albert Dodge."

"I'm glad of it," answered the Squire, laughing, "and to prove my
confidence in your ability, I will ask you what I shall do with this
little creek; it spreads itself out very awkwardly just at this point
where it ought to be most graceful."

"I have it, sir," said Dodge after a careful survey. "I should clear
the stream which runs muddy in this place by throwing pebbles to the
bottom; widen it twenty feet more; make a pretty little egg-shaped
island in the centre, upon which I should plant a few shrubs and
perhaps a weeping willow, which would thrive admirably in this wet
soil."

"Good! good! It shall be done! When shall you be ready to go to
work?"

"To-day, if Grant can come with his oxen. I can postpone one visit I
wish to make till winter."

The next morning Bertie came riding to the spot on Whitefoot's back.
Buck and Bright were there, the wagon backed down to the very edge of
the water, while Star and Spot were dragging off a load of mud scraped
or scooped up from the bed of the shallow brook.

"Where is papa?" inquired Bertie, after he had sat awhile watching
the operations.

"Gone with the new gardener to buy some trees," answered Tom,
laughing. "The Squire's up to all sorts of improvements. Shouldn't
wonder a mite if he should take down yonder mountain to give him a
view of the city."

"I think this will be very pretty when it's done," remarked the child.
"How long did they say they should be gone?"

"Didn't say in my hearing. Bertie I wish you'd ask the Squire if he'd
like a load of beach pebbles, 'cause if he does, I'll bring him a load
to-morrow morning. Those are the kind to make this water run clear."

"Oh, there they are!" shouted the boy, trotting off to meet them.
"Have you bought the trees, Papa?"

"Yes, and brought them home, don't you see them?"

"What, those little things?"

"Willows grow very fast, my son. They will thrive better than if they
were larger."

"But, papa, how can we get to the island? Shall we have a bridge?"

"You must ask Dodge, Bertie. He is the author of this plan."

"I'll tell you what would be better than a bridge," explained Dodge,
laughing. "You must learn to row a boat; and then you can land at any
place, you know. But our island is more for ornament than for profit.
We don't expect to have a settlement there."

"Why wouldn't it be pretty to have a little house for the swans on it?
Joe Allen told me they could be taught to come on shore for their
feed."

"We will consider that proposal, my dear, when the island is in
existence," answered papa; "in the meantime you may think of a pretty
name for it."




CHAPTER VII.

PAT'S VISIT HOME.


I hope my readers have become so much interested in Pat Riley that
they will be as glad to hear from him as Bertie was.

We left him, as you know, in Mrs. Taylor's back chamber, making tops
for the children. In a few days he was able to go down stairs. The
first use he made of his liberty was to make a reel for Mrs. Taylor
to wind her yarn on.

Wishing to keep the boy employed, the good woman had borrowed a reel
of a neighbor, and set him to work winding thread. The contrivance
greatly delighted him. He examined it with the utmost care, pushing it
up and down, to fit it for a larger or smaller skein, much to the
amusement of the good woman.

"Did you never see one before?" she asked, smiling.

"No, ma'am, but it's very nice."

No more was said on the subject, and she never noticed that he
examined it again; but the third day after he was released from the
chamber he followed her one day into the pantry, and presented her a
new one made by his own hands.

"You won't have to borrow again," he said, his face all in a glow of
pleasure. "I'm going to try it now. I saved one skein on purpose."

Mrs. Taylor carried it out and exhibited it in triumph to the family.

"Did you do it all yourself?" asked Mr. Curtis, smiling his
approbation.

"Yes, sir; but I had seen the one up stairs. I made more holes though,
'cause that was too large for some skeins and not large enough for
others."

"You are a genius, Pat. I have no doubt you'll succeed, now that
you've resolved to try your best."

The day before he left for the school, Pat asked Mrs. Taylor's
permission to go and bid his father good-by. It was some weeks since
the old man had been there, though he promised to come in a day or
two. The good woman consented, though she told him the air was rather
chilly for a boy who had been so sick.

On his way he passed the spot where Bertie had first talked with him.
He stopped and sat on the top of the stone wall, where he had listened
to the first kind words he ever remembered to have heard addressed to
him. I trust no little boy or girl who reads this will think the worse
of him, when I tell them that his breast began to heave, and the
tears gushed to his eyes.

"I wouldn't be 'thieving Pat' again," he said, doubling his fist, "no,
not for--not for--" At this moment his eye rested on the handsome new
edifice at Woodlawn; and he added with an impressive gesture, "no, not
for the Squire's new house. I'd rather starve again and have mammy
push me down stairs or anything rather than go sneaking round hiding
behind the walls, and feeling so ashamed to look any body in the face.
No, no, I'll stick to the new Patrick, as Mrs. Taylor tells about,
let what will come, I'll never lie to Bertie, and go back to my old
ways."

He felt stronger and better after this resolve, and walked on rapidly
until he reached the tree into which he had climbed to watch for
Bertie. The sight of his old home just beyond, had excited him a good
deal; and he laughed at the recollections of his fear that the Squire
had sent Joe Allen to take him to jail.

Then he stepped up to the door and looked within. All seemed
deserted. A few half-burnt brands had broken and fallen apart on the
wide, old-fashioned hearth, the low wooden chair usually occupied by
his father was vacant; a piece of crust, mouldy with age, lay on the
table, and a broken pipe beside it.

Pat stood a moment gazing around, his face growing every moment more
sad, then suddenly ran up the old creaking stairs to his own chamber.

"She's done it. I knew she would," he exclaimed, angrily. "She always
did everything she could to spite me!"

He picked from the dirty floor two or three tail feathers of a tiny
yellow bird which he had saved from the jaws of a cat, though not
until it had received it's death wound; and which after a fashion of
his own he had stuffed.

This, almost his only treasure, his drunken step-mother had
deliberately pulled to pieces, scattering the feathers on the floor.

One tiny feather he put into his pocket as a memorial of the life
which had forever passed, and then hurried away from scenes which
recalled such bitter memories.

"Dad is gone," he exclaimed aloud, walking a short distance from the
house, then turning back for another last gaze; "and perhaps I shall
never see him again."




CHAPTER VIII.

LETTER FROM PAT.


Before this he had been glad to meet no one; but now he felt a keen
desire to ascertain where his father had gone; and resolved to return
by the way of Tom Grant's, though a flurry of snow filled the air, and
inquire whether Mr. Riley had been seen of late. Mrs. Grant, Tom's
mother, was getting dinner, while Jerry was at work cutting wood in
the back yard. The old lady knew how hard Pat had tried to reform, and
greeted him in a most cordial manner.

"Why, Patrick!" she exclaimed, catching hold of his arm, "Come right
in out of the snow. So yer going off to school, I hear my son say,
well it's a lucky chance for ye, and I wish ye well. Sit right down
now. Thomas will be at home soon, and he'll be glad to see ye."

"I must be going in a minute," Pat answered, "twirling his hat, I
only wanted to know when you've seen Daddy. I've been to the old
place, and there's no sign of anybody living in it."

"Haven't ye heard? Well, I s'pose ye haven't. Yer daddy's cleared out,
bag and baggage. I don't s'pose he had to hire much of a team, either,
to carry off what was left at the old place; but he took his pipe and
a change of clothes; and I don't believe there is enough left in the
shanty, to make it dangerous to leave the door open o' nights. Folks
as heard him talk, do say he was clear discouraged with yer mammy's
drinking and quarrelling; and he's gin her up entirely. But I can't
tell nothing how that is."

"Do you know where he's gone?" asked Pat.

"La, no; I don't s'pose he knew hisself. He had a stick over his
shoulder, and his bundle hung on the end on't, and that's all I can
tell ye."

The boy turned without a word, and walked away. He knew now why his
father came to the farm again so soon after his first visit; and why
he consented so easily that the Squire should send him to school. He
had resolved to quit his old home forever.

All this he told Mrs. Taylor that night, and ended with a sigh.

"I don't suppose he and I shall ever see each other again. He wasn't
so bad till mammy came."

[Illustration]

About a week after he reached the school, his teacher wrote Mr.
Curtis,

    "Patrick Riley arrived here a few days after the term commenced,
    and has conducted himself in such a manner as to win the
    approbation of all his teachers. I agree with you, that he will
    make a smart man; and from present appearances, I hope also, a
    useful one. I mentioned to him that I intended to write you, and
    was gratified to notice that he is not destitute of gratitude for
    all you have done to improve his condition. He requested me to
    express his thanks, also to your son, who he says first awoke in
    him a desire to become an honest boy, and likewise to Mrs. Taylor.
    Patrick is taking hold of his lessons with a will, and hopes to
    write you soon.

                    "Respectfully yours,

                         "JOHNATHAN HAVEN."

This letter was read with great interest by all the family; but there
was no one who rejoiced so much at Pat's good conduct as Bertie.

Mrs. Curtis was greatly affected the night following to hear the
little boy thank God for helping Pat to be good and obey the
commandments.

About a fortnight later, Whitefoot stopped at the village post office,
and Bertie jumped from his carriage and ran in with a package of
letters for the mail.

"Look here!" exclaimed the girl, who delivered letters. "Is this for
you?"

The child glanced at it, laughing and blushing. It was a curious
shaped epistle, almost square, without an envelope, the name being a
rough imitation of printing, and spelled Birty Kertis, Oxford; care
Squier Kertis.

"I think it must be intended for you," said the girl, with an arch
glance. "It is post-marked Lexington."

"Oh, yes, it's mine!" exclaimed the boy. "It's from Pat Riley, I guess
he wrote it himself."

It was indeed from Patrick. I do not think my readers could decipher
it, if I copied the curious spelling, I shall, therefore, give it as
Mrs. Curtis, after considerable study, read it to Bertie.

     "DEAR FRIEND:--There's a big boy here as knows how to write
     tip-top. I and Tip (that's his name) are the most popular boys
     in school. He's agreed to write this letter for me, 'cause I want
     ye to know how I'm getting on; and there's something I want to
     tell ye awful bad, 'cause I know ye'll like it. You was the first
     one that ever spoke encouraging to me, and I'll never forget it
     of ye as long as I know myself, nor then either. I'm going to try
     and be a Squire like your pa; and then I'll take all the little
     thieving fellows I can find, and help 'em to be good. Rich folks
     don't know how hard 'tis for poor ones to keep from stealin' when
     their stomach is as flimpsy as a rag. I know how to pity 'em, for
     when mammy locked me up till I'd agree to steal again, there was
     such a gnawing and gnawing, that I should have give in, if it
     hadn't been for you.

     "Every time, I'd say to myself, I can't stand it no longer; then
     I'd see you a-sitting in your donkey carriage, looking at me with
     such sorry eyes.

     "But that isn't what I was going to tell yer; and Tip is getting
     tired writing such a lot of stuff. I've begun to be a soldier, I
     don't wear any uniform except a little blue star on my coat; but
     everybody knows by this, that I'm trying to fight against all my
     old habits. It's hard work I tell you. 'Tisn't as if I was at
     Mrs. Taylor's, with everybody helping me, and nothing to make me
     cross. There's lots of bad boys here, who won't join the company
     of soldiers, and they do everything they can to hinder and bother
     us. I'm most afraid to tell yer one thing, for fear ye'll think
     Tip and I are better than we are. We've begun to pray God to help
     us, and it does come a sight easier to do as we oughter.

     "If ever ye see anything of my poor old father, I'd like him to
     know that I pray for him whenever I do for myself. I shouldn't
     wonder if I should get so I could forgive mammy sometime. Perhaps
     she didn't know any better.

                    "Your true friend,

                         "PATRICK RILEY."




CHAPTER IX.

BERTIE'S SPELLING MATCH.


Early in November, Mr. Curtis removed his family to Woodlawn; and
Bertie commenced attending school. It was too far for him to walk, and
now he found Whitefoot a greater convenience than ever. Close by the
schoolhouse lived a farmer by the name of Camp, who readily agreed
with Mr. Curtis to allow the donkey to stand in his barn during
school hours.

Miss Esther Taylor, his former teacher, welcomed him back with great
pleasure, for she had learned to love him like a brother. His health
had now greatly improved by so much exercise in the open air, and he
resolved to study hard through all the winter months.

I suppose there are many children more forward in their lessons than
he was; but he had laid a good foundation for an education. He could
read correctly, and with expression, and had begun Colburn's Mental
Arithmetic. In geography he had only learned the general divisions of
the globe, and had begun to draw upon his slate, islands, lakes,
capes, peninsulas, etc., which greatly helped him to understand the
explanations in his book.

In spelling, Bertie was rather backward, not being quick to learn the
sounds of which the word was composed.

Miss Taylor was resolved her pupils should excel in arithmetic and
spelling. In order to excite their ambition she allowed them twice a
week to have what is called a spelling-match.

Two boys or two girls among the best spellers were chosen alternately
by vote of the scholars, and these called out from among their mates
the names of those they wished on their side. Of course each one
wished the best spellers, in order that his side might win the prize,
and as poor Bertie generally failed, he was left out.

After this had occurred two or three times, the little fellow began to
feel mortified; and one night said to his mamma,--

"Will you please buy me a satchel? I'm going to bring home my
spelling-book every night; and I can't carry it very well on
Whitefoot's back, without it's in a satchel."

Mrs. Curtis left the room, and presently returned with a small leather
bag, to which a strap was attached.

"Will this do?" she asked.

"Oh, yes, mamma! that is just what I wanted."

After this, mamma, and papa, and Mrs. Dodge, and Nellie, and Bertie,
and Nancy had a great many spelling-matches, the rule being that every
one who pronounced the word must do so with the greatest distinctness,
so that every letter as far as possible should be articulated.

Before the winter was past, Bertie's dislike to his spelling-book was
wholly conquered, and he was called as often as any scholar to try
for the prize in the spelling-match.

This was the first winter the children had ever passed in the country.
When the snow began to fall, Winnie was delighted, and went out to
catch the flakes on a piece of paper.

Their house was of a June temperature, while the new conservatory
furnished bouquets and cut flowers in abundance.

It was not the intention of Mr. and Mrs. Curtis to keep aloof from the
villagers. Indeed, by this time, the Oxford people well understood
that the Squire and his wife were ready to befriend them whenever they
were in distress.

The gentleman taught a class in the Sabbath School, composed of
married ladies who had never before been members.

Mrs. Taylor, who was one of the class, often remarked she would arise
long before light rather than to lose the opportunity of hearing the
Bible explained in the simple, practical way the Squire performed the
service.

It was a happy day for the good pastor of Oxford when Mr. Curtis
purchased his farm at Woodlawn. From their first introduction, the
hearts of these truly Christian persons were drawn toward each other.
They were working in the same cause to win souls to the Saviour whom
they loved. One was rich, and the other comparatively poor; but both
had consecrated themselves and all that they possessed, to the
Saviour, who had bought them with his precious blood; and both desired
so to live and to train their families, that when lying on the bed of
death, they might say with Paul,--"I have fought a good fight; I have
finished my course; I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness."




CHAPTER X.

BERTIE'S PRESENTS.


Christmas Day dawned clear and cold. As soon as it was light enough to
see across the chamber Bertie crept from his bed toward the window,
where on one of the knobs belonging to the shutters, he could see a
huge stocking tied by a string, and stuffed to its utmost capacity.

The little fellow laughed heartily as he felt of the stocking, to
ascertain what was within it. Then he jumped on a chair, trying to
take the sock down, but with a sudden thought,--

"Winnie would like to see me take the things out," he leaped into bed
again, and began in his childish way to guess what presents he had
received, and who they were from.

"I wonder whether I shall have a new Bible," he said half aloud, "I
had a Bible last year from mamma; but no, I don't think she'll give
me another, because she said she hoped that one would last me for a
long time."

Presently he heard some little feet pattering along the hall, and then
Winnie's bright face peeped into the room.

"Dit up, Bertie," she said, laughing, and showing all her white teeth.
"Dit up, and have a merry Tismus."

"Oh, Winnie darling, I hope you'll have many merry Christmases! Now
let's go and see papa and mamma, and then when Nancy has dressed you,
I'll show you my presents."

"Law!" exclaimed Nancy, raising her hands, "you don't mean to say you
haven't taken down your stocking. What would Saint Nick say?"

"I know who Saint Nick is," Bertie answered, with a merry laugh. "It's
mamma, I saw her last year come creeping softly into my room in the
city, and hang it up. I'd rather have mamma than anybody, because she
knows what I would like."

"Well, dear, hurry and dress. Your mamma isn't awake yet; and then
you can show us your presents."

"Did you give me anything, nurse?"

"I! what a question!" she exclaimed, in pretended horror.

"But I think you did, because when I went to the nursery of a sudden
last night, you threw your apron over something you was working, and
you looked ever so queer."

"Why, Bertie, I never thought you watched me so, I must be careful
what I do. Well, supposing I did, what should you like best?"

"A ball for Winnie and I to play in the house with. One that would not
break the windows, I mean."

Nurse laughed and looked wise, and then left the room. Soon after
Bertie finished dressing, and ran to wish mamma and papa a "Merry
Christmas."

"Well, my son, has St. Nick crept down your chimney?" asked papa
directing an arch glance at his wife.

"My St. Nick has," was the boy's answer, as he kissed his mamma.

"What was in the stocking, then? I think it's very strange no one hung
a stocking for me."

"What is that over yonder, Lawrence?" asked the lady, laughing.

"Ah, a stocking for me! that is more than I expected. Well, now I'm
satisfied that's a joke; and I shall find nothing in it but paper."

"I'll run and get mine, and then we'll look over our presents
together," said Bertie, in great glee.

Winnie now came in bringing a doll almost as large as herself. It was
made of kid, with a porcelain face, and had dresses which could be
taken off or put on at pleasure. This was given her by Mrs. Dodge and
the clothes by Nelly.

With a loud shout Bertie pulled out a small box in which was a
gingerbread man riding on a donkey. "I know where that came from very
quick," he said. "It smells just like Mrs. Taylor's gingerbread. Oh,
isn't it funny?"

"It is a very striking resemblance of you and Whitefoot," remarked
papa, trying to look grave, at which everybody laughed heartily.

Next came a small package tied with red cord, which contained--what do
you imagine? Why, a nightcap, with cook's compliments.

It was found to be a perfect fit, and mamma told him it would keep his
hair from being so snarled in the morning.

A pretty ball, just such as Bertie had caught a glimpse of under
Nancy's apron was next brought to view, which so much delighted him
that he dropped the stocking and began to toss it at once.

There was a gift from Miss Lerow of a beautiful pair of reins, knit of
bright worsted and ornamented with little bells. But what pleased him
perhaps more than everything else, was a jack-knife from Edward Torrey
with the words, "To the forgiving boy," marked on the inside of the
pasteboard box.

Old Mrs. Grant had not forgotten to add her gift, which was a pair of
warm mittens, done up with a nice, knit comforter from Mary Jerrold
Monsey.

Altogether it was a great success, and everybody felt very happy.




CHAPTER XI.

THE HEART AND HAND.


"Why don't you open your stocking, papa?" inquired Bertie, when he saw
the gentleman about to leave his chamber.

"I'll leave that to mamma," he said laughing.

"But really, Lawrence," she answered, "you might see for yourself.
You'll regret it if you don't."

"Oh, of course, Cecilia, and spoil your joke!" He hesitated a moment
but catching a glimpse of Bertie's anxious face, he turned back
suddenly, and took down the stocking from the hook.

Putting his hand cautiously into the top, as if he were afraid of
being bitten, at which the children shouted with laughter, he pulled
forth a nicely rolled package, the outside of which he most carefully
examined with his fingers.

"Very fine!" he exclaimed, with a quick glance at his wife. "It is a
doughnut, I presume."

"Doughnuts are not to be despised when they are given to express
affection," she answered, gravely.

"Well," he said, laying the package on his knees, "I'll see what else
there is. I may find a solitary raisin enveloped in a pound or two of
paper."

"Oh, papa, you're too funny!" shouted Bertie.

"Quick, Lawrence, the bell will ring for breakfast presently."

He drew cautiously from the stocking a small box, tied and sealed
with wax.

"All very grand," he began, with a shrug of the shoulders, when his
wife caught it from his hands.

"Open the other, first," she said.

He tore off the paper, and presently came to a note addressed to
"Lawrence Curtis, Esq." in a beautifully neat hand. Opening it
cautiously, he glanced at the bottom, and saw the names of his entire
class, when his countenance changed at once.

"Really," he said, "I had no idea of this," reading aloud, "'Will our
dear teacher please accept the enclosed slippers as a trifling token
of our gratitude?'

"They are beautiful! very tasteful; exactly what I wanted! I must have
them made up at once. Oh! here is the cash for that purpose! Well, my
friends, I'm very grateful. Now I'm encouraged to try again," taking
up the box, and quizzically glancing into the blushing face before
him.

It contained a watch-chain of exquisite workmanship, manufactured of
hair and gold, attached to which was an ornament in the shape of a
heart, and a key in the form of a hand.

"My heart and my hand are all I have to give," she whispered, kissing
his forehead, while a tear glistened in her eye. "The chain was made
from the hair you cut from my head when I was so very sick."

He raised the precious token to his lips, exclaiming with great
tenderness, "I shall wear it as long as I live. What would the world
be to me, Cecilia, without your heart and hand?"

There was a service in the church at ten, and at noon all the really
aged people in the parish had been invited to a dinner at Woodlawn.

"I want to have a regular house-warming," Mr. Curtis had said to his
wife. "I want to warm it with the good will of all our villagers." So
it was decided that the old people should come to dinner, the married
persons and children to tea, and the young people of both sexes in the
evening.

I wish I could paint a picture of the happy faces that gathered around
the festal board during that lovely Christmas Day. There was the good
pastor and his family improving this pleasant occasion to speak a word
here and there as it was needed among their flock. There were Mr. and
Mrs. Hunt, leading Susy who had just returned from the hospital. There
was Thomas Grant, his face red as a beet, gallanting a very sensible
looking girl who was soon to become his wife. There were swarms of
laddies and lasses, kept in constant good humor by Albert Dodge, who
had returned to Oxford for the occasion. There were groups of
children headed by Bertie, playing all sorts of games, or gathering in
a circle around the Squire, who told them funny stories.

"You have learned the secret of living," remarked the Pastor, when he
came to take leave. "In promoting the happiness and welfare of those
about us we ensure our own."

"That is the rule by which my wife is training our boy," answered the
gentleman. "No other house-warming could have pleased us so well as
this."




CHAPTER XII.

VIOLETS AND VIOLETTA.


When spring came, Bertie went one morning into his mamma's chamber
with a bunch of the earliest violets.

The curtains were dropped before the large bay window, and though it
was not cold a pleasant fire crackled in the open grate.

"Why, mamma, are you sick?" Bertie asked, running quickly to the side
of the bed.

"Have you seen papa?" said mamma, smiling. "He went out to tell you I
have a present for you."

"No, mamma, I didn't see him."

She turned down the sheet and showed him a tiny baby lying by her
side, trying to suck its own little rosy finger.

Bertie was so astonished he could not speak.

"It's your little sister, my son, and if papa consents, you may call
her Violetta in memory of these pretty flowers."

"Oh, mamma! I'm so glad! I love babies so dearly. Isn't she a
darling?"

At this moment Mrs. Dodge came into the room. "Well, Bertie," she
began, "your mamma has a pretty surprise for you. What do you think
Winnie will say?"

"She'll think it's a doll, mamma. Oh, may I bring her in?"

He ran to the door, and met papa with Winnie in his arms.

Papa looked very smiling and happy as he walked to the side of the
bed.

Baby had fallen asleep now, and was so quiet Bertie could hardly
believe she was alive.

Winnie's eyes grew larger and larger as she gazed, until at last she
gave a spring almost out of her papa's arms upon the bed.

Mamma screamed, and Mrs. Dodge came forward quickly; but papa had
caught her again and held her firm.

"It's your little sister," he explained; "but you must go now and
stay with Nellie, for Nancy wants the new baby to sleep."

"Let me take it a minute. Please, mamma, I wont break it. I wont,
certain," pleaded the child.

"Some day," said mamma, and then she turned so pale that Mrs. Dodge
hurried them all out of the chamber before mamma could ask whether the
little spring flower should be named Violetta.

With his treasures safe in the house, Mr. Curtis, with his gardener,
went to work with renewed zeal to beautify his grounds. His heart was
full of gratitude to the kind Being who had given him so many
blessings; and his delight was to be of benefit to those around him.
No one really in need was ever turned from his door; while many, like
Susy Hunt and Edgar Torrey, received the benefit of his donations.

"The Squire's son will be the father over again," said Mr. Taylor to
the clergyman, "there's nothing pleases him so much, as to give him a
chance to make somebody happy."

"Yes," was the reply, "and I never see him without recalling to
remembrance the words: 'It is more blessed to give than to receive.'"

The fall previous all the rubbish about the place had been cleared
away, the pieces of board and shavings, except what had been given to
the poor, being carried to the shed adjoining the barn. The turf
around the house had of course been a good deal cut up by the teams,
and Mr. Curtis resolved to have new sods immediately laid down, not
only on the terraces, but as far as the turf was broken.

This was quite a curiosity to Bertie, who followed Albert to the field
where the men were cutting out pieces of turf about one foot in width
and two feet in length; then back again to see that they were laid
smoothly upon the well prepared ground, and nicely hammered down with
large flat, wooden mallets.

With his exercise in the open air, Albert had lost something of his
flesh; but his spirits were never better; and in his management of
men, Mr. Curtis thought he had never known his equal. His gay good
humor seemed to inspire all in his employ with new life, while his
firm, clear manner of giving orders convinced them that he intended to
be obeyed.

It was often a severe trial to Bertie to leave for school just as the
men were engaged in some job which he particularly wished to see; but
mamma explained that if he wished to be a useful man he must lay in a
stock of knowledge while he was young.

One morning Mr. Curtis proposed to go to a nursery of trees near the
city for the purchase of currant, gooseberry, blackberry and other
bushes, together with a variety of ornamental shrubs.

Bertie's curiosity was greatly excited to visit such a place, which he
fancied must be almost like Eden.

His mamma shook her head, saying:

"You have had a long vacation, my dear. School is the first duty now."

The little fellow's lip quivered; and for a moment he looked quite
vexed; but while his parents with anxious hearts waited to see
whether he would submit cheerfully to parental authority, his brow
cleared, and he exclaimed:

"You always do know best, mamma. I should admire to go; but I dare say
papa will take me some time."

Papa smiled, but said nothing. Mamma drew her son to her side, and
kissed her approval of his conduct.

In five minutes he was trotting Whitefoot out of the yard, his smiles
as bright, and his brow serene as ever.




CHAPTER XIII.

BERTIE'S REWARD.


At noon, Bertie was obliged to hurry through his lunch, in order to be
back in time for the afternoon session, which commenced at one
o'clock, so that it often happened that he did not see his father till
night.

When he came into the house, he was eager to tell his mamma that at
last he had attained the honor of being at the head of the arithmetic
class. He supposed of course his father had gone to the city, and did
not therefore enquire for him. He only said:

"Please, mamma, don't tell papa when he comes home, because I want to
tell him myself."

"No, I promise," answered mamma, smiling.

At the supper-table, his delight was great, therefore, when he found
that instead of going to the city, Mr. Curtis had been to the town
where the quarry of granite was.

"I concluded," said papa, with a curious smile, "that it would be a
pleasure to go to the nursery in company with a boy who put aside his
own wishes in order to please his mother. Dodge must get his ground
ready, and wait till Saturday for his trees."

"Oh, papa! papa!!" shouted the boy, dancing with delight. "I mean to
be always good, you and mamma are so very kind."

This was Thursday; on Saturday morning at an early hour the Squire and
his son were on their way to the nursery.

They drove Duke in the carriage to the depot station, and left him in
a stable close by, so that he would be ready as soon as they returned
from the city. Bertie was in the gayest of spirits. He sat by the
window, watching the farmers at work in the fields, ploughing,
harrowing, or making furrows for putting the seed into their land. He
enjoyed all this vastly, because he understood how it ought to be
done.

He was so absorbed in watching these operations as they whizzed along
past one farm and then another, that he quite forgot the pleasant
errand on which he was bound. But suddenly he was recalled to the
present by a plaintive voice asking,--"Have a paper, sir? This
morning's paper, sir, and all the telegram news."

Mr. Curtis was absorbed in thought, and took no notice of the newsboy;
but there was something in the sad voice, which awoke Bertie's quick
sympathies.

"Papa! papa!" he repeated, pulling his father's arm, "won't you please
buy a paper? See how many the boy has left."

"I've too much on my mind to care for newspapers, dear."

Bertie raised himself till he could speak in his father's ear.

"Please, papa, see how sick he looks. Can't you buy one?"

The gentleman opened his pocket-book, and gave his son fifty cents.

"Use it as you please," he said, softly.

All this time the newsboy had been making change for a coarse,
rough-looking man who sat opposite, who was obliged to squirt a whole
mouthful of tobacco juice out of his mouth, before he could say,--

"Give me a Erald," and then another mouthful to add,--"Don't cheat,
now, you young rascal."

When the right change had been given, and the man was settled to his
paper, the newsboy turned back to the boy whose eyes had expressed so
much sympathy.

Bertie asked his papa if it would be too much trouble to change seats,
and then he asked,--

"Do you sell many papers?"

"Sometimes."

"What do you do with the money?"

"I give it to mother. It doesn't half support us, though, and now
she's going to die."

As the newsboy said this, a great sob seemed to choke him. Mr. Curtis,
whose eyes were fixed full on his face, saw the little fellow
resolutely suppress his emotion, and his sympathies were enlisted at
once.

"Where does your mother live?" he inquired.

"Close by the depot in the city."

"Go and sell all the papers you can, and then come back here."

"Yes, sir," with a grateful glance at Bertie.

The cars, however, had run into the depot, and the passengers were
beginning to alight, before they saw anything more of the newsboy.
Bertie was begging his father to wait a little longer, when some one
touched his arm; and there was the boy struggling up from behind.

"I've sold 'em all," he began, eagerly.

"Show me where your mother lives," Mr. Curtis said, when they stepped
to the platform.

"Yes, sir."

These were all the words spoken, but a beautiful ray of gratitude shot
from the poor boy's eyes.




CHAPTER XIV.

BERTIE AND THE NEWSBOY.


A few steps brought them to an old block, where their young guide
stopped.

"May I run in and tell mother you're coming. She's so very sick, sir."

"Yes, but be as quick as you can. I must catch the next train to
E----"

Before they had time to miss him, the boy returned, his face very,
very sad.

Bertie instinctively caught his hand, as they followed him to the
humble chamber.

A woman lay there in the last stages of consumption. On a table near
her was a cup, a tumbler, and a spoon, all empty.

"You are in distress," said Mr. Curtis, in a soothing tone; "tell me
what you need."

"Nothing for myself. I shall soon be where want and sorrow shall
never enter; but it is hard to leave my boy alone."

"Is he your only child?"

"The only one left of five. He will soon be an orphan."

Mr. Curtis stood a moment gazing about as if trying to judge from the
surroundings something of the character of the inmates, when he caught
a glimpse of Bertie.

The boy's eyes were fixed on his face with such an eager, wistful
gaze, as if he wondered his father did not offer relief, that he
resolved at once to befriend the orphan.

"You say," he began, "that you hope soon to be in heaven. Cannot you
cast your care for your child on your heavenly Father?"

"I have tried to; but sometimes my faith is weak. He has been taught
his duty to God. I"--

A fit of coughing interrupted her, after which, Mr. Curtis hastened to
say:

"I will be a friend to your boy. I must leave you now; but here is a
sum of money, you will need for immediate wants. I will try and call
again before night. In the meantime, what is your name?"

"Martha Washburn."

They hurried away, reached the cars just in time, found exactly what
they wished, smoke trees, tartarian honeysuckles, azalias, etc., etc.,
ordered them to be ready for Mr. Grant's team Monday noon, and then
went back to the city.

Bertie enjoyed everything. The long rows of trees, the neat lines of
bushes; but his heart was full of Jimmy Washburn. His little hand
nestled itself into his father's, and every chance he had to speak, he
repeated,--

"Oh, papa! I do love you. I do thank you so much. How glad that poor
woman looked when you told her you would take care of her boy."

Mr. Curtis told his wife afterward that he kept thinking, as he saw
Bertie's flushed, eager face, of the text, "of such is the kingdom of
heaven," and prayed that God might keep his heart like that of his
pure-minded boy.

Before he left the city, he made arrangements for Jamie's admission to
a mission school, where he would be well educated, and then sent to a
home in the great West. Then they hurried to Woodlawn to receive a
warm welcome from mamma, Winnie, and a smile from little Violetta.




CHAPTER XV.

THE LAST CHAPTER.


My young reader, I hope ere this you have come to love our little
Bertie, and are sorry that this is the last chapter of the last volume
about him and his sister Winnie.

I love Bertie dearly, and should like to tell you much more about him;
but in the short space that is left I can only relate a few words of
his after life.

Suppose I were to say that he became a liar, a thief and a
Sabbath-breaker, would you believe me? You could not, because you have
seen that he loved God and feared sin. You know how he grieved when he
disobeyed his parents; and how earnestly he confessed his fault to his
heavenly Father. You know how he tried to conquer his impatience, and
to be a dutiful, loving child. You know how earnestly he endeavored to
win every one around him to be good; and how anxious he was to make
others happy. Have I convinced you that in order to be happy yourself,
you must make others so? If I have, I shall be well paid for writing
the history of Bertie and his friends.

Perhaps you will remember that he was not over fond of study when he
first began to attend school; but when his mamma explained to him that
in order to become a useful member of society, as his father was, he
must learn to read, write and spell, which were the first steps
toward acquiring a good education, he made it a duty to learn every
lesson thoroughly, so that by the time he was sixteen years old he was
prepared to enter college.

In the meanwhile Winnie had come into her teens, and little Violetta
was no longer the baby; for there were a pair of beautiful twin
brothers at Woodlawn, "as near alike," Mrs. Dodge declared, "as two
peas in a pod."

In the quiet, country town of Oxford Mrs. Curtis had gained health
and strength. Of course, with so many little ones, her family cares
had greatly increased, but with faithful Nancy in the nursery, she
found time for visiting the poor and distressed, all of whom felt well
assured that no one in need of help would be refused aid from the kind
family at Woodlawn.

On a cold, windy December night, the inhabitants of Oxford were
startled by cries of "Fire! fire!" What was their horror to see the
flames coming from the large barn over the lake. With one accord men,
women and children rushed from all parts of the town to offer aid in
extinguishing the fire. It was, indeed, not the barn, but only an
immense stack of hay behind it. Mr. Curtis, with the aid of his men,
soon succeeded in extinguishing the flames; but the neighbors, once
aroused, could not be persuaded that all the dear family were safe,
until they had caught a glimpse of every member.

Mr. and Mrs. Curtis were deeply affected at the kind solicitude
manifested for their safety; and when they tried, with tearful eyes,
to express it, Mr. Taylor answered for the rest:

"Don't talk of thanking us for wanting to preserve one of God's
greatest blessings to us. Oxford would be a sorry place enough without
our dear ones at Woodlawn. No, my friends, we all feel that you belong
to us, from the Squire down to the tiny babes in the cradle. We're
thankful you didn't need our aid to-night to put out the fire; yet if
you ever do, there isn't a man, woman or child in Oxford, but would
be proud to render it, for there isn't one who hasn't received some
good at your hands."

When the hearty speech was ended, Bertie went around among the people,
shaking hands and thanking them earnestly for their kindness; and then
they quietly returned to their homes.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:


Minor changes have been made to correct typesetter's errors; otherwise,
every effort has been made to remain faithful to the author's words and
intent.





End of Project Gutenberg's Bertie and the Gardeners, by Madeline Leslie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BERTIE AND THE GARDENERS ***

***** This file should be named 26497.txt or 26497.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/4/9/26497/

Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
