The Project Gutenberg EBook of Reminiscences of two years with the colored
troops, by Joshua M. Addeman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Reminiscences of two years with the colored troops
       Personal Narratives of events in the War of the Rebellion,
       being papers read before the Rhode Island Soldiers and
       Sailors Historical Society. No. 7, Second Series

Author: Joshua M. Addeman

Release Date: October 1, 2008 [EBook #26747]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO YEARS WITH COLORED TROOPS ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | This e-book contains archaic spelling which has not been  |
    | modernized. To avoid confusion a list has been provided   |
    | at the end of this document.                              |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




PERSONAL NARRATIVES

OF EVENTS IN THE

WAR OF THE REBELLION,

BEING PAPERS READ BEFORE THE

RHODE ISLAND SOLDIERS AND SAILORS

HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

NO. 7.... SECOND SERIES.

[Illustration]

PROVIDENCE:
N. BANGS WILLIAMS & CO.
1880.




Copyrighted by
N. BANGS WILLIAMS.
1880.




REMINISCENCES

OF

TWO YEARS WITH THE COLORED TROOPS.

BY

J.M. ADDEMAN,
[LATE CAPTAIN FOURTEENTH R.I. HEAVY ARTILLERY, COLORED.]




PROVIDENCE:
N. BANGS WILLIAMS & CO.
1880.




Copyrighted by
N. BANGS WILLIAMS.
1880.

PRINTED BY E.L. FREEMAN & CO.




REMINISCENCES OF TWO YEARS

WITH THE

COLORED TROOPS.


The circumstances attending the organizing of a colored regiment in
this State are well remembered. In the summer of 1863, white men were
no longer eager to enlist for a war the end of which none could
foresee; but nevertheless the war must be prosecuted with vigor;
another draft was impending and the State's quota must be filled. With
difficulty Governor Smith obtained permission to organize a company,
and, as this rapidly filled, then a battalion, and finally a full
regiment of twelve companies of colored men for heavy artillery duty.
In common with many others I did not at the outset look with
particular favor upon the scheme. But with some hesitation I accepted
an appointment from the State as a second lieutenant and reported for
duty at Camp Smith, on the Dexter Training Ground, in this city. After
serving here for some weeks in the fall of 1863, in the organizing of
companies and forwarding them to Dutch Island, where the regiment was
in camp, I successfully passed an examination before what was known as
"Casey's Board," and after some preliminary service with a company of
the third battalion, was assigned to the command of Company H of the
second battalion, with whose fortunes my lot was cast till the close
of our term of service. On the turtle-backed crown of Dutch Island we
remained amid fierce storms and the howling winds that swept with keen
edge over the waters of the Narragansett, until the 20th of January,
1864, when, as I was about to make a visit home, the transport, Daniel
Webster, appeared in the harbor and orders were issued to prepare for
embarking on the following day. At the time appointed, we were on
board, but the sutler's arrangements were not completed until early
the next morning, when we got up steam and were soon out of sight of
our familiar camp.

The incidents of the voyage it is not necessary to recite to any
comrade whose chance it was to make a trip in an army transport, which
had long since seen its better days, and which had been practically
condemned before Uncle Sam found for it such profitable use. The men
packed like sheep in the hold, the officers, though far better off as
to quarters, yet crowded too much for convenience and comfort, the
inevitable sea-sickness, the scanty rations, and what was worse, the
extreme scarcity of water, were annoyances but the counterpart of
those endured by many brave men who preceded and followed us to the
scene of duty. But in the main the weather favored us, and on the
hurricane deck we spent the hours off duty, gazing far across the
illimitable waste of waters, as day after day we approached a warmer
clime with its glowing sunshine and glittering waves and the deep blue
sky bending down in unbroken circle around us. The rebel cruisers were
then in the midst of their destructive work and it was natural, as we
caught sight of a distant vessel, to speculate whether it was a
friendly or a hostile craft. When we were in the latitude of
Charleston, a steamer appeared in the far distance, then a flash, a
puff of smoke and a loud report notified us that it was sending us its
compliments. It approached nearer, a boat put out and officers from
the gunboat Connecticut came on board, examined our papers and soon
allowed us to proceed. The weather rapidly grew warmer and our winter
clothing proved very uncomfortable. The steamer's supply of water was
exhausted and we had to depend on sea-water, distilled by the vessel's
boilers, for all uses. The allowance of an officer was, I think, a
pint a day. Warm and insipid, its only use, as I remember, was for our
morning ablutions, which were more a matter of form than of substance.
In rounding the coast of Florida we bumped one evening on a sand bar
or coral reef. I was very unceremoniously tumbled over, and the game
of back-gammon, in which I was engaged with a brother officer, was of
course, ended at once. Rushing on deck we found ourselves clear of the
obstruction and again on our way. But the breakers, in plain sight,
gave us assurance of the peril we had so narrowly escaped.

In the early morning of February second we crossed the bar and noted
well that line stretching far to the right and left of us, drawn with
almost mathematical exactness, which marked the demarcation between
the clear waters of the Gulf and the turbid waters of the Mississippi.
In going up the river the buckets were constantly dropped into the
muddy stream, and their contents, when allowed to stand for a few
minutes, would soon furnish an abundance of that luxury we all craved
so much,--clear water, cooled by the ice and snows of the far north.
Reaching the inhabited portions of the river, we saw the planters busy
with their spring work, and though the air was chilled with the icy
breath of northern climes, the orange trees in blossom and the green
shrubbery on the shores, gave indication of the semi-tropical climate
we had reached. Arriving at New Orleans in due season, our senior
captain reported for orders. I must not pause to speak of the strange
scenes which greeted our eyes in this, the most cosmopolitan city of
our land. A delay here of two or three days proved almost as
demoralizing as a campaign, and I, for one, was glad when the orders
came to move. For reasons that afterwards transpired, we dropped down
the stream some fifteen miles to a point called English Turn. It
derived its name, as I remember the tradition, from the fact that as
the commander of some English vessel was slowly making his way up what
was then an unknown and perhaps unexplored body of water, he was met
by some French explorer, coming from the opposite direction, who gave
him to understand that all the country he had seen in coming up the
river, was, by prior discovery, the rightful possession of the French
monarch. Though no Frenchman had perhaps seen it, yet with his facile
tongue he worked persuasion in the mind of the bluff Englishman, who
at this point, turned about and put out to sea--hence its name,
English Turn. We found here relics of very early times in the form of
an old earthwork, and an angle of a brick wall, built, when, and
whether by French or Spaniard, none could tell. Here we soon selected
a site and laid out our camp. The time rapidly passed in the busy
occupations which each day brought, in little excursions into the
surrounding country, in conversations with the colored people whose
sad memories of the old slavery days recalled so vividly the
experiences of Uncle Tom and his associates in Mrs. Stowe's famous
tale. Nor were the days unvaried by plenty of fun. Music, vocal and
instrumental, we had in abundance. The mimic talents of our men, led
to the performance of a variety of entertainments, and in their
happy-go-easy dispositions, their troubles set very lightly on them.
Their extravagancies of expression were by no means an unremarkable
feature. When I at first heard their threats to each other, couched
sometimes in the most diabolical language, I had deemed it my duty at
once to rush into the company street and prevent what, among white
men, I would suppose to be the prelude to a bloody fight. "Oh,
Captain," would be the explanation, "we'se only a foolin'."

While here, we had a little flurry of snow, which reminded us of what
we had left in abundance behind, but which was a startling novelty to
the natives, few, if any, of whom, had ever seen anything like it
before. Their explanation was that the Yankees had brought it with
them. In the course of a week or two, an assistant Inspector-General
put in an appearance and gave us a pretty thorough over-hauling; but
what astonished him the most, was to find us in so healthy a
condition; for it appeared that because of a few cases of measles on
board ship, we had been represented as being in very bad shape, and it
was for sanitary reasons that we were sent to English Turn.

We now began to hope for some change. The place was decidedly
unhealthy. Our men were dropping off rapidly from a species of putrid
sore throat which was very prevalent. The soil was so full of moisture
that we had to use the levee for a burial ground. Elsewhere a grave
dug two feet deep would rapidly fill with water, and to cover a coffin
decently, it was necessary that two men should stand on it, while the
extemporized sextons completed their task.

Washington's birthday was duly celebrated, and foot-ball, wheel-barrow
and sack races, among other sports, furnished fun for the whole camp.
Even the inevitable greased pig was provided, but he was so greasy
that he got over the lines into the swamps and--freedom.

Our battalion commander, Major Shaw, arrived on the third of March,
and on the following day, it was my good fortune to witness, in New
Orleans, the inauguration of Gov. Hahn, who, by some form of election,
had been chosen the chief executive. The unclouded sky, the rich
foliage and the beautiful atmosphere, combined to make a glorious day,
and the spectacular arrangements were in keeping. The place was
Lafayette Square. Flags of all nations waved in the breeze. In seats,
arranged tier above tier, were five thousand school children of the
city, dressed in white with ribbons and sashes of the national colors,
while many thousands of the citizens were gathered as spectators.
Patriotic songs were sung by the little folks; five hundred musicians
filled the air with sweet sounds, and in the anvil chorus which was
sung, fifty sons of Vulcan kept time on as many veritable anvils;
while some half dozen batteries of artillery came in heavy on the
choruses. These were fired simultaneously by an electrical
arrangement; and the whole was under charge of P.S. Gilmore, a name
not now unknown to fame in grand musical combinations. An elaborate
address by General Banks, then commanding the department, was an
interesting feature of the occasion.

Our life at English Turn, was varied by little of special interest. Of
course there was no enemy at hand except those foes which a hot
climate breeds so rapidly. A mysterious order came one day, to detail
one hundred men "to join the expedition," and we were notified that a
steamer would call for them on the morrow. Details of picked men were
selected from each company. Five days' rations and forty rounds of
ammunition, were dealt out to each, and in light marching order they
waited several days for the steamer to appear. It was in vain,
however, and we reluctantly gave up the prospect of some little
excitement. We came to the conclusion that somebody at headquarters
had forgotten to countermand the order, or, like Mr. Toots, had deemed
it of no consequence.

We discussed the varying prospects of change, sometimes coming as a
rumor that we should be ordered to Texas, where was the first
battalion of our regiment; sometimes that we should join the Red River
expedition, which was then forming, or the expedition against Mobile
which was in contemplation. But after six weeks delay at English Turn,
we received orders to move up the river to Plaquemine, a point some
one hundred and twenty miles above New Orleans, a few miles below and
on the opposite bank from Baton Rouge. This town was at the entrance
of the Bayou Plaquemine, of which Longfellow makes mention in the
story of Evangeline's search for her lover; a description which gives
so good an idea of the bayous by which Louisiana is intersected, that
I quote it in this connection.

    "They * * * entering the Bayou of Plaquemine,
    Soon were lost in a maze of sluggish and devious waters,
    Which, like a network of steel, extended in every direction.
    Over their heads the towering and tenebrous boughs of the cypress
    Waved like banners that hang on the walls of ancient cathedrals.
    Deathlike the silence seemed, and unbroken save by the herons
    Home to their roosts in the cedar trees returning at sunset,
    Or by the owl, as he greeted the moon with demoniac laughter."

Here we relieved the Forty-Second Ohio, and went into camp. As we
marched through the streets of the village to the site of our camp,
the scowling looks of the white spectators, sufficiently indicated
their sentiments and especially their wrath at being guarded by
"niggers."

We found the state of affairs very different from the tranquil
neighborhood we had just left. The surrounding country was infested
with guerilla bands, and in the jail were a number of rebel prisoners
who had been captured in recent raids. The latter received from the
town's people very gratifying evidences of sympathy, and in their
comparatively comfortable quarters and abundant supplies, afforded a
vivid contrast to the treatment received by our boys at Libby and
Andersonville. Intimations were quite freely expressed by the
prisoners, that it would soon be their turn to guard us, and we were
cautioned by friends and from headquarters, to be on the alert against
a sudden attack.

In the evening of the day after our arrival, we were startled by a
steamer approaching the landing, all ablaze from stem to stern. The
entire heavens seemed illuminated, and it was light enough to read
with perfect distinctness. The vessel was loaded with some three
thousand bales of cotton, and in landing at a point above us, the
sparks from the torch--a wire basket filled with pine knots, and used
after dark to light the loading and unloading of the steamer,--had set
the cotton afire. The motion of the boat and the perfect draft from
her construction, peculiar to nearly all the river craft, of course
spread the fire with great rapidity, and only time sufficient to
rescue the passengers was permitted. The vessel had a large freight of
live stock, some of which escaped to the shore, but most of them
perished in the flames, filling the air with their piteous cries. Our
particular attention was devoted to our magazine, which was an
ordinary store-house and exposed to some danger. Its contents we could
ill afford to lose, and their explosion would have made a sensation
much more lively than even the destruction of the steamer.

At Plaquemine an earth work had been begun by our predecessors. It had
four bastions, one of which was assigned to each of our companies. The
work was in a very incomplete condition, and except for the protection
its parapets afforded, would have been of little service. In the
threatening aspect of affairs, it became necessary at once to
strengthen our defences, and under the direction of an engineer,
details of men were set to work, and rapid progress was made.

In April parties of guerillas and rebel cavalry began to operate
actively in our neighborhood. At Indian village, a few miles distant,
they burned a large quantity of cotton which had been sent in by
planters or collected by speculators and was awaiting transportation.
About the same time mysterious signals attracted our attention, and
soon afterwards, we learned that a body of two hundred cavalry had
crossed the Grand River for the purpose of attacking us. The men slept
on their arms, but no attack was made. A week or two afterwards, I had
occasion to visit New Orleans on business, and while there, heard a
report that Plaquemine was "gobbled up" by the rebs. I was very much
relieved on my return to find everything in _statu quo_. A raid
shortly afterwards on Bayou Goula, a trading station a few miles below
us, resulted in the destruction of considerable property, but no
captures of prisoners.

On the twenty-fifth of May the gunboat 54 was sent to cruise on the
river in our neighborhood, and it was a welcome reinforcement to our
meagre numbers. On the twenty-eighth of May the cavalry of General
Banks' army, on their retreat from the Red River campaign, passed
through our post, remaining a short time in our vicinity. Among them
was a portion of our Third Rhode Island cavalry, and no hospitality
ever gave greater mutual pleasure than that which it happened to be in
our power then to grant. The record of that expedition has been made
up, but there was a refreshing vigor of opinion expressed by our
comrades on the conduct of the campaign. It seemed very lonesome when
they left us with their commander,--a true Rhode Island son, General
Richard Arnold.

Orders came within a day or two from Baton Rouge, announcing a change
of commanders of the district, and exhorting us to get everything into
fighting trim. It will be remembered that flushed with victory the
rebels followed close on the heels of our retreating army, and were
only stopped by the lack of transportation to cross the swift and deep
Atchafalaya. Of course we presumed that they would make one of their
raids down the coast and attack our post, and that of Donaldsonville,
some twenty-five miles below us, which constituted the principal
defences on the river above New Orleans. With the exception, however,
of capturing some of our cavalry pickets, we had no trouble, though
frequent alarms kept us on the qui vive. The beating of the long roll
was almost a nightly occurrence; but this I should not mention to
soldiers, except to refer to an instance that now occurs to me in
illustration of the rapidity of the mind's movements, at times. About
the time of the raids on our northern frontier, I was dreaming one
night, that we were ordered home to proceed at once to some point on
the border. All the movements incident to our departure and to our
arrival at Providence, were before me. As we were halting in Exchange
Place, with arms stacked and men at ease, I obtained permission to go
home for a few minutes to see my family, to whom our arrival was
unknown, when the roll sounded and we were ordered to fall in at once
to take the train. Of course my momentary disappointment was great,
but awaking at once, I heard the drums beating in reality, and
jumping into my outer clothing and equipments in a hurry, was shortly
at the head of my company. The first beat of the drum had probably
started the long train of the incidents of my dream.

In the midst of these rumors of attack, in the early morning of August
sixth we were visited by a body of mounted men. They dashed upon our
pickets who made a bold stand for a short time, and then scattered for
shelter. The rebels had caught sight of the officer, Lieutenant
Aldrich, who was in command, and while a part of them made diligent
search for him, the remainder dashed into the town, and breaking up
into parties raided through the various streets, firing somewhat
indiscriminately, but more particularly at what contrabands they saw.
The companies gathered in their respective bastions in the fort and we
expected a lively brush. As I stood on the parapet and got a glimpse
of a portion of the enemy, I ached to let fly a shell, but the danger
to innocent parties was too great to warrant it just then. I remember
how amused I was at the appearance of the gallant commander of our
post, as with his coat and equipments in one hand, and holding up his
nether garments in the other, he was "double-quicking" from his
quarters in the town, to a place of security in the fort. After that
he selected quarters nearer us. The prospect of being "gobbled up" was
not particularly gratifying, especially to a "nigger" officer, who had
Fort Pillow memories in mind. As the rebels did not appear to be
coming to us, a strong detachment under command of Adjutant Barney,
was sent out to exchange compliments with them. They gave us no
opportunity for this but soon retired, taking with them three of our
pickets and one cavalry vidette, whom they had captured. We
understood, the next day, that our men were shot in cold blood.
Lieutenant Aldrich and the men with him, escaped through the friendly
protection of an osage orange grove. Others swam the bayou and thus
escaped certain death if captured. I think our casualties were,
besides those taken prisoners, one man killed and a few wounded.
Several of the rebels were said to be killed or wounded. One of the
latter, as I remember, fell into our hands and was taken into our
hospital where he received the same treatment as our own men.
Subsequently we learned that the raiders were Texans who boastfully
declared that they asked no quarter and gave none. In consequence of
the barbarous treatment of our men who were captured, some
correspondence passed between General Banks and the rebel commander,
but I am not aware that it amounted to anything.

On the eighteenth a scouting party of our cavalry was captured at
Grand River and others in our nearer vicinity. We had two companies of
the Thirty-first Massachusetts mounted infantry, who were used for
vidette duty. Being more exposed than our own pickets they suffered
occasionally from guerilla raids. One party of them, were surprised,
probably in consequence of a little carelessness, and were taken
prisoners with the exception of one man who was killed. He had been a
prisoner once before and fought to the last, rather than again be
captured. On some of these occasions the attacking parties were
dressed in our own uniform.

All through the country back of us, a constant and merciless
conscription was going on, sweeping in all able-bodied men between
fifteen and sixty years of age. Of course many refugees and
occasional deserters came within our lines.

During the fall of 1864 we received from time to time re-inforcements
of several companies of colored engineer troops, who continued the
work on the fort which we had begun. Though not comparing with the
arduousness of field service, our duties were by no means slight. It
must be remembered that we were in a semi-tropical country, where to
an unacclimated person the climate was itself almost a deadly foe. The
extreme heat produced a lethargy that was depressing in the extreme.
In a few days of dry weather, the surface of the ground would be baked
like a brick. Then would come most violent storms, converting the soil
into a quagmire and covering it with water like a lake. At this time,
there was no small danger of falling into the deep ditches with which
the fields were intersected, for drainage. In this way I lost one man
of my company. Of course it will be understood how productive of
disease would be the malaria from the soil and the adjacent swamps.
Our men with all their buoyancy of disposition, had not the resolute
will of white men, when attacked by sickness, and would succumb with
fatal rapidity. As captain of a company, my most arduous duty, when
not on special duty or detached service, was as field officer of the
day. This necessitated the visiting occasionally during the day and
night, our videttes and picket posts which were stationed on the roads
into the country, and at intersecting points in the fields; and also
crossing in a skiff the Mississippi river, to visit the troops
stationed to guard a telegraph station on the other side. This station
was in the vicinity of a famous duelling ground,--a path not far from
the river bank,--to which in former days the young bloods of the town
and vicinity would resort to repair their wounded honor, according to
the rules of the code. As we were too short of horses always to
furnish a mounted orderly, the officer of the day would at night, have
to make his rounds alone. There was a picturesqueness in those rides
in the solemn hours of the night, a portion of the way over deserted
plantations where the weeds would be as high as one's head on
horseback, the path at times fringing the borders of swamps where the
moss hung in festoons from the stately cypress trees, past lonely
negro cabins, where sometimes I heard the inmates in the midnight
hours, singing some plaintive melody in tones the most subdued.

In addition to our routine work, our officers were largely detailed
for staff, court-martial and other duties. The frequent attempts at
smuggling contraband goods through our lines, also necessitated
military commissions for the trial of these as well as various other
civil offences,--on which duty some of us were always engaged. As a
consequence, we were always short-handed, and tours of duty came as
often as was agreeable. The fall months of 1864 were marked by
occasional raids in our vicinity, with orders, at times, to sleep on
our arms. The capture of a large supply of revolvers, which were
surreptitiously landed near us, indicated the necessity of strictly
guarding the lines, and at the same time, furnish those of us who
needed them, an ample supply of that weapon.

During this period, we organized schools for the instruction of our
men. While some of them were comparatively well educated and were very
serviceable in various kinds of clerical work, a large proportion of
them were destitute of the most rudimentary knowledge. Through the
Christian Commission, of which Ex-Mayor J.V.C. Smith, of Boston, was
in our department the efficient agent, we were amply supplied with
various kinds of books and utensils, embracing primers, arithmetics,
slates and pencils, besides a liberal allowance of reading matter. Our
men were eager recipients of these and made good use of them. We tried
to stimulate their pride in every way possible, and the great majority
of them learned to sign their names to our rolls instead of making
their mark. I had some pride in having my rolls signed by the men
themselves, but I remember one of my men, however, whom I
ineffectually ordered to do this. He admitted to me that he could
write, but in consequence of some trouble he had in former years, got
into by the use of the pen, he had made a vow never to write again, or
something to that effect. My impression is that it was some kind of
forgery he was engaged in. It is possible he may have been an
unfortunate indorser; if so, his determination would not seem so
strange.

At the same time, we were trying to make a permanent improvement in
the way above indicated, we were troubled by difficulties, which were
incident to army life at all times. Liquor, of course, would make
trouble for us, and I think I never knew of any stimulant more
demoralizing, in its way, than Louisiana rum. This fiery fluid would
arouse all the furies in a man when it had him under its control.
Gambling was another vice against which we labored with more or less
success. Sometimes, after taps, I would make a raid on some of the men
who were having a quiet little game. When winter came, we had replaced
our worn out tents with shanties built from the materials of
confiscated houses. These would be darkened, and in voices hushed to
the lowest whisper, the men would indulge in their favorite pastime.
On one occasion, I remember that suddenly forcing the door open, I
dropped, most unexpectedly to them, on a small party of gamblers. As I
scooped in the cards and the stakes, one of them remarked that it was
no use to play against the Captain, for he got high, low, jack and the
game.

In the preparations that were making against Mobile in the winter of
1864-5, we anticipated an opportunity to change our comparatively
inactive life. But General Sherman (T.W.) said he could not spare us
from the important post where we were stationed, and it was with
regret that we were deprived of a share in that brilliant affair which
has been so well described in a former paper. During this winter, the
rebel forces in Western Louisiana, under command of General Kirby
Smith, were comparatively inactive, though raiding parties gave us
occasional trouble. Towards spring they began to move, and attacks on
parties of Union cavalry were not infrequent. Unpleasant rumors of the
capture of the Third Rhode Island Cavalry reached us, but proved to be
unfounded, except that several couriers were taken. Some rebel
prisoners were captured by the scouts, who were encamped near us, but
our freedom from attack, was probably largely due to the inundated
condition of the country. Owing to the neglect of the levees, the
river at its high stage in the spring following broke through the
embankment above and overflowed a large tract of country west of us. A
raid contemplated by the rebels, which would have given us sharp work,
and a force which would have been large enough to annihilate us,
unless in the meanwhile reinforced, were prevented by the condition of
the intervening country, from giving us trouble.

As an illustration of the disastrous effect of this overflow, I am
tempted to give a brief description of a trip I made through a
portion of the country that suffered in this way. Before the waters
had subsided, I was ordered by Brigadier-General R.A. Cameron,
commanding the district of La Fourche, in which we were located, to
report at his headquarters in Brashear City, for duty on his staff.
Taking a steamer to New Orleans and then the train at Algiers, which
is opposite New Orleans, I proceeded very comfortably to a place
called Terrebonne, where steam travel came to a sudden stop. A
hand-car for a mile or two furnished transportation and then we found
the railroad completely washed away by the flood above named. The
General's quartermaster and myself secured a boat and with a crew of
colored soldiers, we rowed some twelve miles to a place called
Tigerville, on the Alligator bayou. Our route lay over the bed of the
railroad, the track washed to one side of the cut, and a stream of
water several feet deep on top of the bed. The road had been built
through what seemed, most of the way, a primeval wilderness. The rank
growth which skirted both sides of the stream, with no sound to break
the silence, save the measured stroke of the oars, for even the birds
which occasionally flitted across our path, were songless, though of
brilliant plumage; the sight of an occasional moccasin or copperhead
snake coiled on the stump of a tree, and not infrequently of an
alligator sunning himself on a log, were features of a situation that
must be seen to be fully realized. The few small settlements through
which we passed, were drowned out. Some of the houses were nearly
under water and large quantities of debris were afloat on the slowly
moving current. Through the long weary hours of our boat ride, the
sun poured its rays upon us with unmitigated fervor. Reaching
Tigerville, we found an ugly little stern-wheeled boat tied up in
what had been one of the thoroughfares of the village, and which the
quartermaster at once ordered to take us to Brashear City. The
captain of the craft, incidentally remarked that his boiler was in
bad shape and might blow up at any time. The quartermaster was
willing, however, to take the risk, and getting up steam, we were
soon on our way. But with the remark of the captain in my mind, as I
looked at the stagnant bayou with its waters black as ink, and gazed
off upon the interminable swamps on either side, and thought of the
monsters from which it took its name, I concluded that the extreme
bow would be a little the safest place, and taking passage on an
empty water cask I found there, I lighted my pipe and tried to feel
as tranquil as the circumstances above suggested would permit.
Through the winding bayous, we pursued our way and sometime after
dark, we safely reached Brashear City, or that portion of it which
was visible above the waste of waters. Speaking of the bayous, it
would be difficult to give a clear conception of their peculiarities.
Equally strange are the people who inhabit those solitudes. Time
would not permit me to describe the "Cajans"--corruption of
"Acadians,"--descendants of the exiles who early settled the
territory of Louisiana, but who have been driven from their first
places of settlement by those more ambitious and unscrupulous.
Living in isolated communities, with their artless and unambitious
characteristics, their simplicity and exclusiveness, they would
furnish material enough for an elaborate paper.

Many reminiscences occur to me in connection with my service on
General Cameron's staff, but any attempt to detail them would
transgress the proper limits of a paper. In spite of the surrender of
Lee and Johnston, a show of hostilities was kept up in the
trans-Mississippi department, it being supposed that Jeff Davis was
making his way in that direction to still retain a semblance of power
in a country which had not felt the severest ravages of the war. Upon
his capture, however, the rebel army in western Louisiana, rapidly
crumbled to pieces, and while the rank and file were seeking their
homes, the officers were continually coming in to our headquarters, to
make their peace formally with Uncle Sam. Having occasion to remove
our headquarters from Brashear City, to a place called Thibodaux,
probably not more than fifty miles distant by rail, we were obliged,
by reason of the overflow, to take a steamer and make a circuit of
some four hundred and fifty miles, going up the swift flowing and
extremely crooked, Atchafalaya, much of the way through a very
desolate country, then down the Red River and the Mississippi to
Algiers, and thence, by rail, to our place of destination. On our
journey we had the company of several rebel officers, some of high
rank, who availed themselves of the General's courtesy to reach the
Cresent City. In a few weeks the General was mustered out, and soon
afterwards, I returned to my company, which, with the battalion, had
in the meanwhile, been ordered to Donaldsonville. Among the duties
here assigned to me, was service as Provost Marshal of the Parish, an
office which combined as varied a responsibility as can well be
imagined. In certain civil cases I had, as judge, jury and executioner
of my own decisions, plenty of employment. With an occasional call to
join in matrimonial bonds sundry pairs of hearts that beat as one, I
had much more frequent cause to settle disputes between planters and
employees, where neither party was disposed to meet the other halfway.
Vexatious and varied as my employments were, and anxious as I might
be to do justice, I was liable to be overhauled by headquarters from
misrepresentations made by angry and disappointed suitors. One event
in my administration of the office, caused quite a sensation for the
day. In the presence of a crowd of whites and blacks, I heard a case
in which a colored woman, who had till recently been a slave, was
plaintiff and principal witness, and a white man who was defendant,
and gave judgment in favor of the former. This may seem to you a very
simple matter, but it was evidently no ordinary occurrence in that
place, and I presume this was the first occasion in the experience of
many of the spectators, in which the sworn testimony of a negro was
received as against that of a white person. I seem now to see the
glaring eyes of one indignant southron as he scowled upon the
proceedings with the intensest malignity. It was not difficult to
guess at his opinion of the changed order of things, while to the
colored people, it was evident that the year of jubilee had come at
last. Thus with comparatively tranquil incidents, the summer of 1865
passed away. Peace with all its attendant blessings, had come. But
disease laid its hands heavily on some of us, and death was not an
infrequent visitor to officers as well as men. From one scourge of
that climate, we were fortunately exempted. Thanks to the thorough
policing, on which our commanding officers insisted, "Yellow Jack,"
who in former seasons had been master of the situation, gave us no
trouble. But many of our number, particularly those of us who, during
the summer, were on court-martial or other duty in New Orleans or its
vicinity, had some uncomfortable experiences with the "Break-bone
fever," a species of malarial disease, whose name is sufficiently
indicative. The services of our regiment were sufficiently appreciated
to delay our muster-out till the second of the following October. The
three battalions were consolidated at Carrollton, and a few days after
we embarked for home on the good steamer North Star. Some of our
officers who took passage in the ill-fated Atlanta, lost their lives
by the foundering of that vessel. In the fearful storm, the beginning
of which we felt as we passed the Jersey shore, more than a hundred
vessels were wrecked on the coast, and among the number was the
'Daniel Webster,' which took us from Dutch Island to New Orleans: In
New York we made a parade which was witnessed by crowds of people with
apparently hearty demonstrations of favor. On our return home, we
received a cordial greeting from the authorities, and in a few days
our regiment was disbanded at Portsmouth Grove and ceased to exist
except in history.

It had endeavored to do its duty, and by those who knew it, I believe
it had been fully appreciated. General Banks complimented it in
orders, and so strict a disciplinarian as General T.W. Sherman,
pronounced it a noble regiment, which, from that source, is no small
praise. But though most of its officers had served in former
organizations during the war, and our lieutenant-colonel was also a
veteran of the Mexican war, and with many of his associates brought to
the discharge of their duties, the advantage of enlarged experience, a
reputation for courage and a high degree of skill, it was not given to
the regiment or its several battalions, to participate in any of those
engagements or campaigns, some of which it has been the pride and
pleasure of comrades here to describe. It was, however, from no
hesitation or unwillingness of theirs. The call was hopefully
expected but disappointedly unheard. Yet, may they not fairly claim to
share in the glory of the result, and to them may not the words of the
poet justly apply,--

               "They also serve who only stand and wait."




       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Archaic spelling not corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | statu quo                                                 |
    | guerilla                                                  |
    | Atchafalaya                                               |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Reminiscences of two years with the
colored troops, by Joshua M. Addeman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO YEARS WITH COLORED TROOPS ***

***** This file should be named 26747.txt or 26747.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/7/4/26747/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
