The Project Gutenberg EBook of Six Days on the Hurricane Deck of a Mule, by
Almira Stillwell Cole

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Six Days on the Hurricane Deck of a Mule
       An account of a journey made on mule back in Honduras,
       C.A. in August, 1891

Author: Almira Stillwell Cole

Release Date: November 2, 2008 [EBook #27136]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIX DAYS ***




Produced by Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






Six Days on the Hurricane Deck of a Mule

An Account of a Journey made on Mule-back in Honduras, C.A.
in August, 1891

BY

Almira Stillwell Cole

[Illustration: Publisher's logo]

1893
The Knickerbocker Press
New York


This book was published after the death of the writer, for distribution
among her relatives and friends

[Illustration: Decoration]




SIX DAYS ON THE HURRICANE DECK OF A MULE.


Last spring I almost learned to ride a bicycle.

Those who have had a similar struggle will correctly estimate the exact
value of that word _almost_. I was laboring under peculiar difficulties,
for I was a whilom inmate of one of those sacred institutions--a young
ladies' boarding-school,--where any infringement upon the Spartan law of
dignity would have been looked upon as less pardonable than a
simultaneous indulgence in the seven deadly sins.

My agony of mind and body under those circumstances can be better
imagined than described. Methought life held no more painful experience,
but how impossible it is to gauge endurance and classify suffering I
have since learned.

When, later on, I announced to my friends and relatives my intention of
taking up a residence in the interior of _Honduras_ for the ensuing five
years, I was fairly overwhelmed by the storm of exclamations,
reproaches, dire predictions, and tearful expostulations, none of which
shook my resolution.

I assured them that the trip was simple enough,--by steamer from _New
York_ to _Colon_, thence by rail to _Panama_, where a steamer was taken
to _Amapala_, and then over the mountain on mule-back.

One friend in vain tried to move me by drawing dreadful pictures of life
with a ruined complexion; another assured me I was going to bury myself
among barbarians; a third pointed out the miseries of sea-sickness and
the certainty of death from some fever which would be sure to attack me
at once, and so _ad infinitum_.

I bore it all as meekly as possible and with outward patience, but
inward raging. I told them I cared more for the complexion of my life
than the amount of sun-kissed pigment my skin contained; I would
civilize all the barbarians I found; and since others had endured
sea-sickness so could I.

However, at last a teasing cousin did hit upon a fact, and a stubborn
one, which had tormented me considerably--that mule I was to ride. He
assured me that had I ever attempted to ride a wheel I would have some
idea of what was in store for me. With a sinking heart but unabashed
countenance, I smiled a superior sort of smile and replied that I had
learned to ride a wheel.

"Well, a mule is worse," was the reply that somewhat staggered me.

Then I did not believe him, but now I think he must be divinely gifted
with the spirit of prophecy.

Sailing day came, and with all the assurance and independence of a
typical American young woman, I stood on the deck of a steamer alone,
and watched the familiar faces of friends fade into the distance.

Sixteen days later, as I was about to go ashore in _Honduras_, I audibly
wondered why any one should find the journey anything but delightful.
Every moment had been an enjoyable one, and I had entirely escaped one
of the foretold horrors. Imagine the shadow that crept across the
sunshine of my mental vision, when the Captain of the ship I was leaving
so regretfully remarked, with a wise and mysterious shake of his head:

"Perhaps you will see why, when you have been for six days on the
hurricane deck of a mule."

A youth, considerably my junior, whom I had known well as a schoolboy in
the States, had come with two men-servants and six mules to meet me. As
I stood on shore and watched the vessel steam out of the harbor, I did
almost feel as if I had had my final contact with civilization.

We went at once to the hotel, which I thought the dirtiest place I had
ever seen. Since then I have learned to discriminate nicely between
different degrees of filth.

Here we were obliged to remain for two days, for _Amapala_ is on an
island, and one has to be transported to the mainland before the journey
can be continued. The little steamer does not run regularly, as _manana_
is the same as to-day, if not preferable, to the native of the coast.

We could hardly believe the evidence of our senses when finally we were
plowing our way over the bay toward our desired destination, some two
and a half hours after the proprietors of the launch had assured us they
would be ready to start.

In all the heat of the tropical noonday sun we came to a stop two hours
later, at _La Brea_, and alighted upon a sandy beach, back of which were
a store-house and a few small mud cabins. In the office of the
store-house we ate our lunch, and shortly after word came to me that the
fated moment for mounting had arrived.

With a heart beating with apprehension I went outside where I found
quite a group of curious natives, while in the midst stood the
antagonist with whom I was to wage such an unaccustomed warfare--a
gentle-looking beast, gayly trapped out in a handsome saddle of red and
tan leather, under which was a corresponding velvet cloth.

With a degree of satisfaction somewhat reassuring, I noted that she was
large enough to carry me and yet so small that a fall from her height
could not be wholly fatal. What I further noticed and was troubled by
was the fact that the saddle was made for the right side instead of the
left, and then it was borne in upon my mind, that the hope that a slight
experience on horseback ten years before would prove of some service to
me now, was a perfectly futile one. I was about to embark upon an
unknown sea, with no chart to guide me in its navigation.

Meanwhile a low chair had been brought, upon which I climbed preparatory
to making the further ascent. Just then my courage was at such a low ebb
that to take the next step seemed beyond me.

"Vincent, I can't do it."

"You must," was the unsympathizing reply, and seeing me still hesitate,
he added: "You can't walk, and this is the only way."

That settled it. In sheer despair, I set my teeth together, shut my eyes
and jumped, remembering that "whatever goes up must come
down"--somewhere, and I did not much care where.

Even yet I retain more than a vivid memory of the astonishment I felt
when I discovered that I had actually alighted in the right place. My
stock of self-esteem has been on the increase ever since.

In a few moments we started merrily off, I soon becoming used to the
motion, and rather liking it. If only my cousin could have witnessed my
triumph, my happiness would have been complete.

The road lay over a velvety plain, and for a couple of hours we rode on,
the only incident at all exciting, being an effort on my part to leave
my head perched upon a heavy limb of an overhanging tree. This danger
past, no new danger presented itself to disturb our quiet progress, and
toward the end of the afternoon, we rode into _Nacaome_, the little
village where we were to spend the night.

Dismounting at the entrance to an _adobe_ house, with doors standing
hospitably ajar, we were bidden to enter, and were shown into a great
bare room, with a tiled floor, no ceiling except the roof of tiles, and
containing two chairs, two beds, and a table. There were no windows, two
great doors, one on each side of the corner, admitting light and air,
and at one side of the room a smaller door led into another apartment,
for this was a house on an unusual scale.

The native bed is something unique, and perhaps a description of it will
not come amiss. A plain, high, single wooden bedstead, such as we
sometimes see in very old-fashioned farm-houses, first has ropes or
strips of skin drawn over it, upon which is placed a piece of matting,
or in some cases, leather--the latter a sign of luxury.

During the day it presents this appearance, but at night a hard pillow
is added, the native woman wraps herself in a sheet, and lies down on
the matting to sleep as peaceful and dreams as blissful, let us hope, as
her more favored sister who reclines upon a downy couch under a silken
coverlid.

I had no occasion to test the comfort of this bed in its primitive
state, for our servants had brought with them everything that could
render our quarters bearable if there were any foundation upon which to
build.

A hammock was slung up in the room, and I found I had never before
cherished a proper appreciation of one. Even a summer girl, with all the
romantic accessories of "shady nook, babbling brook," and so on, can
form no conception of the soul-satisfying comfort derived from
abandoning oneself to the luxurious embrace of a hammock, after a few
hours' ride on a mule. One friend who had survived the experience I was
just beginning, had warned me not to think death was nigh at the end of
the first day, so I lay there almost vainly trying to convince myself
that these were only natural and ordinary sensations and would not bring
about a general dissolution.

Thus reflecting I fell into a kind sleep, from which I was aroused by a
terrific clap of thunder and such a deluge of rain as I had never
witnessed. Heretofore I had always disliked lightning, but nature's
present "pyrotechnical display" challenged naught but my most
enthusiastic admiration. When it was over supper was announced, and soon
afterward we retired for the night, I occupying one of the beds in the
big room, one of the women of the house the other, and poor Vincent
being relegated to a hammock swung up in the next room, where the entire
family--men, women, and children--slept.

I was soon oblivious to my surroundings, and, in the style of the
chroniclers, thus endeth the history of the first day.

Upon awaking the following morning, I found I was considerably rested,
and quite willing to undertake a continuance of the journey, for which
a specially glorious day seemed promised.

About half past seven we were off, I having mounted my steed with a
little more agility than before. Indeed, I improved so rapidly in this
respect before the trip was over, that my companion, in a burst of
boyish enthusiasm, gave it as his opinion that I could "earn five
dollars a day in Buffalo Bill's show." What untold wealth might now have
been mine had not this talent so long lain dormant!

About half a mile from our starting-point we came to a river which at
this place had divided itself, forming two forks, and both had become so
swollen during the present rainy season that it seemed a serious matter
to ford them, especially when my inexperience was taken into
consideration.

An Indian, who lived on the bank, when drawn into the consultation
advised us to go farther down and cross the big river in a canoe. We
went, he acting as our guide, and when we came to the place where the
canoe ought to be, behold, it was on the other side of the stream.

Then ensued such a series of screeches and yells as made me tremble for
the safety of my scalp and look furtively around for a score of
blood-thirsty natives to spring from ambush, but when my fears were
somewhat calmed I understood that our guide was merely calling to the
boatman across the way.

His efforts met with no success, and with a stream of eloquence which my
limited knowledge of profanity would never allow me to translate into
plain English, he rolled up his trousers, grabbed the halter of my mule,
and without further ado plunged into the water and made for the other
shore.

Sometime I will put it on record for how long it is possible to hold
one's breath. During the time we were slipping and sliding over the
stones, sometimes finding a foothold almost an impossibility and with
difficulty breasting the current, I had no use whatever for oxygen, but
lived wholly upon terror and the thought of a watery grave. Such was
not to be my fate, however, and I escaped to endure greater trials and
revel in far more wonderful experiences.

After reaching _terra firma_, on and on we rode over a plain similar to
the one we had traversed the previous afternoon. Once we came to a tiny
stream flowing across our path, so small it was hardly worth noticing,
but to my surprise my mule objected so seriously and so suddenly to
wetting her feet, that I was nearly unseated, and in consequence was led
to investigate the cause of her conduct. I somewhat sympathized with her
when I found that the pretty light blue rivulet was formed of steaming
hot water, the outlet of a boiling spring hard by. In time my superior
will conquered, and we crossed the water, which is so hot that eggs can
be cooked in it.

As we were riding along in silence, I watching the many-colored lizards
darting from our vicinity, marvelling at the size attained by the cactus
in its native clime, and indulging in many comparisons, _not_ odious, I
was suddenly startled by a most outrageous din apparently proceeding
from a clump of trees just before us--such groans and shrieks as if all
civilized creation were yielding up the ghost in the last throes of
mortal agony for the special delectation of innumerable cannibals, whose
cries and yells of evident delight could also be plainly heard.

Terror-stricken, I glanced at my companion, but he seemed perfectly
undisturbed.

"What is it?" I managed to hoarsely whisper.

"Wagons," he briefly ejaculated.

And wagons I found it to be of a kind and class utterly unknown to me.
The wheels were slices of trees, cut diametrically, in the centre of
which holes had been bored for the insertion of the axles.

I think in order to fully accomplish the feat of making this a
two-wheeled cart, and a music box combined, they must have used kerosene
oil for axle grease. So much for the sound of concentrated human woe
which I must eternally regret Milton could not have heard before he
described the sufferings of the lost souls in purgatory. The cries of
fiendish joy were only the loving words of cheer addressed by the
charioteers to the patient oxen drawing the creaking, rumbling, rolling
wagons on over the rough, uneven roads.

Gladly we passed them by and as quickly as possible got beyond earshot.

At noon the servants had not yet overtaken us, and as we were fairly
famished, we stopped at an Indian hut along the way, to partake of any
hospitality the place might afford.

It did not look particularly inviting, I must confess. An old man, whose
whole attire consisted of a pair of trousers and a hat, sat outside the
door, the centre of a more or less scantily clad group of women and
children, while around all, caloes, pigs, chickens, ducks, and cats ran
riot.

I must say for the Indian of _Honduras_ that no matter what his degree
of filth, poverty, nakedness, or intelligence, he never hesitates for
one instant to take in a stranger and share with him all that he has.

It was, perhaps, this novel and spontaneous kindness added to my more
than perfect willingness to endure a restful separation from my mule,
which induced me to get down and enter that house with all my inborn and
inbred love of cleanliness and daintiness crying out within me.

Only one door led into the one room containing beds, table, chair,
boxes, and oh, bliss! a hammock, which, dirty as it was, I was only too
thankful to occupy. No window lighted the darkness of the place, or
afforded an occasional breath of fresh air. The floor was packed earth
and was so dirty that it was a perfect paradise for swarms of fleas and
other insects.

Vincent shot a chicken, which one of the women cooked--a proceeding
which an Indian woman can accomplish with greater celerity and success
than any I have hitherto encountered. This fowl was simply delicious,
and, with boiled eggs and _tortillas_ in addition, served as an
admirable means of refreshing our starving bodies, and we partook of all
heartily, in spite of the more than unappetizing surroundings.

After our mules had finished their repast of cut grass, we proceeded on
our route. Considering the avidity with which the harmless-looking
little insects, known here as _pulgas_, had seized upon me as a new and
delicious morsel upon which to prey, I was not sorry to flee from them,
and the motion of the mule seemed to allay the horrible irritation which
I could only locate as "all over."

During the afternoon we just skirted the town of _Pespire_, and then
passed into shady lanes which wound in and out a country gradually
becoming more undulating.

It was not a great while before we discovered that a sudden shower, so
common in tropical countries, was upon us, and in all probability we had
before us the pleasant prospect of a drenching.

We were not wrong in our guess, for the water, ere many moments had
passed, came down in torrents. With one hand I held my umbrella and so
protected my head and shoulders, and with the other guided my mule.

Before the rain ceased we came to a house where Vincent informed me we
would find our quarters until morning.

Three women sat in front of the house, under shelter of the projecting
roof, one smoking a cigarette and the other two shelling corn. A hammock
was hung here, and two chairs, a bench, and a table completed the
furniture of this outside room.

Mules, pigs, dogs, and chickens roamed at will in the yard directly in
front, which was muddy and shiny, and reeking with filth.

My heart sank lower than ever within me, but summoning up what I could
of my resolution to bear uncomplainingly whatever came, I got off my
mule, stiff, lame, wet, and cold, and sat down in the hammock,
wondering how much more I could endure.

We had not seen our servants since morning, and were becoming somewhat
anxious, remembering the river and the rain, but still found consolation
in the thought that the heavily laden pack mules could not travel as
fast as we had done.

Hardly had we settled ourselves under this shelter when a man rode up,
apparently "the lord of the manor." He was about fifty years of age,
whiter than the women, and was getting a horrible _goitre_, an
affliction that one of the girls, his daughter, was also suffering from,
and which seemed quite a common one in the vicinity.

A few words of explanation from the pretty cigarette-smoker, who, though
not his wife, seemed to be the mistress of the household, apparently
satisfied him, and he subsequently took our presence as a matter of
course.

He seated himself in the chair by the table, his supper of black beans,
meat, cheese, and _tortillas_ was brought and dispatched without the
aid of either knife or fork, and then he turned his attention to our
entertainment.

Notwithstanding the unwelcome sights and odors, we were becoming very
hungry again, and as our men still abstained from putting in an
appearance, we were more than glad to take the eggs, _tortillas_, and
coffee given us. True it is that oftentimes during that six days, I ate
and relished such food in places where, under ordinary circumstances, I
would not have tasted a mouthful of the most tempting delicacies.

About dark one of the men came with three of the mules, but the other
man had lost himself in trying to find us, and not until several hours
later did he succeed in his quest.

Meanwhile I was secretly tormented by the painful anxiety to know where
I was to sleep. One dark, ill-smelling room was all the house contained,
except a shed used as a kitchen, and I could not see how the most
ingenious hostess could make two guests of different sexes comfortable,
however much she might incommode the family.

To my utter horror I learned that, with no conception of any possible
scruples on my part, she had arranged for me to have one of the four
beds, the women of the house the remaining three, while the master and
Vincent were to occupy hammocks in the same room.

With stoical disregard of masculine observance, these native families
disrobed themselves, skilfully it is true, though the process of
necessity was a short one, and then, in company with their male
companion, deliberately set themselves to watch my preparations for the
night.

These last, you may be sure, were of the simplest kind. I took off my
shoes and let down my hair, and then in my still wet dress, which was
fortunately a flannel one, I crept into the bed the servant had made up
with the clothes we carried with us.

Vincent's night toilet was still less elaborate.

He unbuckled the leather belt upon which hung his revolver, and brought
it over to me with a brief injunction that I was to use it if need be. A
startling suggestion truly, but the weapon gave me a sense of security,
though it was such an enormous one that I knew with both hands on the
trigger, both eyes tight shut, and mouth firmly set in the usual
feminine way, I could never make the thing go off, in time to render me
more than a _post-mortem_ defence.

As the burning pine sticks which had furnished light for us, slowly
crumbled into ashes, I heard a wonder-struck voice ask if all the
American ladies went to bed with their clothes on, to which Vincent,
sharing my desire to do or say nothing that could hurt their feelings,
gravely replied that it was the national custom.

Of course I did not sleep, tired as I was--I was more than half afraid
to close my eyes, and when I finally did summon up sufficient courage to
do so, there ensued a series of disturbances that successfully banished
any further somnolent inclination for the night.

First our man, Eduardo, arrived, and all the animals about felt it
their bounden duty to extend to him a welcome, whence began a
simultaneous barking of dogs, mewing of cats, grunting of pigs, crowing
of roosters, quacking of ducks, braying of mules, neighing of horses,
and wagging of tongues, as I had never heard since in my childish days
we had "lived on my father's farm in the green fields of barley."

When that commotion had subsided, our host sank into slumber so noisy
that I lay there in momentary expectation of seeing the roof depart upon
a celestial journey, and I am sure it was only saved from displacement
by the rebellion of his throat causing a terrific fit of coughing. This
over, he recounted a vivid, if stupid dream he had just had, and then
once more came restful silence.

It was not to last long, however, for in the early dawn a neighbor rode
over to help kill a pig, but after a lengthy debate, it was decided that
_manana_ would do as well.

By this time the farm world was astir, and we were not long in
following suit. So, tired, dirty, still damp from yesterday's rain, I
arose to meet the trials and tribulations of the third day.

Two little facts came to my knowledge before our simple breakfast, which
gave a new color to my thoughts and revived my drooping spirits.

One was a prospect of absolute cleanliness, for Vincent told me they had
a bathroom in their house, a luxury I must confess I had not expected to
find in a small village in interior _Honduras_.

At _Amalapa_ I had most regretfully said good-by to two good steamer
friends who were going to the capital by another road, and one which led
through _Pespire_, the little village we had passed the previous
afternoon.

As good luck would have it, Eduardo, in his wanderings, had gone to a
sort of agency there to inquire if we had been seen, and had found a
letter for me, left by one of the two travellers who had preceded us.
Surely never a communication from the dearest friend I had ever had was
quite so eagerly seized and devoured as was this brief note, which came
to me like a refreshing glimpse of the world I had known. Heaven bless
the writer for his kindly inspiration!

At eight o'clock we were again mounted, and had said good-by for ever, I
trust, to _San Juan_. Oh, mockery of names! Meanwhile my companion had
informed me that we would soon come to the mountains, where I knew I
should meet the much-talked-of equestrian difficulty.

We had not ridden long before it seemed to me our road came to a sudden
termination, for right before us rose a steep and rocky cliff. Too soon
I learned that we must scale this; so grasping my saddle firmly, I
prepared to hang on while the mule did the rest. Just in the worst part
of it, I became aware that the saddle was turning, and no effort or
skill of mine could save me from a fall. Vincent saw my danger and
shouted to me to jump, at the same time dismounting and hurrying to my
assistance. With all too brief a prayer for mercy, I let go of
everything except the bridle, and landed a shapeless mass, fortunately
one containing considerable adipose, directly under the mule and upon a
bed of jagged rocks.

My mule, bless her heart! never stirred, or I should either have had my
head crushed by her hoofs, or have been hurled into the depths below.

As it was I was only slightly bruised, and very shaky, but as soon as
the saddle was righted and firmly fastened, I was ready to mount and go
on.

Then I was not so anxious for my cousin's presence, though Vincent will
bear me witness that it was no fault of mine.

I learned during the day that the Spanish word for road is a most
expansive one. For miles we went up and down over smooth, glaring white
rocks, where no animal on earth but a Honduras mule could have found a
footing. When I saw any particularly rugged bit of scenery, a gorge, a
cliff, where surely human foot had never trod, I was told it was the
road. I never foresaw where we were going for one instant. I kept the
reins in my hand, but never pretended to guide the animal, whose
intelligence I now had to admit was superior to my own. When we were
going along the brinks of precipices so frightful that I dared not look
over, I fixed my eyes upon the ears wagging so complacently before me,
and imbibed courage therefrom.

Withal I was a trifle amused at the conviction that I, who had hitherto
not quite entirely trusted any one, not even a man, was now abandoning
myself to a most consuming confidence in a mule.

On in this way we went for six mortal hours, through pine forests with
the trees so far apart that we got no shade, over the white rocks that
nearly blinded us, and with the sun pouring down upon us in midday fury.

Then we began to ascend an almost perpendicular peak.

When little more than half-way up, a mule and driver came suddenly
around a sharp turn and so startled my hitherto gentle animal that, with
a snort of rage, she jumped from the path and bounded from rock to rock
of the cliff above, I meanwhile clinging to her like a burr, and
momentarily expecting to roll with her into the ragged gully hundreds of
feet below.

But again I was doomed to happy disappointment, for a final effort
carried us over a particularly dangerous projection, and the next
instant we were on a plain and only a few rods from _La Breita_, our
stopping-place.

I scarcely remember how I dismounted. I know it was with great
difficulty that I got myself straightened from a sitting posture, and
entered a house so cool and clean that I thought I must have unwittingly
stumbled into Paradise. It goes without saying that I was soon in a
hammock, trying amid those comfortable surroundings to forget how every
bone and muscle ached, how a combination of sleeplessness, continued
fasting, and the glaring roadway was tending to bring on a fearful
headache, and that there were still three days of the journey ahead of
me.

However, by the time I had eaten some lunch I felt better, and began to
take an interest in my surroundings.

The house, of course, was one of the class Bret Harte describes as
"those queer little adobe buildings, with tiled roofs like longitudinal
slips of cinnamon," and belonged to a well-to-do family, the head of
which was a large mule owner, who had amassed his wealth in carrying
cargoes from the coast to the interior.

He was not at home, so his wife, two daughters, a servant, and a
half-foolish boy of eighteen or nineteen, were the only inmates of the
house.

On this particular afternoon they were entertaining three girl
friends--the two younger ones being pretty, and naturally clad in the
costume of their race, while the older one had unfortunately become
imbued with some so-called civilized ideas regarding her toilet.

A calico dress of the most painfully intense pink was made with a full,
plain skirt and an ill-fitting basque, which failed to accomplish a
meeting with the skirt at the usual trysting-place. Over this she had a
shawl of the most royal shade of purple imaginable, and instead of
looking like a pretty, graceful Indian girl, she appeared to be a
variegated monstrosity.

I feel self-reproached at criticising her thus, for she, with the other
two visitors, admired me intensely, and when sufficient time had elapsed
for them to conquer their bashfulness, they asked Vincent, in hushed and
reverent tones, if all the ladies in the States were so "tall, and nice,
and white, and beautiful."

I had previously known that I was tall and could be nice when occasion
demanded it, but it required the elastic conscience and easily aroused
admiration of a warmer-blooded race than mine, to find whiteness or
beauty in the face of an ordinary, typical, American brunette.

They departed before dark, and with dark came a return of the
perplexity regarding the sleeping accommodations I had experienced at
_San Juan_.

In the large room--the living room--there were two beds, a hammock, some
chairs, two tables, and--a "New Home" sewing-machine! Off one end of
this there was a small apartment also containing two beds, and separated
from the larger one by a board partition perhaps six or seven feet high.

In my inmost heart I longed for the privacy of this narrow space, but
such was not in accordance with our hostess' idea of hospitality. I was
assigned to a bed covered by a crucifix-surmounted canopy, in the main
room, and Vincent was invited to take the other. Upon his modestly
stating he would sleep somewhere in a hammock, the mistress told the
foolish boy he could have that bed. To this I objected, in English, and
forthwith Vincent was led to change his mind and accept the previously
refused favor.

While I was making my nocturnal preparations, complete enough to insure
comfort, I remember lazily musing upon the horrified, scandalized
countenances some good friends would present, could they know how easily
I was discarding all previous teachings and traditions, and, without a
struggle, embracing new creeds and customs. I recall that I realized it
was my duty, as a properly reared product of civilization, to go out and
sit on a fence, if need be, to maintain my maidenly isolation and
dignity, but I was too tired.

It is not the first case on record when a willing spirit has been
worsted by weak flesh in a moral combat.

I slept as long, blissfully, and dreamlessly, as if I had not the
heinous crime of having defied Mrs. Grundy upon my conscience, and awoke
on the morning of the fourth day feeling decidedly refreshed.

Before us lay the longest day's ride of all, so we were anxious to be
off as early as possible. We had our breakfast of coffee and
_rosquillas_, not a hearty repast, and prepared to mount.

After each female member of the household had minutely examined my
dress, hat, gloves, and veil, and remarked thereon; after Vincent had
written down my name and had taught them to pronounce it, and had, in
answer to their unresented inquiries, given them choice bits of my
history; after they had, it seemed to me, exhausted all their resources
to detain us further, some one of them suddenly bethought herself of one
of the fixtures of the machine, whose use they could not determine.

I think I sank in their estimation somewhat, because I could not
enlighten them. I suggested hemmer, tucker, quilter, braider, ruffler,
and every known attachment I could think of, but each was produced with
a flourish that negatived every proposition.

I finally gave it up, but if the New Home Sewing Machine Co. will
communicate with me, I will some time, for penance, make a journey to
_La Breita_, and reinstate myself in the good graces of the kindly
inhabitants thereof, by solving the mystery for them.

About half past seven we did get off, and could all the good wishes
that were given us in parting come true, we would be more than mortally
favored.

We had no rough roads to go over that day. Across grassy plains where
hundreds of cattle were grazing; through shady lanes that seemed like
the picturesque bridle paths of carefully cultivated parks, we rode for
four hours, and then reaching a decently clean house we stopped, the
"inner man" having clamored for refreshment for some time.

We found a young girl here, taking care of two children for their absent
father and mother, and not a thing did she feel like shouldering the
responsibility of giving us but one wretched ear of roast corn. In vain
we begged and offered enormous sums for just one of the many fowls
running about,--she was not to be moved. In despair we disposed
ourselves under a huge tree by the roadside to await the arrival of
Eduardo.

I believe it was some two hours afterward that he came, just as we were
going to cast lots as to who should devour the other. Right glad were we
to substitute the appetizing lunch soon spread for us in true picnic
style, and full justice did we show it.

It was not long before we were again on our way, feeling much better
satisfied with ourselves and the world in general. What a cure for the
"blues" a good square meal is!

Just before we reached a little town, _La Armenia_, we made a descent of
some wonderful rocks. I looked back at them and wished I had a camera. I
know a picture of them, with "Where did they come from?" written
underneath, would bring me a small fortune as a copyrighted prize
puzzle. No one but a mule could solve it; and after all that would be
the best answer. I cannot do any better myself, even after having made
the dizzy journey from top to bottom.

We trotted through _La Armenia_ in our very best style--I, because I did
not want to be unfavorably compared with an habitual mule-back
performer,--Vincent, because, as he afterwards confided to me, one of
the prettiest girls in all _Honduras_ lived there.

The rest of the afternoon passed uneventfully enough. To reach _San
Pedro_ was the object of our exertion, and fondly I hoped the
key-keeping saint would unlock some safe and savory abiding-place for
our night's habitation.

About half after five I saw before us a church and a few small houses,
and though I heard no crowing of cocks, a barking of dogs intimated that
we had reached a village, none other than the namesake of Rome's
favorite apostle.

At the farther end of the settlement we found our accommodations.

Outwardly considered these houses are much alike, and though the inside
furniture is almost as similar in kind and disposition, the interiors do
vary greatly after all.

As I lay in a hammock which had been put up for me in front of the
house, and watched the moon rise from behind a mountain just across the
road, it seemed to me that life was very beautiful and well worth
living, in spite of all its hardships. The higher the moon rose, the
more fully her glorious rays streamed over all the surrounding objects
and bathed them in a more charitable light than anything feminine is
supposed to do, the more nearly romantic I grew and felt almost like
finding a certain charm even in _San Juan_. The announcement that my bed
was awaiting me was all that saved me from utter lunacy. Casting a last
lingering glance upon the fair beauty of the scene before me, I gathered
together my half-scattered prosaic faculties and went indoors to--can I
ever give you an idea of it?

Across a vilely dirty room was stretched a cord upon which were hung to
dry, huge and manifold strips of salt meat. To my uneducated olfactories
it seemed past the turning point and far on the road to utter ruin--the
smell was so suffocating and sickening.

One bed Eduardo had succeeded in making very comfortable for me, while
on the other, in its birthday suit, lay an interesting but constantly
wailing infant which was soon afterwards joined by its mother. A hammock
for Vincent was here too, and shortly we were settled for the night in
our several places.

I had expressed a preference to stay outside in my hammock, but the plan
not proving a feasible one, I drenched a handkerchief with some
perfumery, tied it under my nose, and tried to find relief in slumber
sweet.

I was awakened by a queer sort of noise that made me feel creepy and
afraid to breathe. I cannot describe it, for I do not know anything it
was like. The darkness was so thick that I could cut it, I am sure, and
the only certainty I felt at having found myself where I last remember
having been, was the ever strengthening odor of that meat.

When I could bear the suspense no longer, in a frenzy of fear I broke
the spell of silence and fairly shrieked to Vincent. I made known my
woes; he lighted a match, and there, just above my head, upon two pegs
driven into the wall for that express use, sat two parrots dressing
their feathers and making themselves both comfortable for the night and
beautiful for the morrow. They looked as if they felt injured, and I
know I did, at being thus disturbed.

The rest of the night passed somehow--the baby squalled, the parrots
verbally expostulated, a hen in one corner of the room let her presence
be known, a horrid cat under one of the beds joined in the performance,
and the fleas grew more than lively, but the most potent factor was that
too long-dead one which appealed to another sense than that of hearing.

How thankful I was when the dawn broke and I felt at liberty to release
myself from the imprisonment I had for hours endured and go out into the
fresh air. It was really cold I found, but soon after the sun climbed up
over the mountain before us, we became aware that his genial rays were
shedding comfortable warmth as well as benignant light upon all around.

We made an early start, as gladly saying good-by to _San Pedro_ as we
had regretfully bid farewell to _La Breita_ the previous morning.

The road was a good one from a Honduranian standpoint, and the only
novel feature of the landscape was the appearance of the rocks. The
cliffs were black, and looked as if for centuries water had lashed in
restless and often unsubdued fury around their bases, giving them that
peculiar formation so well known to geologists.

All the plains were thickly strewn with black bowlders of sizes ranging
from immensity to those applicable to building and paving purposes.
Nowhere have I ever seen more convincing traces of the drift period.

As we were going over an open space where the sun shone more warmly than
elsewhere, a great yellow and black snake lazily dragged itself across
the road directly in front of me.

I was sorry to see it, not only because I have an innate loathing of
anything that crawls in this smooth, sinuous, treacherous manner, but
because I had wanted to make the journey without encountering a single
experience of the kind.

According to our friend's representations, mostly derived from her
imagination, aided by a school geography, the ground was fairly
honeycombed with entrances to the abodes of these reptiles, and I fully
expected to find them festooning trees, bushes, and fences, lying in
wait within every tuft of grass, and in fact making my life one hideous,
waking nightmare.

However, this was the first and, as was afterwards proved, the last
creature of the kind I was called upon to view, either during my trip or
my subsequent residence in the country up to the present time. Lizards I
saw in plenty, but their shy, quick way of darting out of sight reminded
me more of the bashful little squirrels at home than anything else. I
really liked them, in their place of course.

It still lacked an hour of noon when we came to a running brook, upon
whose bank grew a tree casting such an inviting shade that we could not
resist its fascinations but dismounted, tied our mules, and began to
wish and watch for the appearance of Eduardo.

Presently Vincent like


     "Zaccheus, he
     Did climb a tree."


the sooner to perceive the coming of the expected lunch, and I indulged
in a nap. The approach of a horseman aroused me, and false hopes
together, and also brought my companion to the ground.

The rider, a young, good-looking man, whose toilet was the nearest
approach to a civilized one I had recently come across, despite his bare
feet, to which were strapped spurs, drew up in the middle of the brook,
and after the customary friendly greeting, proceeded to inspect us in a
most leisurely way.

Time, a good deal of time, passed before our servant came, but there he
sat. The lunch was spread and partaken of long and heartily, and still
he calmly surveyed us, not at all in an impertinent way, but just as if
he were honestly interested. We offered him some jelly, which he ate in
a totally unabashed manner, but withdrew not his gaze. We ignored him,
but he took not the hint. Stay there he did until we were remounted, and
then for miles and miles he rode along with us.

We were rather amused than otherwise at his course, though perhaps we
experienced a scarcely recognized feeling of relief when we came to a
place where our roads lay in different directions. He shook hands with
us in the same friendly, impressive, almost warm manner, and then
galloped merrily off as if he had fulfilled an arduous duty and now felt
as if he had a right to enjoy himself.

Shortly afterward we came to a height overlooking the _Yegnare Valley_,
one of the most beautiful and far-reaching scenes it has ever been my
good fortune to behold.

Great pointed peaks kiss the sky on every side, and seem to shut out
all the noise and strife of the world beyond, and like sentinels, grim
and gaunt, guard intact the peace and prosperity of the vast plains
within that natural wall.

Two farms occupy nearly all of the valley, and so extensive are they,
that the farm-houses are four miles apart. The owner of both proved to
be none other than the father of my companion, and though there was
still one more day's journey before us, we already felt quite at home.

We made the descent and entered upon the broad domain of the _Hacienda
de San Francisco_, the boundary of which, to my amazement, I found
indicated by a very familiar American barb-wire fence.

We rode through fields where the grass waved high above our heads, over
pasture plains where hundreds of cattle, mules, and horses roamed at
will, and then, when the sun was sinking low, we came to the farmhouse,
and here we dismounted to make our last night's stop.

The building is a remarkable one, having been a monastery years and
years ago, when the Jesuit missionaries were devoting their energies and
lives to the conversion of the untamed Indians.

It is one hundred and fifty feet long, probably one third as deep, and
has walls a yard thick. All this is divided into five rooms--three large
ones running the whole depth of the house and communicating with each
other, and two smaller ones, one behind the other, and only had access
to from the outside.

The floors are of stone, and it pleased me to fancy that many of the
worn places had been formed by constant contact with the bended knees of
the holy and indefatigable priests. The projecting roof of tiles forms a
sort of porch, we would call it, all around the building, and is paved,
as is also the yard for many feet. Beyond this the land gently slopes to
a river, and still farther on a mountain rises up to limit the landscape
and prevent our greedy eyes from drinking of beauty to a more than
endurable state of intoxication.

It was blissful to lie in a hammock and watch the setting sun give here
and there a lingering farewell touch as if loath to go and leave behind
so much that was beloved, and then at the close of the short tropical
twilight to see fair Luna crown, first with a halo of approaching glory
and then with her own sweet self, the dark peak whose outlines rose
sharp and clear against the star-pierced blue of the evening sky.

It was blissful, I say, to revel in this grand pastoral poem in the full
consciousness that the transition to prose would be one of terror; to
know that in one of the big, cool, clean rooms a comfortable bed was
prepared for me, where I would lose myself in restful unconsciousness,
guarded by the saint whose figure could be clearly defined in an old
oil-painting on the wall, and which, with two others of a like kind,
were relics, doubtless, of a chapel's previous decoration.

'Twas even so, and when I awoke in the morning to find a huge vessel of
water from the river standing by a shallow tub hewn from the trunk of a
tree, while near at hand were placed all the articles necessary for body
and soul-satisfying ablutions, my perfect content knew not how to
manifest itself.

Beautiful _San Francisco_! What happiness to fill the house with twenty
chosen friends and there to dream away a month or more of idle joy!
Surely after such _dolce far niente_ days life could hold no bitterness
for which we had not, in experience, a ready antidote.

Too soon, it seemed, we were forced to leave there, for we had a long,
weary day of mountain climbing ahead of us.

"A bad road," Vincent said, and when he warned me thus I knew I could
expect the worst.

We departed through the fields again, past the barb-wire boundary line,
across the river, and up among the foot-hills, leading to the mountain
close at hand. When the topmost crest was reached I stopped for a last
look at the _Yegnare Valley_, at _San Francisco_ lying below, at _San
Morano_ farther in the distance, at the mountain looming up in the
background, beyond which lies _Tegacigalpa_, and then I turned with
strengthened spirit to the task before me.

To my surprise, at this height we emerged from the woods, to find
ourselves on a most extensive plain, very properly called, in the
Spanish, _La Mesa_--the table. Here we encountered the wagon-road
leading from the capital to our destination and for a long distance we
followed it. After we left _La Mesa_ it was simply horrible, and all my
attention became absorbed in self.

By no means is any one to presume that my mule and I had become
reconciled by our lengthened companionship. Discomfort amounting to
positive agony had taught me to adopt more attitudes, graceful or
ungraceful, than all the combined systems of Delsarte and other physical
culturists could possibly suggest.

Every muscle in my body had been so frequently called into requisition
that to use any one almost drew forth an involuntary scream. In various
places the skin had been worn away by constant friction of the clothing
or saddle, leaving highly sensitive sores, even my gauntlets reducing my
wrists to such a state.

Words cannot express what I suffered. The torture had been of a less
acute kind while we were riding over comparatively level roads, but here
we were going "up hill and down dale" again, and how I was to bear it I
could not see.

I tried to be brave, and I think rarely, if ever, a complaint passed my
lips, but during that last day I more than once nearly committed suicide
through sheer physical exhaustion.

My stock of reserved strength proved to be far greater than I had ever
reason to believe it, and demand for more endurance was always met.

When my mule had some particularly difficult obstacle to surmount, she
had a way of approaching it quietly and then suddenly giving a hump that
filled her spine with complex curves and a burden, unless care were
exercised, with compound fractures. In order to insure one's safety it
is absolutely necessary to preserve an exact equilibrium directly over
the said spine in a line running from the point midway between her ears
to her tail. This is at times so gigantic a task that it is no wonder a
temporary oblivion to bodily sensation is induced.

Poor mule! In moments when I could summon up any spare sympathy, I
lavished it upon her. She seemed to be tired too.

Finally, when going down steep ravines, she ceased to lower herself and
me gently from one foothold to the next, but acquired a habit of
thumping down in a reckless way, giving a sort of grunt, which
sometimes, for the life of me, I could not help accompanying with a
groan that seemed to come from my very shoes. I had no fear of falling.
In fact, I think I should have hailed it as a delightful change could we
have rolled down a cliff and finished even life's journey with this one.

Lunch time found us in the midst of a pine forest, but such a sparsely
grown one that the shade was a mockery. Heat, hunger, and those
delightful insinuating little insects known as woodticks were not
conducive to our happiness here, and more than glad were we when the
arrival of our food bearer gave promise of an early change of scene.

We ate up everything we could, and then, with every nerve tingling with
joy at the speedy home-coming, we mounted our faithful carriers for the
last time.

Very soon after this we left the abominable but so-called wagon road,
and took a short cut over the mountains. It would be but vain repetition
to describe our "ups and downs" for the next few hours. The agony was
just as exquisite, the scenery was just as grand and variable, but as
far as I know it the English language contains no words of sufficient
intensity to express more than I have already iterated and reiterated.

Presently a not far distant peak came in sight, and as we clambered up
higher we could see more and more of it until finally, on an elevated
plateau at its base, there appeared a collection of houses. Across that
intervening space I could gain no idea of what the village would be
like, but I remember thinking that, with that glorious mountain to look
at, I could never get homesick.

Here a rapidly approaching horseman came in view, who proved to be still
another youth whom I had known in the States, and under this double
escort I rode past a suburban mining camp, across the great _plaza_
crowded with Sunday idlers, down another street, through a broad doorway
into a paved courtyard, and found myself at last at home in _Yuscaran_.

Kind hands assisted me to dismount, and led me to the gallery-like
corridor above, filled with friendly faces, and from there into a
spacious parlor that seemed like a palace after my recent experiences.

In consideration of my fatigue I was almost immediately shown to my own
room, which I found luxuriously perfect in all its appointments.

In the preceding six days I had learned a good deal that was new, but it
remained for the revelation of this moment to teach me what gratitude
is. A wave of thankfulness came over me that sent me to my knees, and
ever since then I have been content just to be glad I am alive.

Yes, my cousin, that mule was worse than even you knew--infinitely worse
than a wheel, thanks to which I lost some twenty-five pounds in six
weeks, while in as many days the mule reduced me to a mass of lacerated
skin, fractured bones, and maddening flea-bites. Should you and my
gracious captain friend ever meet, may the kindly Fates order my
presence elsewhere!

But for the others I have no cheering report of fulfilled predictions.

My complexion has been admired for its fairness, a quality it still
possesses--by comparison; I have searched long and vainly among the
surrounding inhabitants for even one barbarian; I have failed to feel
either sea-sickness or home-sickness; I have never been more perfectly
healthy, and no dread fever seems to have selected me for a victim; I
have found no snake coiled within my shoe of a morning, nor have I
discovered one as an unwelcome bedfellow at night. Truth to tell, you
are all wrong, but one, and now hear _me_.

Until railroads, flying machines, balloons, seven-league boots, magic
wishing-rings, or some such means of transit are adopted in _Honduras_,
I choose to stay here and grow up with the country, for _never_, while I
have breath to object or heart to consider self, will I spend another
six days "on the hurricane deck of a mule."

                                             ALMIRA STILWELL COLE.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Six Days on the Hurricane Deck of a
Mule, by Almira Stillwell Cole

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIX DAYS ***

***** This file should be named 27136.txt or 27136.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/1/3/27136/

Produced by Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
