The Project Gutenberg EBook of That Gospel Sermon on the Blessed Hope, by 
Dwight Lyman Moody

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: That Gospel Sermon on the Blessed Hope

Author: Dwight Lyman Moody

Release Date: November 23, 2008 [EBook #27316]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOSPEL SERMON ON BLESSED HOPE ***




Produced by Gerard Arthus, Sarah Gutierrez, and The Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





       *       *       *       *       *



No. 16

THAT GOSPEL SERMON

ON THE BLESSED HOPE.

BY D. L. MOODY.



_A Sermon delivered by_ D. L. MOODY, _the Evangelist, at the Great Chicago
Tabernacle, Jan. 5, 1877. Repeated in the Boston Tabernacle, April
29th._


In 2 Timothy, 3:16, Paul declares: "All scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness;" but there are some people
who tell us when we take up prophecy that it is all very well to be
believed, but that there is no use in one trying to understand it; these
future events are things that the church does not agree about, and it is
better to let them alone, and deal only with those prophecies which have
already been fulfilled. But Paul does not talk that way; he says: "All
scripture is ... profitable for doctrine." If these people are right, he
ought to have said: "Some scripture is profitable; but you can not
understand the prophecies, so you had better let them alone." If God did
not mean to have us study the prophecies, he would not have put them in
the Bible. Some of them are fulfilled, and he is at work fulfilling the
rest, so that if we do not see them all completed in this life, we shall
in the world to come.

I do not want to teach anything to-day dogmatically, on my own
authority, but to my mind this precious doctrine--for such I must call
it--of the return of the Lord to this earth is taught in the New
Testament as clearly as any other doctrine is; yet I was in the church
fifteen or sixteen years before I ever heard a sermon on it. There is
hardly any church that does not make a great deal of baptism, but the
New Testament only speaks about baptism thirteen times, while it speaks
of the return of our Lord fifty times; and yet the church has had very
little to say about it. Now, I can see a reason for this: the devil does
not want us to see this truth, for nothing would wake up the church so
much. The moment a man takes hold of the truth that Jesus Christ is
coming back again to receive his friends to himself, this world loses
its hold upon him; gas-stocks and water-stocks, and stocks in banks and
horse-railroads, are of very much less consequence to him then. His
heart is free, and he looks for the blessed appearing of his Lord, who
at his coming will take him into his blessed kingdom.

In 2 Peter 1:20, we read: "No prophecy of the scripture is of any
private interpretation." Some people say: "O yes, the prophecies are all
well enough for the priests and doctors, but not for the rank and file
of the church." But Peter says: "The prophecy came not by the will of
man, but holy men spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost," and those
men are the very ones who tell us of the return of our Lord. Look at
Daniel 2:45, where he tells the meaning of that stone which the king saw
in his dream that was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that
broke in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold.
"The dream is certain and the interpretation thereof sure," says Daniel.
Now we have seen the fulfillment of that prophecy all but the closing
part of it. The kingdoms of Babylon and Medo-Persia and Greece and Rome
have all been broken in pieces, and now it only remains for this stone
cut out of the mountain without hands to smite the image and break it in
pieces till it becomes like the dust of the summer threshing floor, and
for this stone to become a great mountain and fill the whole earth.


BUT HOW IS HE GOING TO COME?

We are told how he is going to come. When those disciples stood looking
up into heaven at the time of his ascension, there appeared two angels,
who said Acts 1:11: "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." How did he go
up? He took his flesh and bones up with him. "Look at me; handle me;
give me something to eat; a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me
have; I am the identical one whom they crucified and laid in the grave.
Now I am risen from the dead and am going up to heaven," Luke 24:39,43.
He is gone, say the angels, but he will come again just as he went. An
angel was sent to announce his birth of the virgin; angels sang of his
advent in Bethlehem; an angel told the women of his resurrection; and
two angels told the disciples of his coming again. It is the same
testimony in all these cases.

I do not know why people should not like to read the Bible, and find out
all about this precious doctrine of our Lord's return. Some have gone
beyond prophecy, and tried to tell the very day he would come. Perhaps
that is one reason why people do not believe this doctrine. He is
coming, we know that; but just when he is coming we do not know; Matt.
24:36, settles that. The angels do not know; and Christ says that even
he does not know, but that is something the Father keeps to himself. If
Christ had said: "I will not come back for 2,000 years," none of his
disciples would have begun to watch for him, but it is the proper
attitude of a Christian to be always looking for his Lord's return. So
God does not tell us just when he is to come, but Christ tells us to
watch. In this same chapter we find that he is to come unexpectedly and
suddenly. In the twenty-seventh verse we have these words: "For as the
lightning cometh out of the east and shineth unto the west, even so
shall also the coming of the Son of Man be." And again in the
forty-fourth verse: "Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as
ye think not the Son of Man cometh."

Some people say that means death: but the Word of God does not say it
means death. Death is our enemy, but our Lord hath the keys of death; he
has conquered death, hell, and the grave, and at any moment he may come
to set us free from death, and destroy our last enemy for us; so the
proper state for a believer in Christ is waiting and watching for our
Lord's return.

In the last chapter of John there is a text that seems to settle this
matter. Peter asks the question about John: "Lord what shall this man
do? Jesus said unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? Follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among the
brethren that that disciple should not die." They did not think that the
coming of the Lord meant death; there was a great difference between
these two things in their minds.


CHRIST IS THE PRINCE OF LIFE.

There is no death where he is; death flees at his coming; dead bodies
sprang to life when he touched them or spoke to them. His coming is not
death; he is the resurrection and the life, when he sets up his kingdom
there is to be no death, but life forevermore.

There is another mistake, as you will find if you read your Bible
carefully. Some people think that at the coming of Christ everything is
to be done up in a few minutes; but I do not so understand it. The first
thing he is to do is to take his Church out of the world. He calls the
Church his bride, and he says he is going to prepare a place for her. We
may judge, says one, what a glorious place it will be from the length of
time he is in preparing it, and when the place is ready he will come and
take the church to himself.

In the closing verses of the fourth chapter of 1 Thessalonians, Paul
says: "If we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so also them
which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.... We which are alive and
remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are
asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead
in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air,
and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore, comfort one another
with these words." That is the comfort of the church. There was a time
when I used to mourn that I should not be alive in the millennium; but
now I expect to be in the millennium. Dean Alford says--and almost
everybody bows to him in the matter of interpretation--that he must
insist that this coming of Christ to take his church to himself in the
clouds is not the same event us that to judge the world at the last day.
The deliverance of the church is one thing, judgment is another. Now, I
cannot find any place in the Bible where it tells me to wait for signs
of the coming of the millennium, as the return of the Jews, and such
like; but it tells me to look for the coming of the Lord; to watch for
it; to be ready at midnight to meet him, like those five wise virgins.
The trump of God may be sounded, for anything we know, before I finish
this sermon--at any rate we are told that he will come as a thief in the
night, and at an hour when many look not for him.

Some of you may shake your heads and say, "Oh, well, that is too deep
for the most of us; such things ought not to be said before these young
converts; only the very wisest characters, such as ministers and
professors in the theological seminaries, can understand them." But my
friends, you find that Paul wrote about these things to those young
converts among the Thessalonians, and he tells them to comfort one
another with these words. Here in the first chapter of 1 Thessalonians
Paul says, "Ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true
God, and to wait for his Son from heaven whom he raised from the dead,
even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come," To wait for his
Son; that is the true attitude of every child of God. If he is doing
that he is ready for the duties of life, ready for God's work; aye, that
makes him feel that he is just ready to begin to work for God.

Then in 1 Thessalonians, 2:19, he says: "For what is our hope, or joy,
or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye, in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ, at his coming?" And again, in the third chapter, at the
thirteenth verse, "To the end that he may establish your hearts
unblamable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints." Still again, in the fifth
chapter, "For ye yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so
cometh as a thief in the night. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness,
that that day should over take you as a thief." He has something to say
about this same thing in every chapter, indeed I have thought this
Epistle to the Thessalonians might be called the gospel of Christ's
coming again.

There are three great facts foretold in the word of God: First, that
Christ should come; that has been fulfilled. Second, that the Holy Ghost
should come; that was fulfilled at Pentecost, and the church is able to
testify to it by its experience of his saving grace. Third, the return
of our Lord again from heaven--for this we are told to watch and wait
"till he come." Look at that account of the last hours of Christ with
his disciples. What does Christ say to them? If I go away I will send
death after you to bring you to me? I will send an angel after you? Not
at all. He says: "I will come again and receive you unto myself." If my
wife were in a foreign country, and I had a beautiful mansion all ready
for her, she would a good deal rather I should come and bring her unto
it than to have me send some one else to bring her.


THE CHURCH IS THE LAMB'S WIFE.

He has prepared a mansion for his bride, and he promises for our joy and
comfort that he will come himself and bring us to the place he has been
all this while preparing.

My friends it is perfectly safe to take the word of God as we find it.
If he tells us to watch, then watch! If he tells us to pray, then pray!
If he tells us he will come again, wait for him! Let the church bow to
the word of God, rather than trying to find out how such things can be.
"Behold, I come quickly," said Christ. "Even so, come, Lord Jesus,"
should be the prayer of the church.

Take the account of the words of Christ at the communion table. It seems
to me the devil has covered up the most precious thing about it. "For as
often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup ye do show forth the
Lord's death _till he come_." But most people seem to think that the
Lord's table is the place for self-examination and repentance, and
making good resolutions. Not at all; you spoil it that way; it is to
show forth the Lord's death, and we are to keep it up till he comes.

Some people say, "I believe Christ will come on the other side of the
millennium." Where do you get it? I cannot find it. The word of God
nowhere tells me to watch and wait for the coming of the millennium, but
for the coming of the Lord. I do not find any place where God says the
world is to grow better and better, and that Christ is to have a
spiritual reign on earth of a thousand years. I find that the world is
to grow worse and worse, and at length there is to be a separation. "Two
women grinding at a mill, one taken and the other left; two men in one
bed, one taken and the other left," Luke 17:34,36. The church is to be
translated out of the world, we have two examples already, two
representatives, as we might say, of Christ's kingdom, of what is to be
done for all his true believers. Enoch is the representative of the
first dispensation, Elijah of the second, and, as a representative of
the third dispensation, we have the Saviour himself, who is entered into
the heavens for us, and become the first fruits of them that slept. We
are not to wait for the great white throne judgement, but the glorified
church is set on the throne with Christ, and to help to judge the world.

Now, some of you think this is a new and strange doctrine, and that they
who preach it are speckled birds. But let me tell you that most of the
spiritual men in the pulpits of Great Britain are firm in this faith.
Spurgeon preaches it. I have heard Newman Hall say that he knew no
reason why Christ might not come before he got through with his sermon.
But in certain wealthy and fashionable churches, where they have the
form of godliness, but deny the power thereof,--just the state of things
which Paul declares shall be in the last days,--this doctrine is not
preached or believed. They do not want sinners to cry out in their
meeting, "What must I do to be saved?" They want intellectual preachers
who will cultivate their taste, brilliant preachers who will rouse their
imagination, but they do not want the preaching that has in it the power
of the Holy Ghost. We live in the day of shams in religion. The church
is cold and formal; may God wake us up! And I know of no better way to
do it than to get the church to looking for the return of our Lord.

Some people say, "Oh, you will discourage the young converts if you
preach that doctrine." Well, my friends, that has not been my
experience. I have felt like working three times as hard ever since I
came to understand that my Lord was coming back again. I look on this
world as a wrecked vessel. God has given me a life-boat, and said to me,
"Moody, save all you can." God will come in judgment and burn up this
world, but the children of God do not belong to this world; they are in
it, but not of it, like a ship in the water. This world is getting
darker and darker; its ruin is coming nearer and nearer; if you have any
friends on this wreck unsaved, you had better lose no time in getting
them off.

But some will say: "Do you then make the grace of God a failure?" No,
grace is not a failure but man is. The antediluvian world was a failure;
the Jewish work was a failure; man has been a failure everywhere, when
he has had his own way and been left to himself.


CHRIST WILL SAVE HIS CHURCH.

But he will save them finally by taking them out of the world. Now, do
not take my word for it; look this doctrine up in your Bible, and if you
find it there, bow down to it and receive it as the word of God. Take
Matthew 24:48,50: "But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart,
my Lord delayeth his coming ... the Lord of that servant shall come in a
day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of,
and shall cut him asunder and appoint him his portion with the
hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." Take 2 Peter
3:4,5: "There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their
own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming? for since the
fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the beginning
of the creation." Go out on the streets of Chicago and ask men about the
return of our Lord, and that is just what they would say: "Ah, yes, the
Lord delayeth his coming!"

"Behold, I come quickly," said Christ to John, and the last prayer in
the Bible is, "Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly." Were the early
Christians disappointed then? No; no man is disappointed who obeys the
voice of God. The world waited for the first coming of the Lord; waited
for 4,000 years, and then he came. He was here only thirty-three years
and then he went away; but he left us a promise that he would come
again; and as the world watched and waited for his first coming and did
not watch in vain, so now to them who wait for his appearing shall he
appear a second time unto salvation. Now let the question go round, "Am
I ready to meet the Lord if he comes to-night?" "Be ye also ready, for
in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh."

There is another thought I want to call your attention to, and that is
this: Christ will bring all our friends, with him when he comes. All who
have died in the Lord are to be with him when he comes in the clouds of
heaven. "Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first
resurrection: on such the second death has no power, but they shall be
priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand
years," Rev. 20:6. "But the rest of the dead lived not again until the
thousand years were past; this is the first resurrection" (verse 5). That
looks as if the church were to have a thousand years with Christ before
the final judgment, when Satan shall be cast out, and there shall be new
heavens and new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness.

Now, I want to give you some texts to study.

    When we eat the Lord's supper we show forth his death, until he
    come. 1 Cor. xi. 26.

    We are using our talents, until he come. Luke xix. 13.

    We are fighting the good fight of faith, until he come. 1 Tim
    vi. 12-14.

    We are enduring tribulation, until he come. 2 Thes. i. 7.

    We are to be patient, until he come. James v. 8.

    We wait for the crown of righteousness, until he come. 2 Tim.
    iv. 8.

    We wait for the crown of glory, until he come. 1 Pet. v. 4.

    We wait for re-union with departed friends, until he come. 1
    Thes. iv. 13-18.

    We wait for Satan to be bound, until he come. Rev. xx. 3.

    And so let us watch and wait till he comes.




    D. L. Moody, who is perhaps the most popular and efficient
    preacher of the gospel of Christ in the world, to-day, is
    evidently fully committed to a belief in the speedy coming of
    our Lord Jesus Christ, to judge the world and establish his
    eternal kingdom. Looking over the published reports of his
    sermons in Great Britain and in this country, since the
    beginning of 1874, I give extracts which go to show in a plain
    light the man's inner love and hope as relates to the last
    things, and his warm, bold, consistent manner of expressing the
    same. Thousands pray, God bless D. L. Moody.

    1. Mr. Moody proclaims that the grand symbols of Daniel's,
    second and seventh chapters, announce four dominant world
    empires, and but four, to cover all centuries of human
    probation.

    2. That these kingdoms are and were Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece
    and Rome.

    3. That these have had their day of earthly supremacy and the
    last has nearly passed away.

    4. That the fifth kingdom of Daniel is God's, to come in its
    order as the fifth, to overthrow all previous kingdoms, to be a
    visible and eternal kingdom, and to be established by Christ in
    person at his second coming.

    5. That the stone cut from the mountain denotes "Christ
    himself," "at his appearing and kingdom," whose advent "is not
    far distant," and for whose advent "the whole creation groans."
    Rom. 8:19-22.

    6. That the last days, described by our Saviour in Matt.
    24:37-39 as resembling the days of Lot and Noah, are already
    here; observing, "I do not think the day is far distant when our
    Lord will return." And again, "just as judgment overtook
    Belshazzar carousing at his feast, so will judgment come
    suddenly and swiftly upon the world revelling in its sins."

       *     *     *     *     *

    The foregoing he preached in the City Hall, Glasgow, March 15th,
    1874, before three thousand people. On the same day he preached
    on "Christ's Second Coming" in the Free church (Pres.), telling
    the churches that every thirtieth verse in the New Testament
    bears on that glorious coming; and says the _London Christian_,
    "With his usual power he showed what a mighty motive this
    doctrine is to all who are winning souls. He himself had found
    it rousing him to ten-fold more effort to save all that could be
    rescued from the coming wreck."

    In Philadelphia, in a discourse on Daniel's second chapter, he
    said: "This dream has been nearly fulfilled as Daniel
    interpreted it. In the present age the prophecy is nearly
    completed, and the hour of the Lord's second coming is close at
    hand." D. T. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

    PRICE BY MAIL 25 CENTS PER DOZEN, OR $1.25 PER HUNDRED.
    Address all orders to I. C. Wellcome, Yarmouth, Me.

       *       *       *       *       *




BOOK & TRACT CATALOGUE.

THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION.

BY I. C. WELLCOME AND C. GOUD.


"The Plan of Redemption is an earnest book, evidently prepared after no
little study, and with a conscientious desire to advance the cause of
Christ. The Bible is made the basis of argument; it contains many fresh
and well considered suggestions. The careful reader will find much that
is valuable."--_Watchman and Reflector._

"This treatise aims to serve up the gospel scheme in a compact form. It
states the plan and work well, and usually correctly. It refuses to
concede primal immortality to Adam, and adopts the pre-millennial view.
It is a good treatise."--_Zion's Herald._

"Your book contains sublime ideas and deep thoughts. There are parts of
it I like very much"--_W. H. Shailer., D.D._

Neatly bound in Cloth, 460 pages. Price, $1.25. Postpaid by Mail.


THE BEREAN'S CASKET AND REPOSITORY. By I. C. Wellcome. Cloth. Price,
$1.50, leather $2.00, by mail.

THE FIVE KINGDOMS, of Daniel 2d and 7th chapters. Illustrated. By I. C.
Wellcome. Price, $1.25 per 100: 85 cts. per doz., by mail.

THE NEW WORLD. Showing the hope of the church and what is to be their
inheritance. 24 pp. By I. C. Wellcome. $2.00 per hundred.

LOST OR SAVED? COMFORT IN AFFLICTION. LIVING WATERS. 4 pp. each. By I.
C. Wellcome. By mail, 300 for $1.00.

THE GOSPEL HOPE. By a CONGREGATIONALIST. On the prominence and
importance of the subject of the Lord's coming, as shown in the
Scriptures. 12 pp. $1.00 per 100; 25 cents per doz., by mail.

THE FAITHFUL WATCHMAN. By Rev. J. R. MACDUFF, D.D., and Rev. J. H.
BROOKES, D.D. On the Second Coming of Christ, the duty to watch. 12 pp.
$1.00 per 100; 25 cts. per dozen, by mail.

MEAT IN DUE SEASON. By Sir CHARLES SABINE, London, Eng. A very valuable
tract showing that the church is starving for lack of gospel truth. 8pp.
2 doz. for 25 cts., or 150 for $1.00, post-paid.

THE PRESENT AGE. By H. BONAR, D.D., London. A thorough expose of the
boasted progress of the present age. 24 pp. By mail, 40 cts., or $2.00
per hundred.

CHRIST'S REIGN REJECTED. By J. A. SEISS, D.D. On the scoffers and
sceptics, in and out of the church, against the promise of Christ's
return. An important tract. 4 pp. By mail, 300 for $1.00.

THE PRESENT TIMES FORETOLD. By Rev. G. L. WALKER, Congregationalist. An
excellent tract of four pp. 300 for $1.00.

THE LIGHT OF PROPHECY. By Rev. J. H. BROOKES, D.D., Presbyterian. An
important tract on the Second Coming of Christ, the neglect of the
ministry and the value of prophecy. 12 pp. By mail, $1.00 per 100; 25
cts. per dozen.

BIBLE HOLINESS. By Eld. O. R. Fassett. Price, 5 cents.

THE BIBLE ORDER OF THE MILLENNIUM AND THE SECOND ADVENT OF CHRIST. A
thorough statement of Bible truth. By DANIEL D. BUCK, D.D. (Methodist.)
Price 10 cts.

MILLENARIANISM AND MISSIONS. A review of Dr. Huntington's charge against
Millenarianism. By DANIEL D. BUCK, D.D. Price, single, 5 cts. 35 cts.
per doz., $2.50 per 100.

RESURRECTION DESTINIES. A very valuable work on the resurrection and
destiny of all. By DANIEL D. BUCK, D.D. Price 15 cts.


    Published by The Scriptural Publishing Society, Yarmouth, Me.
    Address I. C. WELLCOME.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of That Gospel Sermon on the Blessed Hope, by 
Dwight Lyman Moody

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOSPEL SERMON ON BLESSED HOPE ***

***** This file should be named 27316.txt or 27316.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/3/1/27316/

Produced by Gerard Arthus, Sarah Gutierrez, and The Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
