Project Gutenberg's The Landing of the Pilgrims, by Henry Fisk Carlton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Landing of the Pilgrims

Author: Henry Fisk Carlton

Editor: Claire T. Zyve

Release Date: November 29, 2008 [EBook #27357]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LANDING OF THE PILGRIMS ***




Produced by Colin Bell, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









_DRAMATIC HOURS IN COLONIAL HISTORY_

The
Landing of the Pilgrims

BY

HENRY FISK CARLTON


_Edited by_ CLAIRE T. ZYVE, Ph.D.
Fox Meadow School, Scarsdale, New York

BUREAU OF PUBLICATIONS

TEACHERS COLLEGE, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

NEW YORK CITY




_HOW TO BE A GOOD RADIO ACTOR_


The play in this book has actually been produced on the radio.
Possibly you have listened to this one when you tuned in at home. The
persons whose voices you heard as you listened, looked just as they
did when they left their homes to go to the studio, although they were
taking the parts of men and women who lived long ago and who wore
costumes very different from the ones we wear today.

The persons whose voices you heard stood close together around the
microphone, each one reading from a copy of the play in his hand.
Since they could not be seen, they did not act parts as in other
plays, but tried to make their voices show how they felt.

When you give these plays you will not need costumes and you will not
need scenery, although you can easily arrange a broadcasting studio if
you wish. You will not need to memorize your parts; in fact, it will
not be like a real radio broadcast if you do so, and, furthermore, you
will not want to, since you will each have a copy of the book in your
hands. All you will need to do is to remember that you are taking the
part of a radio actor, that you are to read your speeches very
distinctly, and that by your voice you will make your audience
understand how you feel. In this way you will have the fun of living
through some of the great moments of history.


_HOW TO FOLLOW DIRECTIONS IN THE PLAY_

There are some directions in this play which may be new to you, but
these are necessary, for you are now in a radio broadcasting studio,
talking in front of a microphone. The word [_in_] means that the
character is standing close to the microphone, while [_off_] indicates
that he is farther away, so that his voice sounds faint. When the
directions [_off_, _coming in_] are given, the person speaking is away
from the microphone at first but gradually comes closer. The words
[_mob_] or [_crowd noise_] you will understand mean the sound of many
people talking in the distance.

Both the English and the dialect used help make the characters live,
so the speeches have been written in the way in which these men and
women would talk. This means that sometimes the character may use what
seems to you unusual English. The punctuation helps, too, to make the
speeches sound like real conversation; for example, you will find that
a dash is often used to show that a character is talking very
excitedly.




The Landing of the Pilgrims


_CAST_

PASTOR ROBINSON
ELDER CARVER
WILHELM KIEFT
VOICE
THOMAS WESTON
CAPTAIN JONES
PETER BROWN
MOB


ANNOUNCER

It was in the month of December in 1620 that the Pilgrim Fathers
landed on Plymouth Rock and proceeded to establish the first permanent
white settlement in New England. But the Pilgrims had not set out for
America to establish their new home in New England--far from it--they
had a charter permitting their settlement in the northern portion of
the Virginia plantation, and it was toward Virginia that the little
band of passengers aboard the Mayflower thought they were heading. The
story of how they happened to come to the stern and rockbound coast of
New England and of how they happened to stay there and carve out of
the wilderness a great commonwealth is told here.

Let us begin our story in Leyden, Holland, where for some eleven years
the Pilgrims have lived in exile from England, driven out because of
their religious faith. It is early in the year 1620, and John
Robinson, who is the pastor and leader of the Pilgrims, is talking to
John Carver, who is one of the elders of the church.

ROBINSON

No word yet from Elder Brewster?

CARVER

Nay, not a word. I fear me that he and Master Cushman have found it
impossible to raise such a large sum of money.

ROBINSON

If we delay much longer King James may repent himself of his
generosity in allowing us to settle in Virginia.

CARVER

I begin to fear that we are doomed to spend the rest of our days in
Holland.

ROBINSON

Nay, nay, do not lose heart. Jehovah will find a way for his children.
Remember, the Children of Israel wandered for forty years in the
wilderness before they found rest in the Promised Land.

CARVER

I'll not lose faith, Pastor Robinson. I know a way will be found for
us. [_knock_]

ROBINSON

Will you see who's at the door?

CARVER

Of course, Pastor. [_sound of opening door_] Good day to you, sir.

KIEFT

Does Master John Robinson dwell here?

CARVER

Aye. Will you enter?

KIEFT

Thank you.

CARVER

Pastor Robinson, this gentleman would speak with you.

ROBINSON

Good morrow to you, sir.

KIEFT

Are you Pastor Robinson, then?

ROBINSON

I am. And to what do I owe the honor of this visit, Master--ah--?

KIEFT

My name is Kieft, Wilhelm Kieft, at your service.

ROBINSON

I am honored, Master Kieft. Allow me to present Master Carver. [_they
greet each other_]

KIEFT

And now to the business that brought me here--it is rumored about
Leyden that you and your company are about to leave Leyden. Is that
true?

ROBINSON

There is, as yet, nothing certain, Master Kieft.

KIEFT

But you are planning an emigration to the New World, are you not?

ROBINSON

It has been talked of, certainly, but thus far we have not found the
means.

KIEFT

Well, Master Robinson, perhaps I can find them for you.

ROBINSON

Indeed!

CARVER

Tell us, Master Kieft!

KIEFT

I am a member of the Dutch West India Company, which possesses a large
tract of land in the New World.

ROBINSON

Indeed, I did not know that.

KIEFT

Ah, yes, through the discovery of a countryman of yours, Henry Hudson,
who sailed under our flag, we own the country from the Great South
River to the Great North River, where, I am told, the climate is
healthful and pleasant, and the land rich and bountiful.

CARVER

And what do you propose to us?

KIEFT

My company is prepared to furnish you land upon which to found a
colony, and capital to carry you and your people there and support you
until you have made yourselves self-supporting.

ROBINSON

And for this you would expect of us--what?

KIEFT

Some small share of your profits.

CARVER

Yes, and what else?

KIEFT

Nothing, except that you should live under the Dutch flag and make our
claim to the land secure.

CARVER

Your offer is generous, Master Kieft.

ROBINSON

And you make no other conditions than those you mention?

KIEFT

None, I assure you.

ROBINSON

Can you offer them in writing so that our people may consider them?

KIEFT

Indeed, yes, if you are interested, my company will make you a written
offer within a fortnight.

ROBINSON

We are interested, Master Kieft, very much so.

KIEFT

Good. You shall receive our conditions as soon as I can arrange it.
Good day!

ROBINSON

Good day, sir, and thank you.

CARVER

Jehovah has heard our prayer. The way is open. Mayhap--

ROBINSON

Is it not a generous offer?

CARVER

Generous? Aye, but still--

ROBINSON

Well?

CARVER

I like it not.

ROBINSON

Indeed, and why not?

CARVER

Why should the Dutch West India Company make us such a generous offer?

ROBINSON

Why indeed, but that we may establish for them a colony in the New
World?

CARVER

Aye, a colony that will give them a stronger hold upon disputed land.

ROBINSON

Do you think the land is disputed?

CARVER

I know but little of the New World. I know not even where the Great
North River or the Great South River may be, but only this I know:
King James and his Virginia Company would take it much amiss, that
having a patent to lands in Virginia, we turned to the Dutch and
settled under their flag.

ROBINSON

And what has King James ever done for us but persecute us, drive us
from our homes, and make of us pilgrims upon the face of the earth?

CARVER

Aye, but I am an Englishman. I had looked with joy upon our emigration
to America, because I had hoped we could once again live under British
rule.

ROBINSON

Many of our company have felt the same; but if we cannot go except
under the Dutch flag, still we must go.

CARVER

Aye.

ROBINSON

The hand of Jehovah leads us; we must follow.


ANNOUNCER

So the offer of the Dutch West India Company was received and in due
course of time the provisions were put into writing. The Pilgrim
company discussed the offer from every angle. All of them would have
preferred to settle under the British flag, if it could have been
arranged, but because more than six months had passed and they had not
found anyone who could finance them, they felt that the Dutch offer
should be accepted.

Therefore, near the end of February, 1620, Pastor Robinson and Elder
Carver meet with Wilhelm Kieft to settle finally the matter of the
emigration. Let us listen as they talk together.

KIEFT

Two ships and one thousand pounds, which you can repay in ten years.

ROBINSON

And all your company demands is a monopoly in the fur trade?

KIEFT

That is all. Otherwise you shall do what pleases you; but all of the
fur must belong to the Dutch West India Company.

ROBINSON

That seems just. What think you, Elder Carver?

CARVER

Who shall govern us, Master Kieft?

KIEFT

You shall say that yourself. Who governs you now?

ROBINSON

We have no governor except the Elders of the Church.

KIEFT

It shall be the same in the New World.

CARVER

Do the terms satisfy you, Pastor Robinson?

ROBINSON

Indeed, I am more than satisfied.

KIEFT

Then shall we sign the articles? [_rattle of paper_]

ROBINSON

I can think of nothing more we should consider, can you, Elder?

CARVER

Nothing.

KIEFT

Then, if you have a quill, we can sign now. [_knock_]

ROBINSON

Your pardon, someone knocks.

CARVER [_going_]

I'll see who it is.

ROBINSON

Thank you, Elder. Ah, here is the quill. Now, where is the inkhorn?
Ah, yes, here.

KIEFT

Sign here. [_rattle of paper_]

ROBINSON

Let us wait for Elder Carver.

CARVER [_off_]

Oh, Pastor Robinson?

ROBINSON

Yes?

CARVER

Your pardon, sir, will you come here at once?

ROBINSON

What is it?

CARVER [_off_]

Thomas Weston of London desires to see you.

KIEFT

Can we not finish our business first?

ROBINSON

Tell him to come in and sit down while we get this business finished.

CARVER [_off_]

Will you come in, Master Weston?

WESTON [_coming in_]

Thank you. Have I the honor of addressing Master Robinson?

ROBINSON

I'm Robinson.

WESTON

I'm Thomas Weston, and I have come on behalf of a company of London
merchants--

KIEFT [_sharply_]

Master Robinson, your pardon, but may we not finish this business in
hand?

ROBINSON

Certainly! Elder Carver, Master Kieft is waiting for us to sign the
Articles of Emigration.

WESTON

Your pardon, Master Robinson, did you say "Articles of Emigration"?

ROBINSON

Why, yes.

WESTON

I have an offer to make you for the emigration of your company.

CARVER

What?

ROBINSON

Indeed!

KIEFT

I must insist, sir--

ROBINSON

One moment, Master Kieft.

KIEFT

Are you going to sign or not?

ROBINSON

Master Kieft, this may cause us to change our plans; we must consider.
What is your offer, Master Weston?

WESTON

A company of seven London merchants has agreed to furnish ships and
capital to carry you and your people to America.

KIEFT

You have already agreed with me--

ROBINSON

We have signed nothing yet. Where, Master Weston, does your company
propose that we settle?

WESTON

In northern Virginia--between the Great South River and the Great
North River.

KIEFT

That, sir, is the land of the Dutch West India Company.

WESTON

Your pardon, but King James has decreed--

KIEFT [_getting angrier_]

I care not what your sovereign may have decreed--he has no claim to
that land. My company discovered and explored it!

WESTON

Has your company established any plantations there?

KIEFT

That makes no difference.

WESTON

Until you have established plantations, you cannot claim it.

KIEFT

I do not wish to argue with you, sir. I am here to close this business
with you, Master Robinson. I am waiting--

ROBINSON

We must have time to consider--

KIEFT

I had your word.

CARVER

Master Kieft, the situation has changed. We are Englishmen, and if we
can emigrate under our own flag, you cannot blame us for preferring it
to another.

KIEFT

You have tricked us--you are not treating me fairly!

ROBINSON

Now, sir--

KIEFT [_louder_]

And I warn you if you go to our land under the British flag, you shall
regret it, sir, you shall regret it. Good day! [_sound of door
slamming_]


ANNOUNCER

Thus the Pilgrims incurred the enmity of the Dutch West India Company,
and though the terms of the London merchants were not so generous as
those offered by the Dutch company, the Pilgrims accepted them and set
about making their preparations for the great adventure.

They secured for their voyage two ships, the _Speedwell_ and the
_Mayflower_.

Our next scene is early in July of 1620. The _Mayflower_ has been
engaged for the voyage, and is lying at anchor in the Thames River off
London, where it is undergoing some repairs preparatory to taking on
cargo, which is to come to the New World. Aboard the ship is only the
master, Captain Jones, when he is disturbed by--

KIEFT [_off_]

Ahoy, the _Mayflower_!

JONES

Ahoy! Who's hailing the _Mayflower_?

KIEFT

Here--alongside! May I come aboard?

JONES

What do you want?

KIEFT

I want to talk to the master of the ship.

JONES

I'm master. What do you want?

KIEFT

May I come aboard?

JONES

Come aboard. The ladder's over the side.

KIEFT

All right, I'm coming. [_lower_] Keep the boat alongside!

VOICE

Aye, aye, sir!

KIEFT [_low_]

Stay here till I'm ready to leave!

VOICE

Aye, aye, sir!

JONES

Here you are--right up here, sir. Give me your hand! Ah, there you
are, sir!

KIEFT [_in_]

Thank you, sir. Are you the master of the ship?

JONES

I am, sir.

KIEFT

I understand you are engaged for the voyage.

JONES

That we are, sir, to America.

KIEFT

Aye, yes--by a company of London merchants.

JONES

And what's that to you, sir, begging your pardon?

KIEFT

No matter, I know well enough you are. And now, sir, I want to know if
you'd like to put yourself in the way of earning a hundred pounds?

JONES

A hundred! Law, sir, and who wouldn't?

KIEFT

Exactly! I hoped I'd find you a man of sense.

JONES

What do you want me to do?

KIEFT

You are sailing for northern Virginia, are you not?

JONES

That's the orders.

KIEFT

Where do you expect to make land?

JONES

I was looking to make it in the mouth of the Great North River.

KIEFT

Hm--you know, I suppose, that the Dutch West India Company claims all
the land bordering on the Great North River.

JONES [_laughing_]

Why, sir, everybody claims it. That's no matter. King James has
proclaimed that all the land that has been settled belongs to them
that has settled it; the rest is anybody's. When the company I'm
taking gets their plantation settled, the Dutch can't claim the land
any longer.

KIEFT

Perhaps not, but your company is not going to land on Dutch territory.

JONES

Eh?

KIEFT

You are going to lose your bearings--

JONES

Me--a sailor--lose my bearings?

KIEFT

Certainly--for one hundred pounds.

JONES

Well--

KIEFT

And you will make land far to the north of the Great North River.

JONES

I'll have to see the color of the money.

KIEFT

Is it a bargain?

JONES

Have you got the money with you?

KIEFT

I have, and on your promise, I'll pay it.

JONES

All right. I'll see that the company is landed where you wish.

KIEFT

Good!


ANNOUNCER

And so Captain Jones of the _Mayflower_ was bribed by Dutch gold to
play false with the band of Pilgrims. You know the story of the long
and difficult job the Pilgrims had in getting fairly started on their
voyage. The _Speedwell_ sprang a leak, and they had to put back to
Plymouth harbor where the ship was repaired. They made a second start,
and again the _Speedwell_ became unseaworthy and the captain refused
to go on, so a second time the little flotilla put back to Plymouth.
This time, since the season was far advanced and the Pilgrims feared
that winter would be upon them before they could get established in
their new home, the _Speedwell_ was left behind, and on September 16,
1620, the _Mayflower_ left alone for the New World. Halfway across the
ocean the ship was beset by a long series of storms, so severe that it
took more than two months for the ship to make the trip across the
Atlantic. At last, on the morning of November 20, 1620, the ship's
company were awakened by the electric cry of--

VOICE

Land--ho! Land--land--ho!

JONES [_calling_]

Where away?

VOICE

Two points off the starboard bow!

MOB [_voices swelling up_]

Land! Land! Is it really land? Captain, Captain! Have we really made
land? Land? [_etc._]

JONES

Aye, we've made land! Helmsman, bring the ship to bear on land, dead
ahead!

VOICE

Aye, aye, sir, land dead ahead.

CARVER [_coming up_]

Ah, Captain Jones, at last!

JONES

Aye, at last--land ahead!

CARVER

Praise Jehovah!

ALL

Praise Jehovah! Amen! [_etc._]

CARVER

Captain, tell us, is this Virginia that lies before us?

JONES

I know not; I've not yet taken our bearings.

CARVER

Do you not know where we are?

JONES

How should I? We've been tossed about in storms for a month, with no
sun for days on end.

CARVER

There is sun this morning. Can you not take your bearings now?

JONES

The mate is figuring our position even now.

CARVER

Good!

VOICE

Captain Jones?

JONES

Aye, mate, have you the position?

VOICE

I made it, sir, about seventy west by forty-two north.

CARVER

Forty-two north--but, Captain, we are bound for forty north--we're out
of our course.

JONES

What do you expect--with the storms we've had?

CARVER

Put your ship about--make for the south--this is not Virginia!

JONES

We'll land here.

CARVER

We have no right to land here. Our charter grants us land in Virginia,
not here!

JONES

I can't help that. The ship is in bad shape--I won't risk sailing her
any farther without repairs.

CARVER

Very well, you may stop here for repairs, but we must go on as soon as
they are made.

JONES

It will take some time.

CARVER

My people will help you. We must speed the work.

JONES

Of course, I'll speed it all I can, but a man can't do any more than
he can do.

CARVER

Well, get to it at once--this very day! We must get away from here
within a fortnight or winter will be upon us.

JONES

Aye, so it will--and the winters in this country are bad.

CARVER

Then we must start south without delay.

JONES

Look you, Master Carver--

CARVER

Well, Captain?

JONES

Belikes 'twill be a month or more before I can make the _Mayflower_
seaworthy--

CARVER

A month? Surely you can do better than that?

JONES

Perhaps not so well--why don't you land here?

CARVER

Here?

JONES

Aye. 'Tis a goodly country--full as rich as Virginia.

CARVER

Nay, nay, 'tis not to be thought on. We have a patent to lands in
Virginia--a charter to establish and rule a plantation there; but
here--why, the land is not ours--

JONES

It is if you take it--it belongs to no one else.

CARVER

But our Council would have no rights under the King--nay, nay. We go
on to Virginia--as soon as you have made your repairs.

JONES

So be it, Master Carver.


ANNOUNCER

So the _Mayflower_ brought up to anchor just inside Cape Cod, near the
present village of Provincetown. The voyage had been long and arduous.
There had been much sickness aboard, and Captain Jones knew that most
of the passengers longed to set foot on solid ground and begin the
task of building their homes. So he determined to create further
dissatisfaction among them.

For our next scene we are going into Captain Jones's cabin just as one
of the five men of the company, Peter Brown, has come into the cabin
on the captain's invitation.

JONES

Sit you down, Master Brown, and find what comfort you can in my poor
quarters.

PETER

Poor! If this cabin is poor, Captain, what do ye call what us folks
has to put up with, all crowded into the common cabin like sheep er
worse?

JONES

Aye, 'tis too bad the cabin is not a better place for your goodly
company.

PETER

Aye, well, we'll soon be out of it.

JONES

I fear me, not so soon.

PETER

Indeed, why?

JONES

The ship must be repaired before we can go on.

PETER

How long will that take ye?

JONES

Mayhap two months or more, I know not.

PETER

Two months? Two months more in the cabin of this ship and half of our
company will be dead.

JONES

Aye, belikes they will--and winter will be upon us hard and heavy. The
winters in this country are worse than any you have ever seen in
England or Holland.

PETER

Indeed!

JONES

The snow lies so deep it would cover a man's head--the land is blotted
out, and even the sea freezes--

PETER

Then how could we get ashore?

JONES

I know not.

PETER

And once ashore, how could we find a fair place to build our homes?

JONES

'Tis not for me to say.

PETER

Why can't we land right here, Captain?

JONES

Because your Elder, Master Carver, says fix the ship and go on.

PETER

If Elder Carver says that, then there be naught that we kin do.

JONES

You'd stay packed in the ship's cabin, facing sickness and death,
rather than rise up like men and tell the Elder what you will and what
you won't do, eh?

PETER

Elder Carver and the twelve masters have the voice; we have naught to
do but to obey.

JONES

Can it be that forty English freemen can't vote down twelve masters?

PETER

Under our charter the freemen have no voice.

JONES

Under the charter, eh?

PETER

Aye, so there's naught to do but what the masters say.

JONES

Have you never heard of mutiny?

PETER

Mutiny? Nay, we be lawful men, bound together in the love of Jehovah;
we'll not mutiny! We must abide by our charter.

JONES

The charter, aye.

PETER

So there's naught to do--

JONES

Hold--have you thought on this--the charter binds you under the King's
grant in Virginia Plantation--

PETER

Aye.

JONES

And you are not in Virginia--

PETER

Nay, not yet.

JONES

So you are not bound by the Virginia charter in these waters.

PETER

Forsooth, Captain, I'd not thought on that.

JONES

You have here all the rights of free-born Englishmen. And if you rise
like men and demand that your Elders hearken to your voice, who shall
gainsay you?

PETER

Aye--who--who, indeed? If we vote to land here, 'tis not mutiny.

JONES

Nay, 'tis but your right, if you want to land here.

PETER

We do--we do! Not a man in the company but would stay here if he had
his way.

JONES

Then have your way--like Englishmen! Go to your cabin. Talk to the men
of your company, tell them what I have told you.

PETER

Aye, Captain, I will! At once. [_going_]

JONES

Good! [_sound of door closing_] [_to himself_] Well, Elder Carver, we
shall see whose voice is stronger--yours, or the voice of forty
English freemen!


ANNOUNCER

Thus Captain Jones planted in the mind of one of the freemen of the
Pilgrim company an idea which he was sure would bear fruit before many
hours. He watched the company as first one man and then another fell
in with Peter Brown. He felt the temper of the company changing, but
he still did not feel that mutiny was likely against the strong
religious authority of the Elders. And so to bring the matter to a
head, he asked Carver to come to his cabin. As the door closes, the
captain begins--

JONES

I fear me, Master Carver, we are in a bad way.

CARVER

Indeed--why?

JONES

The carpenter has gone over the ship timber by timber--

CARVER

Well?

JONES

It is a long, hard job we have before us.

CARVER

Oh, too bad, too bad! How long?

JONES

What with finding the proper timbers ashore, and hewing them to fit
our needs, I fear it may well be two months or more before we can
leave these waters.

CARVER

Surely you can make what repairs are necessary in less time--you need
not rebuild the ship.

JONES

Nay--but the ship is sprung at every seam; 'tis nothing but good
fortune that has kept it afloat so long.

CARVER

The seams sprung?

JONES

Aye--all of them.

CARVER

Then our stores are in danger of being ruined.

JONES

Aye, they are even now in such danger they should be unshipped.

CARVER

Then we must do it--set your crew to the work at once.

JONES

The crew has more than it can do to repair the ship and make it ready
to sail on to Virginia, since you insist on going on.

CARVER

Then I'll set our company to work on the stores--we must not let them
be ruined.

JONES

Nay, or you'll all face starvation, for you can count on nothing from
the land at this late date.

CARVER

I'll gather the company together at once and set them to work!

JONES

Aye, do, Master Carver.

CARVER

We must unship the stores; [_going_] we'll begin at once. [_sound of
door opening_]

JONES [_to himself_]

Mayhap your company will have something to say to that, Master Carver.


ANNOUNCER

So Carver gathered together his company in the common cabin, and
standing before the stern-faced, storm-weary gathering, the Elder
spoke:

CARVER

Men of the Pilgrim company, as no doubt you are all well aware by now,
the land we made this morning with such joy and thanksgiving in our
hearts is not the land of the Virginia Plantation.

ALL

Aye, we know as much! So we have heard. [_etc._]

CARVER

But our ship is sore distressed from the buffeting of the storms, and
Captain Jones must needs make repairs before we can sail on to our
destination. [_protests and grumblings_]

I would it were not so, for I know how weary you find yourselves after
the many days upon the sea. But there's naught else to do.

PETER [_calling_]

Why can't we land here? [_mob assents_]

CARVER

Nay, nay, it cannot be. This is not Virginia; we have no patent to
these lands. We must sail on. The captain and his crew will make their
repairs as soon as they can, but our stores in the hold are all of
them in danger of spoiling--so we must needs unship them ourselves
until such time as we may sail away from here. So let every man
prepare himself for work.

PETER

Master Carver--we are not able to work. [_mob assents_]

CARVER

I know, but--

PETER

And more--'tis not our wish to stay aboard this ship longer--[_mob
assents_]

CARVER

But we can do naught else--

PETER

Aye, we kin land here, and find a goodly place to build our homes and
prepare against the winter that will be down upon us long before we
kin get to Virginia. [_mob agrees heartily_]

CARVER

Men--men--quiet--hark to me! We've no right under our charter to
settle here!

PETER

Then tear up the charter. [_mob agrees_]

CARVER

Tear up the charter? Have no government? Nay, we can't do that!

PETER

We be freemen, Master Carver; we have a right to a voice in what we'll
do, and what we won't do--and we all want to land here, don't we, men?
[_all agree_]

CARVER

But if we make our home here, we are outside the King's rule.

PETER

We'll rule ourselves--we be free-born Englishmen! [_all agree_]

CARVER

Mayhap--if that is your wish--

ALL

It is!

Aye, aye! [_etc._]

CARVER

It may be for the best interest of the company and for the glory of
Jehovah. I consent to your wishes. [_cheers_] But it behooves us to
enter into a compact, one with the other--that no man may say, once we
have landed in New England, that we have no law and cannot punish the
disobedient.

PETER

May it please ye, sir, we be more than willing for the masters to
write a compact that all can sign to be governed like any free-born
Englishmen by the will o' the majority--[_all agree_]

CARVER

So be it--let the masters of the company join me in my cabin, and we
shall make a compact joining all the company of freemen into a body
politic. [_cheers_]


ANNOUNCER

And so in the cabin of the _Mayflower_ the masters of the company,
twelve in number, met in the first American legislative assembly and
drew up one of the most famous documents in American history--the
Mayflower Compact--which organized the first self-governing community
in the New World.








End of Project Gutenberg's The Landing of the Pilgrims, by Henry Fisk Carlton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LANDING OF THE PILGRIMS ***

***** This file should be named 27357.txt or 27357.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/3/5/27357/

Produced by Colin Bell, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
