The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rules and Regulations of the Insane Asylum
of California, by Stockton State Hospital

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Rules and Regulations of the Insane Asylum of California
       Prescribed by the Resident Physician, August 1, 1861

Author: Stockton State Hospital

Release Date: December 13, 2008 [EBook #27527]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RULES REGS. INSANE ASYLUM CALIF. ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Markus Brenner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






                                 RULES

                                  AND

                              REGULATIONS

                                OF THE

                     INSANE ASYLUM OF CALIFORNIA.


                 PRESCRIBED BY THE RESIDENT PHYSICIAN,
                            AUGUST 1, 1861.


                               STOCKTON:
                       ARMOR & CLAYES, PRINTERS.
                                 1861.




RESIDENT PHYSICIAN.


The Resident Physician, who shall also be the Superintendent, shall be
the chief executive officer of the Asylum; he shall have the general
superintendence of the buildings, grounds, and property, subject to the
laws and regulations of the Trustees; he shall have the sole control and
management of the patients; he shall ascertain their condition, daily
prescribe their treatment, and adopt such sanitary measures as he may
think best; he shall appoint, with the approval of the Trustees, so many
attendants and assistants as he may think proper and necessary for the
economical and efficient performance of the business of the Asylum,
prescribe their several duties and places;--he shall, also, from time to
time, give such orders and instructions as he may judge best calculated
to insure good conduct, fidelity and economy in every department of
labor and expense; and he is authorized and enjoined to maintain
salutary discipline among all who are employed by the Institution, and
uniform obedience to all the rules and regulations of the
Asylum.--[_State Law of 1858._




ASSISTANT PHYSICIAN.


FIRST.

"The Assistant Physician shall perform" the "duties, and be subject to
the responsibility of the Superintendent, in his sickness or absence,
and" he "may call to his aid, for the time being, such medical
assistance, as he may deem necessary"--"and perform such other duties as
may be directed by the Superintendent and prescribed by the
By-Laws."--[_State Law of 1858._


SECOND.

He shall prepare and superintend the administration of medicines, visit
the wards frequently, and carefully note the condition and progress of
individual cases; see that the directions of the Superintendent are
faithfully executed, and promptly report any case of neglect or abuse
that may come under his observation, or of which he may be informed.


THIRD.

He shall assist in devising employment and recreation for the patients,
and endeavor in every way to promote their comfort and recovery; keep
such records of cases as the Superintendent may direct, assist in
preparing statistics, and conducting correspondence, and he shall
perform such other duties of his office as properly belong thereto.




GENERAL RULES.


1. Persons employed in the service of the Asylum will learn that
character, proper deportment, and faithfulness to duty, will alone keep
them in the situations in which they are placed; and they should
consider well, before entering upon service, whether they are prepared
to devote all their time, talents, and efforts, in the discharge of the
duties assigned to them. The Institution will deal in strict good faith
with its employees, and it will expect, in return, prompt, faithful, and
self-denying service.

2. No one can justly take offense when respectfully informed by the
Superintendent, that his or her temperament is better adapted to some
other employment; and those receiving such information should regard it
as kindly given, that they may have opportunity to avoid the
unpleasantness of being discharged.

3. Those employed at the Asylum be expected to hold themselves in
readiness for duty when directed by its officers; and the neglect of any
labor, or duty, on the ground that laboring hours are over, or to
hesitate, after proper direction, on such pretexts, will be regarded as
evidence against the fitness of the employee for the place he or she may
hold.

4. It must be remembered by all the employees, that their duties are
peculiar and confidential, and that there is an obvious impropriety in
disclosing the names, peculiarities, or acts of the inmates. It should
never be forgotten that the most cruel wounds may, by imprudent
disclosures, be inflicted on those whose conduct and language, during
their misfortune, should be covered with the veil of deepest secrecy.
Conversations, in relation to the Asylum and its inmates, sought by the
idle and mischievous, should be studiously avoided.

5. All persons employed in the Asylum are required to cultivate a calm
and deliberate method of performing their daily duties--carelessness and
precipitation being never more out of place than in an insane asylum.
Loud talking, hurrying up and down stairs, rude forms of address to one
another, and unsightly styles of dress, are wholly misplaced where
everything should be strictly decorous and orderly.

6. In the management of patients, unvarying kindness must be strictly
observed by all. When spoken to, mild, pleasant and persuasive language
must never give place to authoritative expressions of any kind. All
threats, taunts, or other kinds of abuse in language, are expressly
forbidden. A blow, kick, or any other kind of physical abuse, inflicted
on a patient, will be immediately followed by the dismissal of the
person so offending.

7. Employees having charge of patients outside of the wards, whether for
labor or exercise, will be held responsible for their safe return,
unless, by the direction of an officer they shall be transferred to the
charge of some other person; and when patients employed out of doors
become excited, they must be immediately returned to the wards whence
they were taken, and the fact reported at the office.

8. It will be expected of all employed in or about the Asylum, to check,
as far as possible, all conversations or allusions, on the part of
patients, to subjects of an obscene or improper nature, and remove, when
in their power, false impressions on their minds, respecting their
confinement or management; and any person who shall discover a patient
devising plans for escape, suicide, or violence to others, is enjoined
to report it to an officer without delay.

9. The place of duty of those having charge of patients is in the wards,
or in the yards, or in the garden with the patients. During the day and
while the patients are out of their sleeping apartments, they have no
business in their rooms, except for a momentary errand to adjust their
own clothing; and any employee who shall enter his or her room, and
engage in reading, writing, entertaining visitors, or be otherwise off
duty, will be acting in violation of rule.

10. The employees are not permitted to correspond with the friends of
patients; and all letters or packages to, or from, patients, must pass
through the hands of the Superintendent or Assistant Physician. All
making of dresses, working of embroidery, or any mechanism, for the use
of employees, is prohibited, unless by the special permission of the
Superintendent; and no employee of the Institution shall ever make any
bargain with any patient, or his or her friends, or accept of any fee,
reward or gratuity from any patient, or his or her friends, without the
Superintendent's consent.

11. Employees will not be permitted to leave the Asylum without the
consent of the Superintendent or Assistant Physician, and, when allowed
to leave, they will be expected to return by 9 o'clock P. M.--unless
expressly permitted to remain out longer. Before leaving they must hang
up their keys in the place, in the office, provided for that purpose.
Non-residents will not be permitted to remain in the Institution at
night without the knowledge and consent of the Superintendent or
Assistant Physician.

12. No person will be employed in or about the Asylum who is intemperate
in habits, or who engages in gambling or any other immoral or
disreputable practice; and as the patients are not allowed the use of
tobacco, within the Asylum, the employees are expected not to use it, in
any form, in their presence.

13. While employees are not prohibited from _occasionally_ visiting each
other in their wards, it should never become a habit, and the indulgence
is only allowed in view of the spirit of emulation, which may thus be
encouraged by sometimes inspecting each other's sphere of duty. When it
is discovered that the permission is abused, or that visits are being
spent in idle conversation, it will be held as a violation of rule.

14. The two departments of the Institution--male and female--must always
be separate to its employees, and no person, whose post of duty is
exclusively in the one, shall ever be permitted to enter the other,
unless some express or proper occasion shall demand it; and any one who
shall discover, and not disclose, or who shall in any way encourage, an
acquaintance between two patients, of opposite sex, will be held highly
culpable for such misdemeanor, and will be forthwith dismissed from
service.

15. No employee will be permitted to appropriate to his or her use any
article belonging to the Asylum, or purchased for the use of the
patients, however small or comparatively valueless it may be. From the
salary of the person so offending, the cost of the article will be
deducted, and he or she dismissed from service.


STEWARD.

1. The Steward shall have a general oversight of the business of the
farm, garden, grounds, fences and buildings; he shall assist in
maintaining the police regulations of the Asylum, observe the deportment
of those employed in subordinate positions, see that they do their duty,
and report to the Superintendent any instance of neglect or misconduct,
that he may observe, or of which he may be informed; he shall see to the
opening and closing of the house; that the employees rise and commence
their duties at the ringing of the bell, and return at proper season at
night; that the bell is rung promptly at such hours as may be
designated, from time to time, by the Superintendent. He shall have a
general care of the male patients, see that they are kindly treated,
that their clothes are taken care of, that their food is properly
cooked, served and distributed, that the rooms, passages and other
apartments are kept clean and properly warmed and ventilated, and that
every thing pertaining to the Asylum property is kept in order and in
good repair.

2. The Steward shall receive and store all provisions, fuel, clothing,
etc. provided by contracts, and, also, all supplies purchased under the
direction of the Superintendent, and he will be held responsible for the
safe-keeping and economical distribution of the same.

3. He shall keep just, accurate and methodical accounts of all articles
received, and all articles purchased by him, together with all
distributions of supplies to the several departments of the
Institution--each and every day's accounts exhibiting, in detail, the
number, quantity weight or measurement, as the nature of the case may
be, of each and every article received, and from whom, and distributed,
and to whom.

4. On the receipt of supplies, whether obtained under contract, or
purchased by order of the Superintendent, the Steward shall require a
bill or invoice of the same, and if, upon a careful examination of the
quality, quantity, weight or measurement of the article or articles,
they shall be found to correspond with the item or items of the bill, he
shall enter the aggregate amount, with the date and number of the
invoice, in a book provided for that purpose, after which he shall
endorse the bill _correct_, and file it, together with an abstract of
his daily disbursements, in the office of the Superintendent.

5. The Steward will be expected to devote his whole time to the
interests of the Institution, assist, in every way in his power, to
preserve order in the house, and faithfulness among the employees, and
see that all the rules and regulations of the Asylum are fully observed.


MATRON.

1. The Matron shall have charge of the female department of the Asylum.
It will be expected of her to be with the female patients, in all the
wards, as much as possible; see that they are kindly treated; that their
food is properly cooked, served and distributed; that their apartments
are kept clean and in good order, and properly warmed and ventilated;
that the female employees attend to their duties in all respects, and
report to the Superintendent any departure, on their part, from the
rules and regulations of the Institution.

2. The bedding, table linen, napkins, and drapery furniture, carpets,
table covers, and all similar property of the female department, as well
as the clothing of the female patients, shall be under her general care
and supervision. She shall direct the employment and amusements of all
the inmates of the female wards; in short, it will be expected of her to
look frequently and carefully into every interest connected with her
department; and thus, by devoting her whole time to the Institution, aid
in every way in her power, in securing the comfort and recovery of the
patients, and the general welfare of the Asylum.


CLERK.

1. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to keep a correct account, in a book
provided for that purpose, of all supplies received by the Steward under
contract, or purchased by him under direction of the Superintendent. He
shall keep a careful account of all articles used and consumed in the
Asylum daily, and at the end of every month, he shall make an exhibit of
the receipts, expenditures, and disbursements--arranging the different
articles used under appropriate headings, that the actual cost and
consumption of each article, for each day, shall be correctly shown. He
shall keep the ASYLUM ACCOUNT, the PHYSICIANS' DWELLING ACCOUNT, the
GARDEN ACCOUNT, the OFFICE ACCOUNT, the FARM ACCOUNT, and the
IMPROVEMENT AND REPAIRS ACCOUNT, each separate and distinct from the
other, and make out separate and distinct monthly exhibits of each. He
shall also make out, in connection with the exhibits of the above
accounts, a table showing the combined total cost per day, and the
combined total cost per month, with an average cost per day; and the
average cost of each patient per day, and the average cost of each
patient per month, together with any other items that may be of interest
and utility to the Asylum. He shall make out a table showing what bills
are to be paid on the last month's expenditures, and, also, a table
exhibiting the Superintendent's estimate for the expenditures of the
ensuing month.

2. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to keep a correct account of the
patients received--entering, at the time of their admission, in a book
provided for the purpose, a condensed copy of each commitment, with the
facts set forth in the certificate of the examining physicians
accompanying the same. He shall also note, in the same connection, the
condition of the patient, as found by the Superintendent or Assistant
Physician, at the time of admission.


SUPERVISORS.

1. The Supervisors shall have a general oversight of the duties of the
Attendants; they shall spend their time chiefly in the wards, and they
shall see that the rules prescribing the duties of the Attendants,
towards the patients, are faithfully observed, that the patients are
well treated, and in all respects properly cared for; they shall, in an
especial manner, have the oversight of the sick, and see that watchers
are detailed for such as require it.

2. They shall have the care of the clothing of the patients, and the
bedding, table linen, towels, etc., of their respective divisions. On
the arrival of a patient at the Institution, whatever clothing is
brought shall be committed immediately to the Supervisor of the division
to which the patient is sent. A clothing account shall be opened for
each patient, in a book provided for the purpose, in which shall be
entered every article brought to the Institution, including what may be
on the patient's person, and, also, whatever may afterwards be received
or purchased for the patient's use.

3. Money, jewelry, or other valuables, shall be brought to the office
for safe keeping--except where their retention by the patient is
expressly permitted by the Superintendent or Assistant Physician. On the
discharge, or removal, of a patient, the clothing in his or her
possession, shall be carefully compared with the clothing account of
said patient, that any losses may be discovered or accounted for.

4. The clothing belonging to the patients, in each division, shall be
deposited in a room, set apart for the purpose, the key of which shall
be in custody of the Supervisor, and, at some particular hour of the
day, the Supervisors shall be in attendance in their respective clothing
rooms, to exchange, or supply, such clothing as the wants of patients
may require, and Attendants are enjoined, not to call on the
Supervisors, for that purpose, at any other times, if avoidable.
Clothing required for daily use, shall be kept in the ward closets.

5. The Supervisors shall have charge of the sewing rooms, and when any
patient is in want of new clothing the fact shall be reported to the
Supervisors, who will receive instructions from the Superintendent in
regard to its supply. No clothing shall be purchased out of the Asylum,
if it can be manufactured in the sewing rooms.

6. The Supervisors shall be careful that the clothing of patients is
adapted to the season, and especially to see that patients are not
suffered to go out, either for exercise or labor, without a careful
inspection of what is worn.

7. All articles belonging to patients, shall be legibly marked, and the
Supervisors are expected to see that the clothing of each patient is
devoted to his or her use, and to the use of no other.

8. The Supervisors shall see that each patient is supplied with a full
change of under clothing once a week, and that their outer clothing, and
all bed clothing, is changed as often as their strict cleanliness shall
require.


ATTENDANTS.

1. Those employed in the wards in the care of the patients, as their
Attendants, should remember that their first duty is to treat them with
unvarying kindness, respect and attention. Feelings of mutual good will,
can, with few exceptions, be successfully cultivated between Attendants
and those under their immediate care, and doubts may be justly
entertained of an Attendant's fitness, when these are wanting.

2. The first effort on the part of an Attendant, on receiving a patient,
should be to win his or her confidence, however insensible the patient
may be to kindly advances. Patients generally enter the wards with the
thorough conviction that evil is intended them, and the first show of
harshness or force, however slight, will confirm that impression, while
kind assurances, and manifestations of sympathy, quickly disarm them of
their false impressions, and the first great step in the way of cure is
begun. The Attendant should regard the patient as an honored guest, who
comes, tarries for a short time, and goes on his way, to give to the
world a good or evil report of his entertainer.

3. When a patient manifests opposition to the will of the Attendant, the
point should never give rise to protracted discussion, as opposition may
be only increased thereby. Patients will usually yield when mildly and
kindly informed that they are only asked to comply with a rule binding
on all, and that the request is not merely arbitrary. Whenever
continued resistance is anticipated, it is better to yield the point to
the patient, if the request made is one of no great importance, and
report the case to the Superintendent or Assistant Physician.

4. The muffs, sleeves, wristbands, or other means of confinement, are
never to be used unless by order of the Superintendent or Assistant
Physician; and the Attendant shall never, under any circumstances, use
greater force than is sufficient to secure the patient, himself, or
others, from the efforts of his or her violence, and after the patient
is secured in his or her room, the Superintendent or Assistant Physician
shall be informed of what has occurred.

5. During the evening, after patients have retired, one Attendant or
Assistant, shall always be present in each ward, to discover any
disturbance, and administer to any necessity that may arise, and no
Attendant shall ever leave the ward in which he or she is engaged,
without informing an Assistant of his or her intended absence. During
the day Attendants are expected to make the patients, and the patient's
clothing, and sleeping apartments, the objects of their most careful
attention.

6. On rising in the morning, Attendants shall see that the patients are
properly dressed, washed, hair combed, and otherwise in good condition
to appear at breakfast. The beds shall be made, rooms, halls, dining
rooms, water closets and stair-ways put in good order by 9 o'clock, from
April to September inclusively, and by 10 o'clock from October to March
inclusively. All soiled clothing, bedding, etc., shall be taken from the
building, at the earliest possible hour, before the air of the wards
becomes contaminated thereby. A straw bed once soiled or wet, shall be
immediately emptied and the tick sent to the laundry. The wards and
stair-ways shall be washed and swept as often as necessary to secure
perfect cleanliness. Attendants will be assisted by the patients in the
discharge of these duties, but are themselves alone responsible for
their prompt and faithful performance; when Attendants or Assistants are
engaged with their patients in any kind of outside labor, they shall
keep a correct account of the time of the patient employed, and report
the same at the office at the close of every week.

7. Attendants, in this Institution, are considered the companions, not
"keepers," of the patients, and, regarding themselves as such, they
shall strive to keep every one, whose physical health will admit of it,
engaged in some kind of amusement or employment in labor, as designated,
from time to time, by the Superintendent, or Assistant Physician. The
cultivation of fruits and flowers, the use of the library, reading room,
gymnasium, bowling alleys, and other means for mental, moral and
physical training, should be in every way encouraged.

8. The Attendants should see that the patients indulge in no pernicious
practices; those given to solitary habits must receive special
attention, and, as far as possible, induced to participate in the
pursuits and amusements of others. Indolent patients should be led about
the wards and yards, and induced to join in exercises; those, on the
contrary, who are weak, and restless, should be induced to take repose.

9. Attendants are forbidden to make walking out with their patients a
pretext for doing errands, or making calls for themselves, and they must
not go to town with the patients, when the state of the roads and fields
allow exercises in other directions, and they must be especially
vigilant that patients, when out, do not obtain possession of any
dangerous implements, matches, or other articles improper for them to
have, and strict search must be made for such immediately on their
return to the Asylum, and before they shall have time to secrete them in
the wards.

10. On the morning of Wednesday and Saturday of every week, each patient
shall receive a tepid bath, unless by reason of sickness or otherwise,
exceptions shall be made by the Superintendent, or Assistant Physician;
the male patients shall be shaven, and an inspection shall be made that
their hair and nails may be suitably trimmed, and the person generally
in cleanly condition. In trimming the hair, no more should be taken off
than necessary to secure a better appearance of the patient--the
practice, of cutting the hair of the insane close to the head, being
positively forbidden, unless, for some special reason, it shall be so
ordered by the Superintendent or Assistant Physician.

11. On Mondays and Thursdays the Attendants shall collect all clothing
designed for the wash, and deliver the same, with lists thereof, to the
Supervisors, at the assorting rooms, and on Wednesdays and Saturdays
they will assist the Overseers of the laundry to assort the clothing,
and place the articles of each ward to themselves for the inspection of
the Supervisors, who will compare them with the washing lists and make
their return thereon.


ASSISTANTS.

1. The Assistants will be employed with the Attendants in the care of
the patients, their rooms, clothing, etc.; they will be under the
immediate direction and control of the Attendants; and they are expected
to observe with care the rules prescribed for the management of the
patients, and the government of the Asylum.


MEALS.

1. The meals of the patients shall be served promptly at the following
hours:

                _Breakfast._     _Dinner._       _Supper._

December,   }
January,    }     7 A. M.          1 P. M.         7 P. M.
February.   }

March,      }
April,      }
May,        }     6 1/2 A. M.     12 1/2 P. M.    6 1/2 P. M.
September,  }
October,    }
November.   }

June,       }     6 A. M.         12 P. M.         6 P. M.
July,       }
August.     }

2. The Attendants are required to see that their patients are properly
prepared for their meals; that their faces are washed, hair combed, and
clothing adjusted, that each may present a cleanly and orderly
appearance.

3. At meals the Attendants shall always be present to carve, to
distribute the food, to see that each one has a proper supply, and that
they all take their meals in a proper manner. Each shall be supplied
with such liberal allowance as the nature of the case may require, but
all waste, gluttony, or improper habits at the table shall be mildly
checked by the Attendants. They shall be allowed time to take their
meals at leisure--habits of eating differ, and all (the old
particularly) should have time to eat without hurry.

4. Food that has been handled, or rendered unfit for use, shall be sent
back in a receptacle provided for the purpose, but whatever is fit to be
served in another form shall be carefully laid aside for future
consumption.

5. Some very plain food should be kept in the dining-room closets, for
the use of those whose meals may have been interrupted, or for old
persons, or for convalescent patients, who sometimes require food
oftener than under ordinary circumstances.

6. Care must be taken that no patient carries away from the table a
knife, fork, spoon, or any article of food, and, to be sure of this, the
knives, forks and spoons should be counted after each meal, and search
be made for any lost article.


WATCHMAN.

1. The duties of the Watchman will commence at half-past seven o'clock,
P. M., at which time he will visit the office to receive instructions
for the night.

2. He is expected, while on duty, to be faithful and vigilant; to visit
every part of the male department, and the outer walls of the female
department, at least every hour during the night, making as little
noise as possible, never conversing in a loud tone, and opening and
shutting the doors as quietly as possible.

3. He is expected to be kind, gentle and soothing in his manners to the
patients, and use every means in his power to tranquilize those who are
excited, and to allay the fears and apprehensions of the timid; he will
pay particular attention to the sick, the suicidal, and those recently
admitted; will see that the patients are properly supplied with water,
when it is asked for, and will attend to all other reasonable wants;
will notice any unusual noise in the patients' rooms, endeavor to
ascertain the cause, and, if necessary, report the same to the
Attendant; he will notice anything unusual occurring during the night,
and enter the same on a slate provided for the purpose, and he shall
report any irregularities, neglect of duty, or violation of rules, which
may come under his notice.

4. It will be the duty of the Watchman to look after the heating
apparatus during the night; he must be very watchful against fire, and
in case of its occurrence, must report immediately to the Superintendent
and officers without giving general alarm; he shall keep the hose and
fire-ladders always in good order, and in readiness for use; he shall
ring the bell at the hour for rising in the morning, and he will be
expected to perform such other duties as may be required of him. At six
o'clock A. M., he will be relieved by the Porter, and his services will
not be demanded again till the time for duty in the evening.


WATCHWOMAN.

1. The Watchwoman will have charge of the interior of the female
department during the night, and in the management of the patients, and
the discharge of other duties, will be governed by the rules and
regulations laid down for the government of the Watchman.


PORTER.

1. The time of service of the Porter commences and ends in alternation
with that of night watchman. Cleaning, heating and lighting the front
rooms of the centre building belong to him; he shall see that the front
windows and doors are kept secured during the day, and that visitors
about the premises do not transgress the rules of propriety by talking
with the patients at the windows.

2. He is expected to keep within the sound of the office bell, unless
absent on duty; he shall attend to all messages, when required, and
receive and conduct visitors--observing toward all the utmost politeness
and attention; and he will be expected to perform such other duties as
may be required of him.


GARDENER.

1. The Gardener, with the aid of such patients as can be taken out for
that purpose, shall have the care of the orchard, garden, and grounds
around the Asylum and Physician's house; he shall have charge of the
cultivation of the vegetables, fruits and flowers, and he will be held
responsible for their safe keeping and delivery at the Asylum, as
directed, from time to time, by the Superintendent or Steward.

2. He shall keep a pass-book, in which shall be entered by the Steward,
the number, weight or measurement of the products of the garden and
orchard, delivered from time to time, to the Asylum and Physician's
house, together with an accurate account of the time employed by the
patients in his department of labor, and he shall report the same at the
office every Saturday evening.

3. As the fruits and flowers are intended for the use of the patients,
the Gardener is enjoined not to permit visitors or employees to pluck,
or otherwise disturb them, without permission from the Superintendent
or Assistant Physician.


CARPENTER.

1. The Carpenter, who is also Engineer, shall have charge of the
work-shop, tools, etc., belonging to his department of labor; he shall,
with his Assistants, who will be subject to his direction, attend to the
repairs, alterations, and improvements made under the direction of the
Superintendent or Steward; he shall also have charge of the
engine-house, and tools connected therewith, and will be expected to run
the engine as often as may be necessary to keep a full and ample supply
of water in the tank for the daily and nightly use of the Asylum.

2. He shall keep a book in which shall be entered the amount of lumber
used, and the time employed by himself and Assistants, together with the
time employed by the patients, upon each item of labor in his
department; he shall also keep, in the same book, the amount of fuel
consumed, and the running time of the engine in pumping water, and in
sawing wood and lumber.

3. He shall make a report to the Clerk every Saturday night, showing all
the business and labor of his charge during the week.


OVERSEERS OF LAUNDRY.

1. The Overseers of the laundry will have charge of the house and
furniture of the laundry; they will be held responsible for the
safe-keeping of the clothing delivered to them, until they shall be
washed, ironed and returned, in a suitable condition for immediate use,
to the assorting room, and placed in the charge of the Supervisor.

2. They shall keep the house and furniture in good order, and see that
everything is safely locked up at night; they shall observe the rules
and regulations of the Institution, and see that they are observed by
all who are employed under them, and shall report any remissness, or
neglect of duty, to the Superintendent or Steward.


FARMER.

1. The Farmer, under the direction and control of the Steward, shall
have under his immediate charge, the lands used for farming purposes;
the farming implements, the horses, cattle, hogs, chickens and produce
of the farm, together with the hay, grain, straw, etc., purchased and
delivered at the Asylum.

2. He will keep a book, in which, under the head of GENERAL ACCOUNTS, he
will charge the farm with, the wages paid for labor, and the labor
performed by the patients; the cost of farming implements; the amount
paid for blacksmithing; the grain, hay, bran, shorts, straw, etc.,
received; and all other articles or items, of expenditure for farming
purposes. Under the same head, he will credit the farm with all products
received; with the labor of himself and hands in making fences, gates,
putting up buildings etc., together with all articles which may be sold.

3. He will also keep, in the same book, separate accounts under the
following heads--FOR THE ASYLUM: FOR HOGS: FOR CATTLE, ETC. On account
for the Asylum he will charge every article of produce, grain, hay,
straw, etc., together with the pork, beef, veal, chickens, etc.,
delivered from time to time, to the Steward, for the use of the Asylum
and the Physician's house; and credit the Asylum with every article, of
whatever nature or kind, purchased by the Steward and placed in his
keeping. On account for hogs he will charge--amount paid for sows, pigs,
shoats, etc.; amount paid for grain fed per day; amount paid for
butchering; and amount paid for any expenses not included in the above.
He will credit the number and weight of hogs sold, and the amount of
pork supplied. On account for cattle he will charge--amount paid for
cattle purchased; amount paid for grain, hay, shorts, bran, etc., fed
per day, and the amount of any other expenditure incurred for cattle. He
will credit--the quantity of milk and butter obtained daily, and the
number and weight of cattle fatted and killed, including the hides and
tallow.

4. As the Farmer will be held responsible for the safe keeping of all
grain, hay, straw, bran, shorts, cattle, hogs, horses, farming
implements, or anything else connected with the farm, the Steward will
see that no such article is left at the Asylum, unless received by
himself in person, or by the Farmer.

5. The Farmer will be careful to confer often with the Steward in
reference to all matters pertaining to his charge, give timely notice as
to all his wants, and he will be expected to be faithful and industrious
in the use of every means in his power, to render the farm productive
and profitable to the Asylum.

6. He shall make a report, embracing all the business transactions of
the farm, whenever required to do so by the Superintendent or Steward.


VISITORS.

1. Visitors and others will be permitted to visit the Institution on any
day, except Sunday, between the hours of 10 A. M. and 3 P. M.

2. No visitor shall be admitted within the wards occupied by the
patients, without express permission from the Superintendent, or
Assistant Physician. And especial care must be taken that no amount of
visiting is permitted in the wards that might prove injurious to the
patients.

3. Visitors are expressly forbidden to furnish any inmate of the Asylum
with tobacco in any form; or to deliver to, or receive from a patient,
any letter, parcel, or package, without the knowledge and approbation
of the Superintendent, or Assistant Physician.

4. Those having charge of patients are particularly enjoined to abstain
from mentioning to visitors the names of those in their charge, their
peculiarities, or any other circumstances, a knowledge of which might be
painful to persons connected with them.

5. Visitors are respectfully requested not to disturb the flowers and
fruit in the Asylum garden and grounds.


LIBRARY.

1. The Library of the male department shall be under the charge of the
Supervisor. Every volume taken therefrom shall be charged to the
borrower, except for the use of the patients, when it shall be charged
to the Attendant, into whose ward it is taken, who will be responsible
for its being used with ordinary care and returned in proper time.

2. If a volume shall be lost or destroyed, by any patient, the
Attendant, having charge of the patient, will report the fact to the
Supervisor, and, if practicable, exhibit the fragments. If lost or
destroyed, by any other person, it must be replaced.

3. No one will be permitted to take from the library more than one
volume at a time, or to keep a volume more than two weeks, without
permission from the Superintendent or Assistant Physician, except
Bibles, Testaments and Prayer books placed in the hands of the patients
for daily reading.

4. The Supervisor will be responsible for books taken from the library
and not charged.

5. The Library of the female department will be under the charge of the
Matron, who, in its management, will be governed by the above rules,
prescribing the duties and responsibilities of the Supervisor.



ACKNOWLEDGMENT.

In the preparation of the foregoing Rules and Regulations, the Resident
Physician has made free use of the published rules of other
Institutions, particularly those of the Illinois State Hospital for the
Insane.




Transcriber's Note: The table below lists all corrections applied to the
original text.

p. 04: [added closing quote] prescribed by the By-Laws."
p. 05: vail of deepest secrecy -> veil
p. 06: shall be tranferred -> transferred
p. 07: the use of tabacco-> tobacco
p. 16: 12 M. -> 12 P. M.
p. 21: the use of the Asylum and the Physcian's house -> Physician's





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rules and Regulations of the Insane
Asylum of California, by Stockton State Hospital

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RULES REGS. INSANE ASYLUM CALIF. ***

***** This file should be named 27527.txt or 27527.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/5/2/27527/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Markus Brenner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
