The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Victor of Salamis by William Stearns
Davis



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: A Victor of Salamis

Author: William Stearns Davis

Release Date: December 22, 2008 [Ebook #27587]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VICTOR OF SALAMIS***





                           A VICTOR OF SALAMIS

                                The MM Co.





                          A VICTOR OF SALAMIS


       _A TALE OF THE DAYS OF XERXES, LEONIDAS AND THEMISTOCLES_


                                   BY

                         WILLIAM STEARNS DAVIS

             AUTHOR OF "A FRIEND OF CAESAR," "GOD WILLS IT,"
                            "BELSHAZZAR," ETC.



            "... On the AEgean shore a city stands,
            Built nobly, pure the air and light the soil,
            Athens, the eye of Greece."




*New York*
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., LTD.
1907
_All rights reserved_





                            COPYRIGHT, 1907,
                        BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

                                 -------

             Set up and electrotyped. Published April, 1907.




                             *Norwood Press*
                 J. S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
                          Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.





                              AUTHOR'S NOTE


The invasion of Greece by Xerxes, with its battles of Thermopylae, Salamis,
and Plataea, forms one of the most dramatic events in history. Had Athens
and Sparta succumbed to this attack of Oriental superstition and
despotism, the Parthenon, the Attic Theatre, the Dialogues of Plato, would
have been almost as impossible as if Phidias, Sophocles, and the
philosophers had never lived. Because this contest and its heroes--Leonidas
and Themistocles--cast their abiding shadows across our world of to-day, I
have attempted this piece of historical fiction.

Many of the scenes were conceived on the fields of action themselves
during a recent visit to Greece, and I have tried to give some glimpse of
the natural beauty of "The Land of the Hellene,"--a beauty that will remain
when Themistocles and his peers fade away still further into the
backgrounds of history.

                                                                  W. S. D.





                                 CONTENTS


             PROLOGUE
             THE ISTHMIAN GAMES NEAR CORINTH

   CHAPTER                                              PAGE
        I.   GLAUCON THE BEAUTIFUL                         3
       II.   THE ATHLETE                                  10
      III.   THE HAND OF PERSIA                           21
       IV.   THE PENTATHLON                               31


             BOOK I
             THE SHADOW OF THE PERSIAN

        V.   HERMIONE OF ELEUSIS                          51
       VI.   ATHENS                                       62
      VII.   DEMOCRATES AND THE TEMPTER                   74
     VIII.   ON THE ACROPOLIS                             84
       IX.   THE CYPRIAN TRIUMPHS                         95
        X.   DEMOCRATES RESOLVES                         106
       XI.   THE PANATHENAEA                              116
      XII.   A TRAITOR TO HELLAS                         128
     XIII.   THE DISLOYALTY OF PHORMIO                   141
      XIV.   MARDONIUS THE PERSIAN                       152


             BOOK II
             THE COMING OF THE PERSIAN

       XV.   THE LOTUS-EATING AT SARDIS                  165
      XVI.   THE COMING OF XERXES THE GOD-KING           174
     XVII.   THE CHARMING BY ROXANA                      186
    XVIII.   DEMOCRATES'S TROUBLES RETURN                197
      XIX.   THE COMMANDMENT OF XERXES                   209
       XX.   THERMOPYLAE                                  219
      XXI.   THE THREE HUNDRED--AND ONE                   230
     XXII.   MARDONIUS GIVES A PROMISE                   243
    XXIII.   THE DARKEST HOUR                            253
     XXIV.   THE EVACUATION OF ATHENS                    264
      XXV.   THE ACROPOLIS FLAMES                        268
     XXVI.   THEMISTOCLES IS THINKING                    279
    XXVII.   THE CRAFT OF ODYSSEUS                       287
   XXVIII.   BEFORE THE DEATH GRAPPLE                    300
     XXIX.   SALAMIS                                     311
      XXX.   THEMISTOCLES GIVES A PROMISE                329


             BOOK III
             THE PASSING OF THE PERSIAN

     XXXI.   DEMOCRATES SURRENDERS                       333
    XXXII.   THE STRANGER IN TROEZENE                     343
   XXXIII.   WHAT BEFELL ON THE HILLSIDE                 350
    XXXIV.   THE LOYALTY OF LAMPAXO                      360
     XXXV.   MOLOCH BETRAYS THE PHOENICIAN                372
    XXXVI.   THE READING OF THE RIDDLE                   388
   XXXVII.   THE RACE TO SAVE HELLAS                     399
  XXXVIII.   THE COUNCIL OF MARDONIUS                    418
    XXXIX.   THE AVENGING OF LEONIDAS                    426
       XL.   THE SONG OF THE FURIES                      438
      XLI.   THE BRIGHTNESS OF HELIOS                    445






                                 PROLOGUE


                     THE ISTHMIAN GAMES NEAR CORINTH


                           A VICTOR OF SALAMIS




                                CHAPTER I


                          GLAUCON THE BEAUTIFUL


The crier paused for the fifth time. The crowd--knotty Spartans, keen
Athenians, perfumed Sicilians--pressed his pulpit closer, elbowing for the
place of vantage. Amid a lull in their clamour the crier recommenced.

"And now, men of Hellas, another time hearken. The sixth contestant in the
pentathlon, most honourable of the games held at the Isthmus, is Glaucon,
son of Conon the Athenian; his grandfather--" a jangling shout drowned him.

"The most beautiful man in Hellas!" "But an effeminate puppy!" "Of the
noble house of Alcmaeon!" "The family's accursed!" "A great god helps
him--even Eros." "Ay--the fool married for mere love. He needs help. His
father disinherited him."

"Peace, peace," urged the crier; "I'll tell all about him, as I have of
the others. Know then, my masters, that he loved, and won in marriage,
Hermione, daughter of Hermippus of Eleusis. Now Hermippus is Conon's
mortal enemy; therefore in great wrath Conon disinherited his son,--but
now, consenting to forgive him if he wins the parsley crown in the
pentathlon--"

"A safe promise," interrupted a Spartan in broadest Doric; "the pretty boy
has no chance against Lycon, our Laconian giant."

"Boaster!" retorted an Athenian. "Did not Glaucon bend open a horseshoe
yesterday?"

"Our Moerocles did that," called a Mantinean; whereupon the crier,
foregoing his long speech on Glaucon's noble ancestry, began to urge the
Athenians to show their confidence by their wagers.

"How much is staked that Glaucon can beat Ctesias of Epidaurus?"

"We don't match our lion against mice!" roared the noisiest Athenian.

"Or Amyntas of Thebes?"

"Not Amyntas! Give us Lycon of Sparta."

"Lycon let it be,--how much is staked and by whom, that Glaucon of Athens,
contending for the first time in the great games, defeats Lycon of Sparta,
twice victor at Nemea, once at Delphi, and once at Olympia?"

The second rush and outcry put the crier nearly at his wits' end to record
the wagers that pelted him, and which testified how much confidence the
numerous Athenians had in their unproved champion. The brawl of voices
drew newcomers from far and near. The chariot race had just ended in the
adjoining hippodrome; and the idle crowd, intent on a new excitement, came
surging up like waves. In such a whirlpool of tossing arms and shoving
elbows, he who was small of stature and short of breath stood a scanty
chance of getting close enough to the crier's stand to have his wager
recorded. Such, at least, was the fate of a gray but dignified little man,
who struggled vainly--even with risk to his long linen chiton--to reach the
front.

"Ugh! ugh! Make way, good people,--Zeus confound you, brute of a Spartan,
your big sandals crush my toes again! Can I never get near enough to place
my two minae on that Glaucon?"

"Keep back, graybeard," snapped the Spartan; "thank the god if you can
hold your money and not lose it, when Glaucon's neck is wrung to-morrow."
Whereupon he lifted his own voice with, "Thirty drachmae to place on Lycon,
Master Crier! So you have it--"

"And two minae on Glaucon," piped the little man, peering up with bright,
beady eyes; but the crier would never have heard him, save for a sudden
ally.

"Who wants to stake on Glaucon?" burst in a hearty young Athenian who had
wagered already. "You, worthy sir? Then by Athena's owls they shall hear
you! Lend us your elbow, Democrates."

The latter request was to a second young Athenian close by. With his
stalwart helpers thrusting at either side, the little man was soon close
to the crier.

"Two minae?" quoth the latter, leaning, "two that Glaucon beats Lycon, and
at even odds? But your name, sir--"

The little man straightened proudly.

"Simonides of Ceos."

The crowd drew back by magic. The most bristling Spartan grew respectful.
The crier bowed as his ready stylus made the entry.

"Simonides of Ceos, Simonides the most noted poet in Hellas!" cried the
first of his two rescuers; "it's a great honour to have served so famous a
man. Pray let me take your hand."

"With all the joy in the world." The little poet coloured with delight at
the flattery. "You have saved me, I avow, from the forge and anvil of
Hephaestus. What a vulgar mob! Do stand apart; then I can try to thank
you."

Aided again by his two protectors, Simonides was soon clear of the
whirlpool. Under one of the graceful pines, which girded the long stadium,
he recovered breath and looked at leisure upon his new acquaintances. Both
were striking men, but in sharp contrast: the taller and darker showed an
aquiline visage betraying a strain of non-Grecian blood. His black eyes
and large mouth were very merry. He wore his green chiton with a
rakishness that proved him anything but a dandy. His companion, addressed
as Democrates, slighter, blonder, showed Simonides a handsome and truly
Greek profile, set off by a neatly trimmed reddish beard. His purple-edged
cloak fell in statuesque folds of the latest mode, his beryl signet-ring,
scarlet fillet, and jewelled girdle bespoke wealth and taste. His face,
too, might have seemed frank and affable, had not Simonides suddenly
recalled an old proverb about mistrusting a man with eyes too close
together.

"And now," said the little poet, quite as ready to pay compliments as to
take them, "let me thank my noble deliverers, for I am sure two such
valorous young men as you must come of the best blood of Attica."

"I am not ashamed of my father, sir," spoke the taller Athenian; "Hellas
has not yet forgotten Miltiades, the victor of Marathon."

"Then I clasp the hand of Cimon, the son of the saviour of Hellas." The
little poet's eyes danced. "Oh! the pity I was in Thessaly so long, and
let you grow up in my absence. A noble son of a noble father! And your
friend--did you name him Democrates?"

"I did so."

"Fortunate old rascal I am! For I meet Cimon the son of Miltiades, and
Democrates, that young lieutenant of Themistocles who all the world knows
is gaining fame already as Nestor and Odysseus, both in one, among the
orators of Athens."

"Your compliments exceed all truth," exclaimed the second Athenian, not at
all angered by the praise. But Simonides, whose tongue was brisk, ran on
with a torrent of flattery and of polite insinuation, until Cimon halted
him, with a query.

"Yet why, dear Cean, since, as you say, you only arrived this afternoon at
the Isthmus, were you so anxious to stake that money on Glaucon?"

"Why? Because I, like all Greece outside of Sparta, seem to be turning
Glaucon-mad. All the way from Thessaly--in Boeotia, in Attica, in Megara--men
talked of him, his beauty, his prowess, his quarrel with his father, his
marriage with Hermione, the divinest maiden in Athens, and how he has gone
to the games to win both the crown and crusty Conon's forgiveness. I tell
you, every mule-driver along the way seemed to have staked his obol on
him. They praise him as 'fair as Delian Apollo,' 'graceful as young
Hermes,' and--here I wonder most,--'modest as an unwedded girl.' " Simonides
drew breath, then faced the others earnestly, "You are Athenians; do you
know him?"

"Know him?" Cimon laughed heartily; "have we not left him at the wrestling
ground? Was not Democrates his schoolfellow once, his second self to-day?
And touching his beauty, his valour, his modesty," the young man's eyes
shone with loyal enthusiasm, "do not say 'over-praised' till you have seen
him."

Simonides swelled with delight.

"Oh, lucky genius that cast me with you! Take me to him this moment."

"He is so beset with admirers, his trainers are angry already; besides, he
is still at the wrestling ground."

"But soon returns to his tents," added Democrates, instantly; "and
Simonides--is Simonides. If Themistocles and Leonidas can see Glaucon, so
must the first poet of Hellas."

"O dearest orator," cried the little man, with an arm around his neck, "I
begin to love you already. Away this moment, that I may worship your new
divinity."

"Come, then," commanded Cimon, leading off with strides so long the bard
could hardly follow; "his tent is not distant: you shall see him, though
the trainers change to Gorgons."

The "Precinct of Poseidon," the great walled enclosure where were the
temples, porticos, and the stadium of the Isthmus, was quickly behind
them. They walked eastward along the sea-shore. The scene about was brisk
enough, had they heeded. A dozen chariots passed. Under every tall pine
along the way stood merchants' booths, each with a goodly crowd. Now a
herd of brown goats came, the offering of a pious Phocian; now a band of
Aphrodite's priestesses from Corinth whirled by in no overdecorous dance,
to a deafening noise of citharas and castanets. A soft breeze was sending
the brown-sailed fisher boats across the heaving bay. Straight before the
three spread the white stuccoed houses of Cenchraea, the eastern haven of
Corinth; far ahead in smooth semicircle rose the green crests of the
Argive mountains, while to their right upreared the steep lonely pyramid
of brown rock, Acro-Corinthus, the commanding citadel of the thriving
city. But above, beyond these, fairer than them all, spread the clear,
sun-shot azure of Hellas, the like whereof is not over any other land,
save as that land is girt by the crisp foam of the blue AEgean Sea.

So much for the picture, but Simonides, having seen it often, saw it not
at all, but plied the others with questions.

"So this Hermione of his is beautiful?"

"Like Aphrodite rising from the sea foam." The answer came from
Democrates, who seemed to look away, avoiding the poet's keen glance.

"And yet her father gave her to the son of his bitter enemy?"

"Hermippus of Eleusis is sensible. It is a fine thing to have the
handsomest man in Hellas for son-in-law."

"And now to the great marvel--did Glaucon truly seek her not for dowry, nor
rank, but for sheer love?"

"Marriages for love are in fashion to-day," said Democrates, with a side
glance at Cimon, whose sister Elpinice had just made a love match with
Callias the Rich, to the scandal of all the prudes in Athens.

"Then I meet marvels even in my old age. Another Odysseus and his
Penelope! And he is handsome, valiant, high-minded, with a wife his peer?
You raise my hopes too high. They will be dashed."

"They will not," protested Democrates, with every sign of loyalty; "turn
here: this lane in the pines leads to his tent. If we have praised too
much, doom us to the labours of Tantalus."

But here their progress was stopped. A great knot of people were swarming
about a statue under a pine tree, and shrill, angry voices proclaimed not
trafficking, but a brawl.




                                CHAPTER II


                               THE ATHLETE


There was ceaseless coming and going outside the Precinct of Poseidon.
Following much the same path just taken by Simonides and his new friends,
two other men were walking, so deep in talk that they hardly heeded how
many made respectful way for them, or how many greeted them. The taller
and younger man, to be sure, returned every salute with a graceful
flourish of his hands, but in a mechanical way, and with eye fixed on his
companion.

The pair were markedly contrasted. The younger was in his early prime,
strong, well developed, and daintily dressed. His gestures were quick and
eloquent. His brown beard and hair were trimmed short to reveal a clear
olive face--hardly regular, but expressive and tinged with an extreme
subtilty. When he laughed, in a strange, silent way, it was to reveal fine
teeth, while his musical tongue ran on, never waiting for answer.

His comrade, however, answered little. He barely rose to the other's
shoulder, but he had the chest and sinews of an ox. Graces there were
none. His face was a scarred ravine, half covered by scanty stubble. The
forehead was low. The eyes, gray and wise, twinkled from tufted eyebrows.
The long gray hair was tied about his forehead in a braid and held by a
golden circlet. The "chlamys" around his hips was purple but dirty. To his
companion's glib Attic he returned only Doric monosyllables.

"Thus I have explained: if my plans prosper; if Corcyra and Syracuse send
aid; if Xerxes has trouble in provisioning his army, not merely can we
resist Persia, but conquer with ease. Am I too sanguine, Leonidas?"

"We shall see."

"No doubt Xerxes will find his fleet untrustworthy. The Egyptian sailors
hate the Phoenicians. Therefore we can risk a sea fight."

"No rashness, Themistocles."

"Yes--it is dicing against the Fates, and the stake is the freedom of
Hellas. Still a battle must be risked. If we quit ourselves bravely, our
names shall be remembered as long as Agamemnon's."

"Or Priam's?--his Troy was sacked."

"And you, my dear king of Sparta, will of course move heaven and earth to
have your Ephors and Council somewhat more forward than of late in
preparing for war? We all count on you."

"I will try."

"Who can ask more? But now make an end to statecraft. We were speaking
about the pentathlon and the chances of--"

Here the same brawling voices that had arrested Simonides broke upon
Themistocles and Leonidas also. The cry "A fight!" was producing its
inevitable result. Scores of men, and those not the most aristocratic,
were running pell-mell whither so many had thronged already. In the
confusion scant reverence was paid the king of Sparta and the first
statesman of Athens, who were thrust unceremoniously aside and were barely
witnesses of what followed.

The outcry was begun, after-report had it, by a Sicyonian bronze-dealer
finding a small but valuable lamp missing from the table whereon he showed
his wares. Among the dozen odd persons pressing about the booth his eye
singled out a slight, handsome boy in Oriental dress; and since Syrian
serving-lads were proverbially light-fingered, the Sicyonian jumped
quickly at his conclusion.

"Seize the Barbarian thief!" had been his shout as he leaped and snatched
the alleged culprit's mantle. The boy escaped easily by the frailness of
his dress, which tore in the merchant's hands; but a score of bystanders
seized the fugitive and dragged him back to the Sicyonian, whose order to
"search!" would have been promptly obeyed; but at this instant he stumbled
over the missing lamp on the ground before the table, whence probably it
had fallen. The bronze-dealer was now mollified, and would willingly have
released the lad, but a Spartan bystander was more zealous.

"Here's a Barbarian thief and spy!" he began bellowing; "he dropped the
lamp when he was detected! Have him to the temple and to the wardens of
the games!"

The magic word "spy" let loose the tongues and passions of every man
within hearing. The unfortunate lad was seized again and jostled rudely,
while questions rattled over him like hailstones.

"Whose slave are you? Why here? Where's your master? Where did you get
that outlandish dress and gold-laced turban? Confess, confess,--or it'll be
whipped out of you! What villany are you up to?"

If the prisoner had understood Greek,--which was doubtful,--he could scarce
have comprehended this babel. He struggled vainly; tears started to his
eyes. Then he committed a blunder. Not attempting a protest, he thrust a
small hand into his crimson belt and drew forth a handful of gold as bribe
for release.

"A slave with ten darics!" bawled the officious Spartan, never relaxing
his grip. "Hark you, friends, it's plain as day. Dexippus of Corinth has a
Syrian lad like this. The young scoundrel's robbed his master and is
running away."

"That's it! A runaway! To the temple with him!" chimed a dozen. The
prisoner's outcries were drowned. He would have been swept off in ungentle
custody had not a strong hand intervened in his favor.

"A moment, good citizens," called a voice in clear Attic. "Release this
lad. I know Dexippus's slave; he's no such fellow."

The others, low-browed Spartans mostly, turned, ill-pleased at the
interruption of an Athenian, but shrank a step as a name went among them.

"Castor and Pollux--it's Glaucon the Beautiful!"

With two thrusts of impetuous elbows, the young man was at the assailed
lad's side. The newcomer was indeed a sight for gods. Beauty and power
seemed wholly met in a figure of perfect symmetry and strength. A face of
fine regularity, a chiselled profile, smooth cheeks, deep blue eyes, a
crown of closely cropped auburn hair, a chin neither weak nor stern, a
skin burnt brown by the sun of the wrestling schools--these were parts of
the picture, and the whole was how much fairer than any part! Aroused now,
he stood with head cast back and a scarlet cloak shaking gracefully from
his shoulders.

"Unhand the lad!" he repeated.

For a moment, compelled by his beauty, the Spartans yielded. The Oriental
pressed against his protector; but the affair was not to end so easily.

"Hark you, Sir Athenian," rejoined the Spartan leader, "don't presume on
your good looks. Our Lycon will mar them all to-morrow. Here's Dexippus's
slave or else a Barbarian spy: in either case to the temple with him, and
don't you hinder."

He plucked at the boy's girdle; but the athlete extended one slim hand,
seized the Spartan's arm, and with lightning dexterity laid the busybody
flat on Mother Earth. He staggered upward, raging and calling on his
fellows.

"Sparta insulted by Athens! Vengeance, men of Lacedaemon! Fists! Fists!"

The fate of the Oriental was forgotten in the storm of patriotic fury that
followed. Fortunately no one had a weapon. Half a dozen burly Laconians
precipitated themselves without concert or order upon the athlete. He was
hidden a moment in the rush of flapping gowns and tossing arms. Then like
a rock out of the angry sea shone his golden head, as he shook off the
attack. Two men were on their backs, howling. The others stood at
respectful distance, cursing and meditating another rush. An Athenian
pottery merchant from a neighbouring booth began trumpeting through his
hands.

"Men of Athens, this way!"

His numerous countrymen came scampering from far and wide. Men snatched up
stones and commenced snapping off pine boughs for clubs. The athlete,
centre of all this din, stood smiling, with his glorious head held high,
his eyes alight with the mere joy of battle. He held out his arms. Both
pose and face spoke as clearly as words,--"Prove me!"

"Sparta is insulted. Away with the braggart!" the Laconians were
clamouring. The Athenians answered in kind. Already a dark sailor was
drawing a dirk. Everything promised broken heads, and perhaps blood, when
Leonidas and his friend,--by laying about them with their staves,--won their
way to the front. The king dashed his staff upon the shoulder of a
strapping Laconian who was just hurling himself on Glaucon.

"Fools! Hold!" roared Leonidas, and the moment the throng saw what
newcomers they faced, Athenian and Spartan let their arms drop and stood
sheepish and silent. Themistocles instantly stepped forward and held up
his hand. His voice, trumpet-clear, rang out among the pines. In three
sentences he dissolved the tumult.

"Fellow-Hellenes, do not let Dame Discord make sport of you. I saw all
that befell. It is only an unlucky misunderstanding. You are quite
satisfied, I am sure, Master Bronze-Dealer?"

The Sicyonian, who saw in a riot the ruin of his evening's trade, nodded
gladly.

"He says there was no thieving, and he is entirely satisfied. He thanks
you for your friendly zeal. The Oriental was not Dexippus's slave, and
Xerxes does not need such boys for spies. I am certain Glaucon would not
insult Sparta. So let us part without bad blood, and await the judgment of
the god in the contest to-morrow."

Not a voice answered him. The crash of music from the sacrificial embassy
of Syracuse diverted everybody's attention; most of the company streamed
away to follow the flower-decked chariots and cattle back to the temple.
Themistocles and Leonidas were left almost alone to approach the athlete.

"You are ever Glaucon the Fortunate," laughed Themistocles; "had we not
chanced this way, what would not have befallen?"

"Ah, it was delightful," rejoined the athlete, his eyes still kindled;
"the shock, the striving, the putting one's own strength and will against
many and feeling 'I am the stronger.' "

"Delightful, no doubt" replied the statesman, "though Zeus spare me
fighting one against ten! But what god possessed you to meddle in this
brawl, and imperil all chances for to-morrow?"

"I was returning from practice at the palaestra. I saw the lad beset and
knew he was not Dexippus's slave. I ran to help him. I thought no more
about it."

"And risked everything for a sly-eyed Oriental. Where is the rascal?"

But the lad--author of the commotion--had disappeared completely.

"Behold his fair gratitude to his rescuer," cried Themistocles, sourly,
and then he turned to Leonidas. "Well, very noble king of Sparta, you were
asking to see Glaucon and judge his chances in the pentathlon. Your
Laconians have just proved him; are you satisfied?"

But the king, without a word of greeting, ran his eyes over the athlete
from head to heel, then blurted out his verdict:

"Too pretty."

Glaucon blushed like a maid. Themistocles threw up his hands in
deprecation.

"But were not Achilles and many another hero beautiful as brave? Does not
Homer call them so many times 'godlike'?"

"Poetry doesn't win the pentathlon," retorted the king; then suddenly he
seized the athlete's right arm near the shoulder. The muscles cracked.
Glaucon did not wince. The king dropped the arm with a "_Euge!_" then
extended his own hand, the fingers half closed, and ordered, "Open."

One long minute, just as Simonides and his companions approached, Athenian
and Spartan stood face to face, hand locked in hand, while Glaucon's
forehead grew redder, not with blushing. Then blood rushed to the king's
brow also. His fingers were crimson. They had been forced open.

"_Euge!_" cried the king, again; then, to Themistocles, "He will do."

Whereupon, as if satisfied in his object and averse to further dalliance,
he gave Cimon and his companions the stiffest of nods and deliberately
turned on his heel. Speech was too precious coin for him to be wasted on
mere adieus. Only over his shoulder he cast at Glaucon a curt mandate.

"I hate Lycon. Grind his bones."

Themistocles, however, lingered a moment to greet Simonides. The little
poet was delighted, despite overweening hopes, at the manly beauty yet
modesty of the athlete, and being a man who kept his thoughts always near
his tongue, made Glaucon blush more manfully than ever.

"Master Simonides is overkind," had ventured the athlete; "but I am sure
his praise is only polite compliment."

"What misunderstanding!" ran on the poet. "How you pain me! I truly
desired to ask a question. Is it not a great delight to know that so many
people are gladdened just by looking on you?"

"How dare I answer? If 'no,' I contradict you--very rude. If 'yes,' I
praise myself--far ruder."

"Cleverly turned. The face of Paris, the strength of Achilles, the wit of
Periander, all met in one body;" but seeing the athlete's confusion more
profound than ever, the Cean cut short. "Heracles! if my tongue wounds
you, lo! it's clapped back in its sheath; I'll be revenged in an ode of
fifty iambs on your victory. For that you will conquer, neither I nor any
sane man in Hellas has the least doubt. Are you not confident, dear
Athenian?"

"I am confident in the justice of the gods, noble Simonides," said the
athlete, half childishly, half in deep seriousness.

"Well you may be. The gods are usually 'just' to such as you. It's we
graybeards that Tyche, 'Lady Fortune,' grows tired of helping."

"Perhaps!" Glaucon passed his hand across his eyes with a dreamy gesture.
"Yet sometimes I almost say, 'Welcome a misfortune, if not too terrible,'
just to ward off the god's jealousy of too great prosperity. In all
things, save my father's anger, I have prospered. To-morrow I can appease
that, too. Yet you know Solon's saying, 'Call no man fortunate till he is
dead.' "

Simonides was charmed at this frank confession on first acquaintance.
"Yes, but even one of the Seven Sages can err."

"I do not know. I only hope--"

"Hush, Glaucon," admonished Democrates. "There's no worse dinner before a
contest than one of flighty thoughts. When safe in Athens--"

"In Eleusis you mean," corrected the athlete.

"Pest take you," cried Cimon; "you say Eleusis because there is Hermione.
But make this day-dreaming end ere you come to grips with Lycon."

"He will awaken," smiled Themistocles. Then, with another gracious nod to
Simonides, the statesman hastened after Leonidas, leaving the three young
men and the poet to go to Glaucon's tent in the pine grove.

"And why should Leonidas wish Glaucon to grind the bones of the champion
of Sparta?" asked Cimon, curiously.

"Quickly answered," replied Simonides, who knew half the persons of the
nobility in Hellas; "first, Lycon is of the rival kingly house at Sparta;
second, he's suspected of 'Medizing,' of favouring Persia."

"I've heard that story of 'Medizing,' " interrupted Democrates, promptly;
"I can assure you it is not true."

"Enough if he's suspected," cried the uncompromising son of Miltiades;
"honest Hellenes should not even be blown upon in times like this. Another
reason then for hating him--"

"Peace!" ordered Glaucon, as if starting from a long revery, and with a
sweep of his wonderful hands; "let the Medes, the Persians, and their war
wait. For me the only war is the pentathlon,--and then by Zeus's favour the
victory, the glory, the return to Eleusis! Ah--wish me joy!"

"Verily, the man is mad," reflected the poet; "he lives in his own bright
world, sufficient to himself. May Zeus never send storms to darken it! For
to bear disaster his soul seems never made."

                              * * * * * * *

At the tent Manes, the athlete's body-servant, came running to his master,
with a small box firmly bound.

"A strange dark man brought this only a moment since. It is for Master
Glaucon."

On opening there was revealed a bracelet of Egyptian turquoise; the price
thereof Simonides wisely set at two minae. Nothing betrayed the identity of
the giver save a slip of papyrus written in Greek, but in very uncertain
hand. "_To the Beautiful Champion of Athens: from one he has greatly
served._"

Cimon held the bracelet on high, admiring its perfect lustre.

"Themistocles was wrong," he remarked; "the Oriental was not ungrateful.
But what 'slave' or 'lad' was this that Glaucon succoured?"

"Perhaps," insinuated Simonides, "Themistocles was wrong yet again. Who
knows if a stranger giving such gifts be not sent forth by Xerxes?"

"Don't chatter foolishness," commanded Democrates, almost peevishly; but
Glaucon replaced the bracelet in the casket.

"Since the god sends this, I will rejoice in it," he declared lightly. "A
fair omen for to-morrow, and it will shine rarely on Hermione's arm." The
mention of that lady called forth new protests from Cimon, but he in turn
was interrupted, for a half-grown boy had entered the tent and stood
beckoning to Democrates.




                               CHAPTER III


                            THE HAND OF PERSIA


The lad who sidled up to Democrates was all but a hunchback. His bare arms
were grotesquely tattooed, clear sign that he was a Thracian. His eyes
twinkled keenly, uneasily, as in token of an almost sinister intelligence.
What he whispered to Democrates escaped the rest, but the latter began
girding up his cloak.

"You leave us, _philotate_?" cried Glaucon. "Would I not have all my
friends with me to-night, to fill me with fair thoughts for the morrow?
Bid your ugly Bias keep away!"

"A greater friend than even Glaucon the Alcmaeonid commands me hence," said
the orator, smiling.

"Declare his name."

"Declare _her_ name," cried Simonides, viciously.

"Noble Cean, then I say I serve a most beautiful, high-born dame. Her name
is Athens."

"Curses on your public business," lamented Glaucon. "But off with you,
since your love is the love of us all."

Democrates kissed the athlete on both cheeks. "I leave you to faithful
guardians. Last night I dreamed of a garland of lilies, sure presage of a
victory. So take courage."

"_Chaire! chaire!_"(1) called the rest; and Democrates left the tent to
follow the slave-boy.

Evening was falling: the sea, rocks, fields, pine groves, were touched by
the red glow dying behind Acro-Corinthus. Torches gleamed amid the trees
where the multitudes were buying, selling, wagering, making merry. All
Greece seemed to have sent its wares to be disposed of at the Isthmia.
Democrates idled along, now glancing at the huckster who displayed his
painted clay dolls and urged the sightseers to remember the little ones at
home. A wine-seller thrust a sample cup of a choice vintage under the
Athenian's nose, and vainly adjured him to buy. Thessalian easy-chairs,
pottery, slaves kidnapped from the Black Sea, occupied one booth after
another. On a pulpit before a bellowing crowd a pair of marionettes were
rolling their eyes and gesticulating, as a woman pulled the strings.

But there were more exalted entertainments. A rhapsodist stood on a pine
stump chanting in excellent voice Alcaeus's hymn to Apollo. And more
willingly the orator stopped on the edge of a throng of the better sort,
which listened to a man of noble aspect reading in clear voice from his
scroll.

"AEschylus of Athens," whispered a bystander. "He reads choruses of certain
tragedies he says he will perfect and produce much later."

Democrates knew the great dramatist well, but what he read was new--a "Song
of the Furies" calling a terrific curse upon the betrayer of friendship.
"Some of his happiest lines," meditated Democrates, walking away, to be
held a moment by the crowd around Lamprus the master-harpist. But now,
feeling that he had dallied long enough, the orator turned his back on the
two female acrobats who were swinging on a trapeze and struck down a long,
straight road which led toward the distant cone of Acro-Corinthus. First,
however, he turned on Bias, who all the time had been accompanying,
dog-fashion.

"You say he is waiting at Hegias's inn?"

"Yes, master. It's by the temple of Bellerophon, just as you begin to
enter the city."

"Good! I don't want to ask the way. Now catch this obol and be off."

The boy snatched the flying coin and glided into the crowd.

Democrates walked briskly out of the glare of the torches, then halted to
slip the hood of his cloak up about his face.

"The road is dark, but the wise man shuns accidents," was his reflection,
as he strode in the direction pointed by Bias.

The way was dark. No moon; and even the brilliant starlight of summer in
Hellas is an uncertain guide. Democrates knew he was traversing a long
avenue lined by spreading cypresses, with a shimmer of white from some
tall, sepulchral monument. Then through the dimness loomed the high
columns of a temple, and close beside it pale light spread out upon the
road as from an inn.

"Hegias's inn," grumbled the Athenian. "Zeus grant it have no more fleas
than most inns of Corinth!"

At sound of his footsteps the door opened promptly, without knocking. A
squalid scene revealed itself,--a white-washed room, an earthen floor, two
clay lamps on a low table, a few stools,--but a tall, lean man in Oriental
dress greeted the Athenian with a salaam which showed his own gold
earrings, swarthy skin, and black mustache.

"Fair greetings, Hiram," spoke the orator, no wise amazed, "and where is
your master?"

"At service," came a deep voice from a corner, so dark that Democrates had
not seen the couch where lolled an ungainly figure that now rose clumsily.

"Hail, Democrates."

"Hail, Lycon."

Hand joined in hand; then Lycon ordered the Oriental to "fetch the noble
Athenian some good Thasian wine."

"You will join me?" urged the orator.

"Alas! no. I am still in training. Nothing but cheese and porridge till
after the victory to-morrow; but then, by Castor, I'll enjoy 'the
gentleman's disease'--a jolly drunkenness."

"Then you are sure of victory to-morrow?"

"Good Democrates, what god has tricked you into believing your fine
Athenian has a chance?"

"I have seven minae staked on Glaucon."

"Seven staked in the presence of your friends; how many in their absence?"

Democrates reddened. He was glad the room was dark. "I am not here to
quarrel about the pentathlon," he said emphatically.

"Oh, very well. Leave your dear sparrow to my gentle hands." The Spartan's
huge paws closed significantly: "Here's the wine. Sit and drink. And you,
Hiram, get to your corner."

The Oriental silently squatted in the gloom, the gleam of his beady eyes
just visible. Lycon sat on a stool beside his guest, his Cyclops-like
limbs sprawling down upon the floor. Scarred and brutish, indeed, was his
face, one ear missing, the other beaten flat by boxing gloves; but
Democrates had a distinct feeling that under his battered visage and wiry
black hair lurked greater penetration of human motive and more ability to
play therewith than the chance observer might allow. The Athenian
deliberately waited his host's first move.

"The wine is good, Democrates?" began Lycon.

"Excellent."

"I presume you have arranged your wagers to-morrow with your usual
prudence."

"How do you know about them?"

"Oh, my invaluable Hiram, who arranged this interview for us through Bias,
has made himself a brother to all the betting masters. I understand you
have arranged it so that whether Glaucon wins or loses you will be none
the poorer."

The Athenian set down his cup.

"Because I would not let my dear friend's sanguine expectations blind all
my judgment is no reason why you should seek this interview, Lycon," he
rejoined tartly. "If this is the object of your summons, I'm better back
in my own tent."

Lycon tilted back against the table. His speech was nothing curt or
"Laconic"; it was even drawling. "On the contrary, dear Democrates, I was
only commending your excellent foresight, something that I see
characterizes all you do. You are the friend of Glaucon. Since Aristeides
has been banished, only Themistocles exceeds you in influence over the
Athenians. Therefore, as a loyal Athenian you must support your champion.
Likewise, as a man of judgment you must see that I--though this pentathlon
is only a by-play, not my business--will probably break your Glaucon's back
to-morrow. It is precisely this good judgment on your part which makes me
sure I do well to ask an interview--for something else."

"Then quickly to business."

"A few questions. I presume Themistocles to-day conferred with Leonidas?"

"I wasn't present with them."

"But in due time Themistocles will tell you everything?"

Democrates chewed his beard, not answering.

"_Pheu!_ you don't pretend Themistocles distrusts you?" cried the Spartan.

"I don't like your questions, Lycon."

"I am very sorry. I'll cease them. I only wished to-night to call to your
mind the advantage of two such men as you and I becoming friends. I may be
king of Lacedaemon before long."

"I knew that before, but where's your chariot driving?"

"Dear Athenian, the Persian chariot is now driving toward Hellas. We
cannot halt it. Then let us be so wise that it does not pass over us."

"Hush!" Democrates spilled the cup as he started. "No 'Medizing' talk
before me. Am I not Themistocles's friend?"

"Themistocles and Leonidas will seem valiant fools after Xerxes comes. Men
of foresight--"

"Are never traitors."

"Beloved Democrates," sneered the Spartan, "in one year the most patriotic
Hellene will be he who has made the Persian yoke the most endurable. Don't
blink at destiny."

"Don't be overcertain."

"Don't grow deaf and blind. Xerxes has been collecting troops these four
years. Every wind across the AEgean tells how the Great King assembles
millions of soldiers, thousands of ships: Median cavalry, Assyrian
archers, Egyptian battle-axemen--the best troops in the world. All the East
will be marching on our poor Hellas. And when has Persia failed to
conquer?"

"At Marathon."

"A drop of rain before the tempest! If Datis, the Persian general, had
only been more prudent!"

"Clearly, noblest Lycon," said Democrates, with a satirical smile, "for a
taciturn Laconian to become thus eloquent for tyranny must have taken a
bribe of ten thousand gold darics."

"But answer my arguments."

"Well--the old oracle is proved: 'Base love of gain and naught else shall
bear sore destruction to Sparta.' "

"That doesn't halt Xerxes's advance."

"An end to your croakings,"--Democrates was becoming angry,--"I know the
Persian's power well enough. Now why have you summoned me?"

Lycon looked on his visitor long and hard. He reminded the Athenian
disagreeably of a huge cat just considering whether a mouse were near
enough to risk a spring.

"I sent for you because I wished you to give a pledge."

"I'm in no mood to give it."

"You need not refuse. Giving or withholding the fate of Hellas will not be
altered, save as you wish to make it so."

"What must I promise?"

"That you will not reveal the presence in Greece of a man I intend to set
before you." Another silence. Democrates knew even then, if vaguely, that
he was making a decision on which might hinge half his future. In the
after days he looked back on this instant with unspeakable regret. But the
Laconian sat before him, smiling, sneering, commanding by his more
dominant will. The Athenian answered, it seemed, despite himself:--

"If it is not to betray Hellas."

"It is not."

"Then I promise."

"Swear it then by your native Athena."

And Democrates--perhaps the wine was strong--lifted his right hand and swore
by Athena Polias of Athens he would betray no secret.

Lycon arose with what was part bellow, part laugh. Even then the orator
was moved to call back the pledge, but the Spartan acted too swiftly. The
short moments which followed stamped themselves on Democrates's memory.
The flickering lamps, the squalid room, the long, dense shadows, the
ungainly movements of the Spartan, who was opening a door,--all this passed
after the manner of a vision. And as in a vision Democrates saw a stranger
stepping through the inner portal, as at Lycon's summons--a man of no huge
stature, but masterful in eye and mien. Another Oriental, but not as the
obsequious Hiram. Here was a lord to command and be obeyed. Gems flashed
from the scarlet turban, the green jacket was embroidered with pearls--and
was not half the wealth of Corinth in the jewels studding the sword hilt?
Tight trousers and high shoes of tanned leather set off a form supple and
powerful as a panther's. Unlike most Orientals the stranger was fair. A
blond beard swept his breast. His eyes were sharp, steel-blue. Never a
word spoke he; but Democrates looked on him with wide eyes, then turned
almost in awe to the Spartan.

"This is a prince--" he began.

"His Highness Prince Abairah of Cyprus," completed Lycon, rapidly, "now
come to visit the Isthmian Games, and later your Athens. It is for this I
have brought you face to face--that he may be welcome in your city."

The Athenian cast at the stranger a glance of keenest scrutiny. He knew by
every instinct in his being that Lycon was telling a barefaced lie. Why he
did not cry out as much that instant he hardly himself knew. But the gaze
of the "Cyprian" pierced through him, fascinating, magnetizing, and
Lycon's great hand was on his victim's shoulder. The "Cyprian's" own hand
went out seeking Democrates's.

"I shall be very glad to see the noble Athenian in his own city. His fame
for eloquence and prudence is already in Tyre and Babylon," spoke the
stranger, never taking his steel-blue eyes from the orator's face. The
accent was Oriental, but the Greek was fluent. The prince--for prince he
was, whatever his nation--pressed his hand closer. Almost involuntarily
Democrates's hand responded. They clasped tightly; then, as if Lycon
feared a word too much, the unknown released his hold, bowed with
inimitable though silent courtesy, and was gone behind the door whence he
had come.

It had taken less time than men use to count a hundred. The latch clicked.
Democrates gazed blankly on the door, then turned on Lycon with a start.

"Your wine was strong. You have bewitched me. What have I done? By Zeus of
Olympus--I have given my hand in pledge to a Persian spy."

" 'A prince of Cyprus'--did you not hear me?"

"Cerberus eat me if that man has seen Cyprus. No Cyprian is so blond. The
man is Xerxes's brother."

"We shall see, friend; we shall see: 'Day by day we grow old, and day by
day we grow wiser.' So your own Solon puts it, I think."

Democrates drew himself up angrily. "I know my duty; I'll denounce you to
Leonidas."

"You gave a pledge and oath."

"It were a greater crime to keep than to break it."

Lycon shrugged his huge shoulders. "_Eu!_ I hardly trusted to that. But I
do trust to Hiram's pretty story about your bets, and still more to a tale
that's told about where and how you've borrowed money."

Democrates's voice shook either with rage or with fear when he made shift
to answer.

"I see I've come to be incriminated and insulted. So be it. If I keep my
pledge, at least suffer me to wish you and your 'Cyprian' a very good
night."

Lycon good-humouredly lighted him to the door. "Why so hot? I'll do you a
service to-morrow. If Glaucon wrestles with me, I shall kill him."

"Shall I thank the murderer of my friend?"

"Even when that friend has wronged you?"

"Silence! What do you mean?"

Even in the flickering lamplight Democrates could see the Spartan's evil
smile.

"Of course--Hermione."

"Silence, by the infernal gods! Who are you, Cyclops, for _her_ name to
cross your teeth?"

"I'm not angry. Yet you will thank me to-morrow. The pentathlon will be
merely a pleasant flute-playing before the great war-drama. You will see
more of the 'Cyprian' at Athens--"

Democrates heard no more. Forth from that wine-house he ran into the
sheltering night, till safe under the shadow of the black cypresses. His
head glowed. His heart throbbed. He had been partner in foulest treason.
Duty to friend, duty to country,--oath or no oath,--should have sent him to
Leonidas. What evil god had tricked him into that interview? Yet he did
not denounce the traitor. Not his oath held him back, but benumbing
fear,--and what sting lay back of Lycon's hints and threats the orator knew
best. And how if Lycon made good his boast and killed Glaucon on the
morrow?




                                CHAPTER IV


                              THE PENTATHLON


In a tent at the lower end of the long stadium stood Glaucon awaiting the
final summons to his ordeal. His friends had just cried farewell for the
last time: Cimon had kissed him; Themistocles had gripped his hand;
Democrates had called "Zeus prosper you!" Simonides had vowed that he was
already hunting for the metres of a triumphal ode. The roar from without
told how the stadium was filled with its chattering thousands. The
athlete's trainers were bestowing their last officious advice.

"The Spartan will surely win the quoit-throw. Do not be troubled. In
everything else you can crush him."

"Beware of Moerocles of Mantinea. He's a knavish fellow; his backers are
recalling their bets. But he hopes to win on a trick; beware, lest he trip
you in the foot-race."

"Aim low when you hurl the javelin. Your dart always rises."

Glaucon received this and much more admonition with his customary smile.
There was no flush on the forehead, no flutter of the heart. A few hours
later he would be crowned with all the glory which victory in the great
games could throw about a Hellene, or be buried in the disgrace to which
his ungenerous people consigned the vanquished. But, in the words of his
day, "he knew himself" and his own powers. From the day he quitted boyhood
he had never met the giant he could not master; the Hermes he could not
outrun. He anticipated victory as a matter of course, even victory wrested
from Lycon, and his thoughts seemed wandering far from the tawny track
where he must face his foes.

"Athens,--my father,--my wife! I will win glory for them all!" was the drift
of his revery.

The younger rubber grunted under breath at his athlete's vacant eye, but
Pytheas, the older of the pair, whispered confidently that "when he had
known Master Glaucon longer, he would know that victories came his way,
just by reaching out his hands."

"Athena grant it," muttered the other. "I've got my half mina staked on
him, too." Then from the tents at either side began the ominous call of
the heralds:--

"Amyntas of Thebes, come you forth."

"Ctesias of Epidaurus, come you forth."

"Lycon of Sparta, come you forth."

Glaucon held out his hands. Each trainer seized one.

"Wish me joy and honour, good friends!" cried the athlete.

"Poseidon and Athena aid you!" And Pytheas's honest voice was husky. This
was the greatest ordeal of his favourite pupil, and the trainer's soul
would go with him into the combat.

"Glaucon of Athens, come you forth."

The curtains of the tent swept aside. An intense sunlight sprang to meet
the Athenian. He passed into the arena clad only in his coat of glistering
oil. Scolus of Thasos and Moerocles of Mantinea joined the other four
athletes; then, escorted each by a herald swinging his myrtle wand, the
six went down the stadium to the stand of the judges.

Before the fierce light of a morning in Hellas beating down on him,
Glaucon the Alcmaeonid was for an instant blinded, and walked on passively,
following his guide. Then, as from a dissolving mist, the huge stadium
began to reveal itself: line above line, thousand above thousand of
bright-robed spectators, a sea of faces, tossing arms, waving garments. A
thunderous shout rose as the athletes came to view,--jangling, incoherent;
each city cheered its champion and tried to cry down all the rest:
applause, advice, derision. Glaucon heard the derisive hootings, "pretty
girl," "pretty pullet," from the serried host of the Laconians along the
left side of the stadium; but an answering salvo, "Dog of Cerberus!"
bawled by the Athenian crowds opposite, and winged at Lycon, returned the
taunts with usury. As the champions approached the judges' stand a
procession of full twenty pipers, attended by as many fair boys in flowing
white, marched from the farther end of the stadium to meet them. The boys
bore cymbals and tambours; the pipers struck up a brisk marching note in
the rugged Dorian mode. The boys' lithe bodies swayed in enchanting
rhythm. The roaring multitude quieted, admiring their grace. The champions
and the pipers thus came to the pulpit in the midst of the long arena. The
president of the judges, a handsome Corinthian in purple and a golden
fillet, swept his ivory wand from right to left. The marching note ceased.
The whole company leaped as one man to its feet. The pipes, the cymbals
were drowned, whilst twenty thousand voices--Doric, Boeotian, Attic--chorused
together the hymn which all Greece knew: the hymn to Poseidon of the
Isthmus, august guardian of the games.

Louder it grew; the multitude found one voice, as if it would cry, "We are
Hellenes all; though of many a city, the same fatherland, the same gods,
the same hope against the Barbarian."

  "Praise we Poseidon the mighty, the monarch,
  Shaker of earth and the harvestless sea;
  King of wide AEgae and Helicon gladsome
  Twain are the honours high Zeus sheds on thee!
  Thine to be lord of the mettlesome chargers,
  Thine to be lord of swift ships as they wing!
  Guard thou and guide us, dread prince of the billows,
  Safe to their homeland, thy suppliants bring;
  Faring by land or by clamorous waters
  Be thou their way-god to shield, to defend,
  Then shall the smoke of a thousand glad altars,
  To thee in reverent gladness ascend!"

Thus in part. And in the hush thereafter the president poured a libation
from a golden cup, praying, as the wine fell on the brazier beside him, to
the "Earth Shaker," seeking his blessing upon the contestants, the
multitude, and upon broad Hellas. Next the master-herald announced that
now, on the third day of the games, came the final and most honoured
contest: the pentathlon, the fivefold struggle, with the crown to him who
conquered thrice. He proclaimed the names of the six rivals, their cities,
their ancestry, and how they had complied with the required training. The
president took up his tale, and turning to the champions, urged them to
strive their best, for the eyes of all Hellas were on them. But he warned
any man with blood-guiltiness upon his soul not to anger the gods by
continuing in the games.

"But since," the brief speech concluded, "these men have chosen to
contend, and have made oath that they are purified or innocent, let them
join, and Poseidon shed fair glory upon the best!"

More shouting; the pipers paraded the arena, blowing shriller than ever.
Some of the athletes shifted uneasily. Scolus the Thasian--youngest of the
six--was pale, and cast nervous glances at the towering bulk of Lycon. The
Spartan gave him no heed, but threw a loud whisper at Glaucon, who stood
silently beside him:--

"By Castor, son of Conon, you are extremely handsome. If fine looks won
the battle, I might grow afraid."

The Athenian, whose roving eye had just caught Cimon and Democrates in the
audience, seemed never to hear him.

"And you are passing stalwart. Still, be advised. I wouldn't harm you, so
drop out early."

Still no answer from Glaucon, whose clear eye seemed now to be wandering
over the bare hills of Megara beyond.

"No answer?" persisted the giant. "_Eu!_ don't complain that you've lacked
warning, when you sit to-night in Charon's ferry-boat."

The least shadow of a smile flitted across the Athenian's face; there was
a slight deepening of the light in his eye. He turned his head a bit
toward Lycon:--

"The games are not ended, dear Spartan," he observed quietly.

The giant scowled. "I don't like you silent, smiling men! You're warned.
I'll do my worst--"

"Let the leaping begin!" rang the voice of the president,--a call that
changed all the uproar to a silence in which one might hear the wind
moving in the firs outside, while every athlete felt his muscles tighten.

The heralds ran down the soft sands to a narrow mound of hardened earth,
and beckoned to the athletes to follow. In the hands of each contestant
were set a pair of bronze dumb-bells. The six were arrayed upon the mound
with a clear reach of sand before. The master-herald proclaimed the order
of the leaping: that each contestant should spring twice, and he whose
leaps were the poorest should drop from the other contests.

Glaucon stood, his golden head thrown back, his eyes wandering idly toward
his friends in the stadium. He could see Cimon restless on his seat, and
Simonides holding his cloak and doubtless muttering wise counsel. The
champion was as calm as his friends were nervous. The stadium had grown
oppressively still; then broke into along "ah!" Twenty thousand sprang up
together as Scolus the Thasian leaped. His partisans cheered, while he
rose from a sand-cloud; but ceased quickly. His leap had been poor. A
herald with a pick marked a line where he had landed. The pipers began a
rollicking catch to which the athletes involuntarily kept time with their
dumb-bells.

Glaucon leaped second. Even the hostile Laconians shouted with pleasure at
sight of his beautiful body poised, then flung out upon the sands far
beyond the Thasian. He rose, shook off the dust, and returned to the
mound, with a graceful gesture to the cheer that greeted him; but wise
heads knew the contest was just beginning.

Ctesias and Amyntas leaped beyond the Thasian's mark, short of the
Athenian's. Lycon was fifth. His admirers' hopes were high. He did not
blast them. Huge was his bulk, yet his strength matched it. A cloud of
dust hid him from view. When it settled, every Laconian was roaring with
delight. He had passed beyond Glaucon. Moerocles of Mantinea sprang last
and badly. The second round was almost as the first; although Glaucon
slightly surpassed his former effort. Lycon did as well as before. The
others hardly bettered their early trial. It was long before the Laconians
grew quiet enough to listen to the call of the herald.

"Lycon of Sparta wins the leaping. Glaucon of Athens is second. Scolus of
Thasos leaps the shortest and drops from the pentathlon."

Again cheers and clamour. The inexperienced Thasian marched disconsolately
to his tent, pursued by ungenerous jeers.

"The quoit-hurling follows," once more the herald; "each contestant throws
three quoits. He who throws poorest drops from the games."

Cimon had risen now. In a momentary lull he trumpeted through his hands
across the arena.

"Wake, Glaucon; quit your golden thoughts of Eleusis; Lycon is filching
the crown."

Themistocles, seated near Cimon's side, was staring hard, elbows on knees
and head on hands. Democrates, next him, was gazing at Glaucon, as if the
athlete were made of gold; but the object of their fears and hopes gave
back neither word nor sign.

The attendants were arraying the five remaining champions at the foot of a
little rise in the sand, near the judges' pulpit. To each was brought a
bronze quoit, the discus. The pipers resumed their medley. The second
contest was begun.

First, Amyntas of Thebes. He took his stand, measured the distance with
his eye, then with a run flew up the rising, and at its summit his body
bent double, while the heavy quoit flew away. A noble cast! and twice
excelled. For a moment every Theban in the stadium was transported.
Strangers sitting together fell on one another's necks in sheer joy. But
the rapture ended quickly. Lycon flung second. His vast strength could now
tell to the uttermost. He was proud to display it. Thrice he hurled.
Thrice his discus sped out as far as ever man had seen a quoit fly in
Hellas. Not even Glaucon's best wishers were disappointed when he failed
to come within three cubits of the Spartan. Ctesias and Moerocles realized
their task was hopeless, and strove half heartedly. The friends of the
huge Laconian were almost beside themselves with joy; while the herald
called desperately that:--

"Lycon of Sparta wins with the discus. Glaucon of Athens is second.
Ctesias of Epidaurus throws poorest and drops from the games."

"Wake, Glaucon!" trumpeted Cimon, again his white face shining out amid
the thousands of gazers now. "Wake, or Lycon wins again and all is lost!"

Glaucon was almost beyond earshot; to the frantic entreaty he answered by
no sign. As he and the Spartan stood once more together, the giant leered
on him civilly:--

"You grow wise, Athenian. It's honour enough and to spare to be second,
with Lycon first. _Eu!_--and here's the last contest."

"I say again, good friend,"--there was a slight closing of the Athenian's
lips, and deepening in his eyes,--"the pentathlon is not ended."

"The harpies eat you, then, if you get too bold! The herald is calling for
the javelin-casting. Come,--it's time to make an end."

But in the deep hush that spread again over the thousands Glaucon turned
toward the only faces that he saw out of the innumerable host:
Themistocles, Democrates, Simonides, Cimon. They beheld him raise his arm
and lift his glorious head yet higher. Glaucon in turn saw Cimon sink into
his seat. "He wakes!" was the appeased mutter passing from the son of
Miltiades and running along every tier of Athenians. And silence deeper
than ever held the stadium; for now, with Lycon victor twice, the literal
turning of a finger in the next event might win or lose the parsley crown.

The Spartan came first. The heralds had set a small scarlet shield at the
lower end of the course. Lycon poised his light javelin thrice, and thrice
the slim dart sped through the leathern thong on his fingers. But not for
glory. Perchance this combat was too delicate an art for his ungainly
hands. Twice the missile lodged in the rim of the shield; once it sprang
beyond upon the sand. Moerocles, who followed, surpassed him. Amyntas was
hardly worse. Glaucon came last, and won his victory with a dexterous
grace that made all but the hottest Laconian swell the "_Io! paian!_" of
applause. His second cast had been into the centre of the target. His
third had splintered his second javelin as it hung quivering.

"Glaucon of Athens wins the javelin-casting. Moerocles of Mantinea is
second. Amyntas of Thebes is poorest and drops from the games." But who
heard the herald now?

By this time all save the few Mantineans who vainly clung to their
champion, and the Laconians themselves, had begun to pin their hopes on
the beautiful son of Conon. There was a steely glint in the Spartan
athlete's eye that made the president of the games beckon to the
master-herald.

"Lycon is dangerous. See that he does not do Glaucon a mischief, or
transgress the rules."

"I can, till they come to the wrestling."

"In that the god must aid the Athenian. But now let us have the
foot-race."

In the little respite following the trainers entered and rubbed down the
three remaining contestants with oil until their bodies shone again like
tinted ivory. Then the heralds conducted the trio to the southern end
farthest from the tents. The two junior presidents left their pulpit and
took post at either end of a line marked on the sand. Each held the end of
a taut rope. The contestants drew lots from an urn for the place nearest
the lower turning goal,--no trifling advantage. A favouring god gave
Moerocles the first; Lycon was second; Glaucon only third. As the three
crouched before the rope with hands dug into the sand, waiting the fateful
signal, Glaucon was conscious that a strange blond man of noble mien and
Oriental dress was sitting close by the starting line and watching him
intently.

It was one of those moments of strain, when even trifles can turn the
overwrought attention. Glaucon knew that the stranger was looking from him
to Lycon, from Lycon back to himself, measuring each with shrewd eye. Then
the gaze settled on the Athenian. The Oriental called to him:--

"Swift, godlike runner, swift;"--they were so close they could catch the
Eastern accent--"the Most High give you His wings!"

Glaucon saw Lycon turn on the shouter with a scowl that was answered by a
composed smile. To the highly strung imagination of the Athenian the wish
became an omen of good. For some unknown cause the incident of the
Oriental lad he rescued and the mysterious gift of the bracelet flashed
back to him. Why should a stranger of the East cast him fair wishes? Would
the riddle ever be revealed?

A trumpet blast. The Oriental, his wish, all else save the tawny track,
flashed from Glaucon's mind. The rope fell. The three shot away as one.

Over the sand they flew, moving by quick leaps, their shining arms
flashing to and fro in fair rhythm. Twice around the stadium led the race,
so no one strained at first. For a while the three clung together, until
near the lower goal the Mantinean heedlessly risked a dash. His foot
slipped on the sands. He recovered; but like arrows his rivals passed him.
At the goal the inevitable happened. Lycon, with the shorter turn, swung
quickest. He went up the homeward track ahead, the Athenian an elbow's
length behind. The stadium seemed dissolving in a tumult. Men rose; threw
garments in the air; stretched out their arms; besought the gods; screamed
to the runners.

"Speed, son of Conon, speed!"

"Glory to Castor; Sparta is prevailing!"

"Strive, Mantinean,--still a chance!"

"Win the turn, dear Athenian, the turn, and leave that Cyclops behind!"

But at the upper turn Lycon still held advantage, and down the other track
went the twain, even as Odysseus ran behind Ajax, "who trod in Ajax'
footsteps ere ever the dust had settled, while on his head fell the breath
of him behind." Again at the lower goal the Mantinean was panting wearily
in the rear. Again Lycon led, again rose the tempest of voices. Six
hundred feet away the presidents were stretching the line, where victory
and the plaudits of Hellas waited Lycon of Lacedaemon.

Then men ceased shouting, and prayed under breath. They saw Glaucon's
shoulders bend lower and his neck strain back, while the sunlight sprang
all over his red-gold hair. The stadium leaped to their feet, as the
Athenian landed by a bound at his rival's side. Quick as the bound the
great arm of the Spartan flew out with its knotted fist. A deadly stroke,
and shunned by a hair's-breadth; but it was shunned. The senior president
called angrily to the herald; but none heard his words in the rending din.
The twain shot up the track elbow to elbow, and into the rope. It fell
amid a blinding cloud of dust. All the heralds and presidents ran together
into it. Then was a long, agonizing moment, while the stadium roared,
shook, and raged, before the dust settled and the master-herald stood
forth beckoning for silence.

"Glaucon of Athens wins the foot-race. Lycon of Sparta is second. Moerocles
of Mantinea drops from the contest. Glaucon and Lycon, each winning twice,
shall wrestle for the final victory."

And now the stadium grew exceeding still. Men lifted their hands to their
favourite gods, and made reckless, if silent, vows,--geese, pigs, tripods,
even oxen,--if only the deity would strengthen their favourite's arm. For
the first time attention was centred on the tall "time pointer," by the
judges' stand, and how the short shadow cast by the staff told of the end
of the morning. The last wagers were recorded on the tablets by nervous
styluses. The readiest tongues ceased to chatter. Thousands of wistful
eyes turned from the elegant form of the Athenian to the burly form of the
Spartan. Every outward chance, so many an anxious heart told itself,
favoured the oft-victorious giant; but then,--and here came reason for a
true Hellene,--"the gods could not suffer so fair a man to meet defeat."
The noonday sun beat down fiercely. The tense stillness was now and then
broken by the bawling of a swarthy hawker thrusting himself amid the
spectators with cups and a jar of sour wine. There was a long rest. The
trainers came forward again and dusted the two remaining champions with
sand that they might grip fairly. Pytheas looked keenly in his pupil's
face.

" 'Well begun is half done,' my lad; but the hottest battle is still
before," said he, trying to cover his own consuming dread.

"Faint heart never won a city," smiled Glaucon, as if never more at ease;
and Pytheas drew back happier, seeing the calm light in the athlete's
eyes.

"Ay," he muttered to his fellow-trainer, "all is well. The boy has
wakened."

But now the heralds marched the champions again to the judges. The
president proclaimed the rules of the wrestling,--two casts out of three
gave victory. In lower tone he addressed the scowling Spartan:--

"Lycon, I warn you: earn the crown only fairly, if you would earn it. Had
that blow in the foot-race struck home, I would have refused you victory,
though you finished all alone."

A surly nod was the sole answer.

The heralds led the twain a little way from the judges' stand, and set
them ten paces asunder and in sight of all the thousands. The heralds
stood, crossing their myrtle wands between. The president rose on his
pulpit, and called through the absolute hush:--

"Prepared, Spartan?"

"Yes."

"Prepared, Athenian?"

"Yes."

"Then Poseidon shed glory on the best!"

His uplifted wand fell. A clear shrill trumpet pealed. The heralds bounded
back in a twinkling. In that twinkling the combatants leaped into each
other's arms. A short grapple; again a sand cloud; and both were rising
from the ground. They had fallen together. Heated by conflict, they were
locked again ere the heralds could proclaim a tie. Cimon saw the great
arms of the Spartan twine around the Athenian's chest in fair grapple, but
even as Lycon strove with all his bull-like might to lift and throw,
Glaucon's slim hand glided down beneath his opponent's thigh. Twice the
Spartan put forth all his powers. Those nearest watched the veins of the
athletes swell and heard their hard muscles crack. The stadium was in
succession hushed and tumultuous. Then, at the third trial, even as Lycon
seemed to have won his end, the Athenian smote out with one foot. The
sands were slippery. The huge Laconian lunged forward, and as he lunged,
his opponent by a masterly effort tore himself loose. The Spartan fell
heavily,--vanquished by a trick, though fairly used.

The stadium thundered its applause. More vows, prayers, exhortations.
Glaucon stood and received all the homage in silence. A little flush was
on his forehead. His arms and shoulders were very red. Lycon rose slowly.
All could hear his rage and curses. The heralds ordered him to contain
himself.

"Now, fox of Athens," rang his shout, "I will kill you!"

Pytheas, beholding his fury, tore out a handful of hair in his mingled
hope and dread. No man knew better than the trainer that no trick would
conquer Lycon this second time; and Glaucon the Fair might be nearer the
fields of Asphodel than the pleasant hills by Athens. More than one man
had died in the last ordeal of the pentathlon.

The silence was perfect. Even the breeze had hushed while Glaucon and
Lycon faced again. The twenty thousand sat still as in their sepulchres,
each saying in his heart one word--"Now!" If in the first wrestling the
attack had been impetuous, it was now painfully deliberate. When the
heralds' wands fell, the two crept like mighty cats across the narrow
sands, frames bent, hands outstretched, watching from the corners of their
eyes a fair chance to rush in and grapple. Then Lycon, whose raging spirit
had the least control, charged. Another dust cloud. When it cleared, the
two were locked together as by iron.

For an instant they swayed, whilst the Spartan tried again his brute
power. It failed him. Glaucon drew strength from the earth like Antaeus.
The hushed stadium could hear the pants of the athletes as they locked
closer, closer. Strength failing, the Spartan snatched at his enemy's
throat; but the Athenian had his wrist gripped fast before the clasp could
tighten, and in the melee Glaucon's other hand passed beneath Lycon's
thigh. The two seemed deadlocked. For a moment they grinned face to face,
almost close enough to bite each other's lips. But breath was too precious
for curses. The Spartan flung his ponderous weight downward. A slip in the
gliding sand would have ruined the Athenian instantly; but Poseidon or
Apollo was with him. His feet dug deep, and found footing. Lycon drew back
baffled, though the clutches of their hands were tightening like vices of
steel. Then again face to face, swaying to and fro, panting, muttering,
while the veins in the bare backs swelled still more.

"He cannot endure it. He cannot! Ah! Athena Polias, pity him! Lycon is
wearing him down," moaned Pytheas, beside himself with fear, almost
running to Glaucon's aid.

The stadium resumed its roaring. A thousand conflicting prayers, hopes,
counsels, went forth to the combatants. The gods of Olympus and Hades; all
demigods, heroes, satyrs, were invoked for them. They were besought to
conquer in the name of parents, friends, and native land. Athenians and
Laconians, sitting side by side, took up the combat, grappling fiercely.
And all this time the two strove face to face.

How long had it lasted? Who knew? Least of all that pair who wrestled
perchance for life and for death. Twice again the Spartan strove with his
weight to crush his opponent down. Twice vainly. He could not close his
grip around the Athenian's throat. He had looked to see Glaucon sink
exhausted; but his foe still looked on him with steadfast, unweakening
eyes. The president was just bidding the heralds, "Pluck them asunder and
declare a tie!" when the stadium gave a shrill long shout. Lycon had
turned to his final resource. Reckless of his own hurt, he dashed his iron
forehead against the Athenian's, as bull charges bull. Twice and three
times, and the blood leaped out over Glaucon's fair skin. Again--the rush
of blood was almost blinding. Again--Pytheas screamed with agony--the
Athenian's clutch seemed weakening. Again--flesh and blood could not stand
such battering long. If Lycon could endure this, there was only one end to
the pentathlon.

"Help thou me, Athena of the Gray Eyes! For the glory of Athens, my
father, my wife!"

The cry of Glaucon--half prayer, half battle-shout--pealed above the
bellowing stadium. Even as he cried it, all saw his form draw upward as
might Prometheus's unchained. They saw the fingers of the Spartan unclasp.
They saw his bloody face upturned and torn with helpless agony. They saw
his great form totter, topple, fall. The last dust cloud, and into it the
multitude seemed rushing together....

... They caught Glaucon just as he fell himself. Themistocles was the
first to kiss him. Little Simonides wept. Cimon, trying to embrace the
victor, hugged in the confusion a dirty Plataean. Democrates seemed lost in
the whirlpool, and came with greetings later. Perhaps he had stopped to
watch that Oriental who had given Glaucon good wishes in the foot-race.
The fairest praise, however, was from a burly man, who merely held out his
hand and muttered, "Good!" But this was from Leonidas.

                              * * * * * * *

Very late a runner crowned with pink oleanders panted up to the Athenian
watch by Mount Icarus at the custom-house on the Megarian frontier.

"_Nika!_--He conquers."

The man fell breathless; but in a moment a clear beacon blazed upon the
height. From a peak in Salamis another answered. In Eleusis, Hermippus the
Noble was running to his daughter. In Peiraeus, the harbour-town, the
sailor folk were dancing about the market-place. In Athens, archons,
generals, and elders were accompanying Conon to the Acropolis to give
thanks to Athena. Conon had forgotten how he had disowned his son. Another
beacon glittered from the Acropolis. Another flashed from the lordly crest
of Pentelicus, telling the news to all Attica. There was singing in the
fishers' boats far out upon the bay. In the goat-herds' huts on dark
Hymethus the pan-pipes blew right merrily. Athens spent the night in
almost drunken joy. One name was everywhere:--

"Glaucon the Beautiful who honours us all! Glaucon the Fortunate whom the
High Gods love!"





                                  BOOK I


                        THE SHADOW OF THE PERSIAN




                                CHAPTER V


                           HERMIONE OF ELEUSIS


A cluster of white stuccoed houses with a craggy hill behind, and before
them a blue bay girt in by the rocky isle of Salamis--that is
Eleusis-by-the-Sea. Eastward and westward spreads the teeming Thrasian
plain, richest in Attica. Behind the plain the encircling mountain wall
fades away into a purple haze. One can look southward toward Salamis; then
to the left rises the rounded slope of brown Poecilon sundering Eleusis
from its greater neighbour, Athens. Look behind: there is a glimpse of the
long violet crests of Cithaeron and Parnes, the barrier mountains against
Boeotia. Look to right: beyond the summits of Megara lifts a noble cone. It
is an old friend, Acro-Corinthus. The plain within the hills is sprinkled
with thriving farmsteads, green vineyards, darker olive groves. The stony
hill-slopes are painted red by countless poppies. One hears the tinkling
of the bells of roving goats. Thus the more distant view; while at the
very foot of the hill of vision rises a temple with proud columns and
pediments,--the fane of Demeter the "Earth Mother" and the seat of her
Mysteries, renowned through Hellas.

The house of Hermippus the Eumolpid, first citizen of Eleusis, stood to
the east of the temple. On three sides gnarled trunks and sombre leaves of
the sacred olives almost hid the white low walls of the rambling
buildings. On the fourth side, facing the sea, the dusty road wound east
toward Megara. Here, by the gate, were gathered a rustic company:
brown-faced village lads and lasses, toothless graybeards, cackling old
wives. Above the barred gate swung a festoon of ivy, whilst from within
the court came the squeaking of pipes, the tuning of citharas, and shouted
orders--signs of a mighty bustling. Then even while the company grew, a
half-stripped courier flew up the road and into the gate.

"They come," ran the wiseacre's comment; but their buzzing ceased, as
again the gate swung back to suffer two ladies to peer forth. Ladies, in
the truth, for the twain had little in common with the ogling village
maids, and whispers were soon busy with them.

"Look--his wife and her mother! How would you, Praxinoe, like to marry an
Isthmionices?"

"Excellently well, but your Hermas won't so honour you."

"_Eu!_ see, she lifts her pretty blue veil; I'm glad she's handsome. Some
beautiful men wed regular hags."

The two ladies were clearly mother and daughter, of the same noble height,
and dressed alike in white. Both faces were framed in a flutter of Amorgos
gauze: the mother's was saffron, crowned with a wreath of golden
wheat-ears; the daughter's blue with a circlet of violets. And now as they
stood with arms entwined the younger brushed aside her veil. The gossips
were right. The robe and the crown hid all but the face and tress of the
lustrous brown hair,--but that face! Had not King Hephaestos wrought every
line of clear Phoenician glass, then touched them with snow and rose, and
shot through all the ichor of life? Perhaps there was a fitful fire in the
dark eyes that awaited the husband's coming, or a slight twitching of the
impatient lips. But nothing disturbed the high-born repose of face and
figure. Hermione was indeed the worthy daughter of a noble house, and
happy the man who was faring homeward to Eleusis!

Another messenger. Louder bustle in the court, and the voice of Hermippus
arraying his musicians. Now a sharp-faced man, who hid his bald pate under
a crown of lilies, joined the ladies,--Conon, father of the victor. He had
ended his life-feud with Hermippus the night the message flashed from
Corinth. Then a third runner; this time in his hand a triumphant palm
branch, and his one word--"Here!" A crash of music answered from the court,
while Hermippus, a stately nobleman, his fine head just sprinkled with
gray, led out his unmartial army.

Single pipes and double pipes, tinkling lyres and many-stringed citharas,
not to forget herdsmen's reed flutes, cymbals, and tambours, all made
melody and noise together. An imposing procession that must have crammed
the courtyard wound out into the Corinth road.

Here was the demarch(2) of Eleusis, a pompous worthy, who could hardly
hold his head erect, thanks to an exceeding heavy myrtle wreath. After
him, two by two, the snowy-robed, long-bearded priests of Demeter; behind
these the noisy corps of musicians, and then a host of young men and
women,--bright of eye, graceful of movement,--twirling long chains of ivy,
laurel, and myrtle in time to the music. Palm branches were everywhere.
The procession moved down the road; but even as it left the court a crash
of cymbals through the olive groves answered its uproar. Deep now and
sonorous sounded manly voices as in some triumphal chant. Hermione, as she
stood by the gate, drew closer to her mother. Inflexible Attic custom
seemed to hold her fast. No noblewoman might thrust herself boldly under
the public eye--save at a sacred festival--no, not when the centre of the
gladness was her husband.

"He comes!" So she cried to her mother; so cried every one. Around the
turn in the olive groves swung a car in which Cimon stood proudly erect,
and at his side another. Marching before the chariot were Themistocles,
Democrates, Simonides; behind followed every Athenian who had visited the
Isthmia. The necks of the four horses were wreathed with flowers; flowers
hid the reins and bridles, the chariot, and even its wheels. The victor
stood aloft, his scarlet cloak flung back, displaying his godlike form. An
unhealed scar marred his forehead--Lycon's handiwork; but who thought of
that, when above the scar pressed the wreath of wild parsley? As the two
processions met, a cheer went up that shook the red rock of Eleusis. The
champion answered with his frankest smile; only his eyes seemed
questioning, seeking some one who was not there.

"Io! Glaucon!" The Eleusinian youths broke from their ranks and fell upon
the chariot. The horses were loosed in a twinkling. Fifty arms dragged the
car onward. The pipers swelled their cheeks, each trying to outblow his
fellow. Then after them sped the maidens. They ringed the chariot round
with a maze of flowers chains. As the car moved, they accompanied it with
a dance of unspeakable ease, modesty, grace. A local poet--not Simonides,
not Pindar, but some humbler bard--had invoked his muse for the grand
occasion. Youths and maidens burst forth into singing.

  "Io! Io, paean! the parsley-wreathed victor hail!
  Io! Io, paean! sing it out on each breeze, each gale!
    He has triumphed, our own, our beloved,
      Before all the myriad's ken.
    He has met the swift, has proved swifter!
      The strong, has proved stronger again!
    Now glory to him, to his kinfolk,
      To Athens, and all Athens' men!
    Meet, run to meet him,
      The nimblest are not too fleet.
    Greet him, with raptures greet him,
      With songs and with twinkling feet.
    He approaches,--throw flowers before him.
      Throw poppy and lily and rose;
    Blow faster, gay pipers, faster,
      Till your mad music throbs and flows,
    For his glory and ours flies through Hellas,
      Wherever the Sun-King goes.

  Io! Io, paean! crown with laurel and myrtle and pine,
  Io, paean! haste to crown him with olive, Athena's dark vine.
    He is with us, he shines in his beauty;
      Oh, joy of his face the first sight;
    He has shed on us all his bright honour,
      Let High Zeus shed on him his light,
    And thou, Pallas, our gray-eyed protectress,
      Keep his name and his fame ever bright!"

Matching action to the song, they threw over the victor crowns and chains
beyond number, till the parsley wreath was hidden from sight. Near the
gate of Hermippus the jubilant company halted. The demarch bawled long for
silence, won it at last, and approached the chariot. He, good man, had
been a long day meditating on his speech of formal congratulation and
enjoyed his opportunity. Glaucon's eyes still roved and questioned, yet
the demarch rolled out his windy sentences. But there was something
unexpected. Even as the magistrate took breath after reciting the victor's
noble ancestry, there was a cry, a parting of the crowd, and Glaucon the
Alcmaeonid leaped from the chariot as never on the sands at Corinth. The
veil and the violet wreath fell from the head of Hermione when her face
went up to her husband's. The blossoms that had covered the athlete shook
over her like a cloud as his face met hers. Then even the honest demarch
cut short his eloquence to swell the salvo.

"The beautiful to the beautiful! The gods reward well. Here is the fairest
crown!"

For all Eleusis loved Hermione, and would have forgiven far greater things
from her than this.

                              * * * * * * *

Hermippus feasted the whole company,--the crowd at long tables in the
court, the chosen guests in a more private chamber. "Nothing to excess"
was the truly Hellenic maxim of the refined Eleusinian; and he obeyed it.
His banquet was elegant without gluttony. The Syracusan cook had prepared
a lordly turbot. The wine was choice old Chian but well diluted. There was
no vulgar gorging with meat, after the Boeotian manner; but the great
Copaic eel, "such as Poseidon might have sent up to Olympus," made every
gourmand clap his hands. The aromatic honey was the choicest from Mt.
Hymettus.

Since the smaller company was well selected, convention was waived, and
ladies were present. Hermione sat on a wide chair beside Lysistra, her
comely mother; her younger brothers on stools at either hand. Directly
across the narrow table Glaucon and Democrates reclined on the same couch.
The eyes of husband and wife seldom left each other; their tongues flew
fast; they never saw how Democrates hardly took his gaze from the face of
Hermione. Simonides, who reclined beside Themistocles,--having struck a
firm friendship with that statesman on very brief acquaintance,--was
overrunning with humour and anecdote. The great man beside him was hardly
his second in the fence of wit and wisdom. After the fish had given way to
the wine, Simonides regaled the company with a gravely related story of
how the Dioscuri had personally appeared to him during his last stay in
Thessaly and saved him from certain death in a falling building.

"You swear this is a true tale, Simonides?" began Themistocles, with one
eye in his head.

"It's impiety to doubt. As penalty, rise at once and sing a song in honour
of Glaucon's victory."

"I am no singer or harpist," returned the statesman, with a
self-complacency he never concealed. "I only know how to make Athens
powerful."

"Ah! you son of Miltiades," urged the poet, "at least you will not refuse
so churlishly."

Cimon, with due excuses, arose, called for a harp, and began tuning it;
but not all the company were destined to hear him. A slave-boy touched
Themistocles on the shoulder, and the latter started to go.

"The Dioscuri will save you?" demanded Simonides, laughing.

"Quite other gods," rejoined the statesman; "your pardon, Cimon, I return
in a moment. An agent of mine is back from Asia, surely with news of
weight, if he must seek me at once in Eleusis."

But Themistocles lingered outside; an instant more brought a summons to
Democrates, who found Themistocles in an antechamber, deep in talk with
Sicinnus,--nominally the tutor of his sons, actually a trusted spy. The
first glance at the Asiatic's keen face and eyes was disturbing. An inward
omen--not from the entrails of birds, nor a sign in the heavens--told
Democrates the fellow brought no happy tidings.

With incisive questions Themistocles had been bringing out everything.

"So it is absolutely certain that Xerxes begins his invasion next spring?"

"As certain as that Helios will rise to-morrow."

"Forewarned is forearmed. Now where have you been since I sent you off in
the winter to visit Asia?"

The man, who knew his master loved to do the lion's share of the talking,
answered instantly:--

"Sardis, Emesa, Babylon, Susa, Persepolis, Ecbatana."

"_Eu!_ Your commission is well executed. Are all the rumours we hear from
the East well founded? Is Xerxes assembling an innumerable host?"

"Rumour does not tell half the truth. Not one tribe in Asia but is
required to send its fighting men. Two bridges of boats are being built
across the Hellespont. The king will have twelve hundred war triremes,
besides countless transports. The cavalry are being numbered by hundreds
of thousands, the infantry by millions. Such an army was never assembled
since Zeus conquered the Giants."

"A merry array!" Themistocles whistled an instant through his teeth; but,
never confounded, urged on his questions. "So be it. But is Xerxes the man
to command this host? He is no master of war like Darius his father."

"He is a creature for eunuchs and women; nevertheless his army will not
suffer."

"And wherefore?"

"Because Prince Mardonius, son of Gobryas, and brother-in-law of the king,
has the wisdom and valour of Cyrus and Darius together. Name him, and you
name the arch-foe of Hellas. He, not Xerxes, will be the true leader of
the host."

"You saw him, of course?"

"I did not. A Magian in Ecbatana told me a strange story. 'The Prince,'
said he, 'hates the details of camps; leaving the preparation to others,
he has gone to Greece to spy out the land he is to conquer.' "

"Impossible, you are dreaming!" The exclamation came not from Themistocles
but Democrates.

"I am not dreaming, worthy sir," returned Sicinnus, tartly; "the Magian
may have lied, but I sought the Prince in every city I visited; they
always told me, 'He is in another.' He was not at the king's court. He may
have gone to Egypt, to India, or to Arabia;--he _may_ likewise have gone to
Greece."

"These are serious tidings, Democrates," remarked Themistocles, with an
anxiety his voice seldom betrayed. "Sicinnus is right; the presence of
such a man as Mardonius in Hellas explains many things."

"I do not understand."

"Why, the lukewarmness of so many friends we had counted on, the
bickerings which arose among the Confederates when we met just now at the
Isthmus, the slackness of all Spartans save Leonidas in preparing for war,
the hesitancy of Corcyra in joining us. Thebes is Medizing, Crete is
Medizing, so is Argos. Thessaly is wavering. I can almost name the princes
and great nobles over Hellas who are clutching at Persian money. O Father
Zeus," wound up the Athenian, "if there is not some master-spirit
directing all this villany, there is no wisdom in Themistocles, son of
Neocles."

"But the coming of Mardonius to Greece?" questioned the younger man; "the
peril he runs? the risk of discovery--"

"Is all but nothing, except as he comes to Athens, for Medizers will
shelter him everywhere. Yet there is one spot--blessed be Athena--"
Themistocles's hands went up in easy piety--"where, let him come if come he
dare!" Then with a swift change, as was his wont, the statesman looked
straight on Democrates.

"Hark you, son of Myscelus; those Persian lords are reckless. He may even
test the fates and set foot in Attica. I am cumbered with as many cares as
Zeus, but this commission I give to you. You are my most trusted
lieutenant; I can risk no other. Keep watch, hire spies, scatter
bribe-money. Rest not day nor night to find if Mardonius the Persian
enters Athens. Once in our clutches--and you have done Hellas as fair a
turn as Miltiades at Marathon. You promise it? Give me your hand."

"A great task," spoke Democrates, none too readily.

"And one you are worthy to accomplish. Are we not co-workers for Athens
and for Hellas?"

Themistocles's hawklike eyes were unescapable. The younger Athenian
thought they were reading his soul. He held out his hand....

When Democrates returned to the hall, Cimon had ended his song. The guests
were applauding furiously. Wine was still going round, but Glaucon and
Hermione were not joining. Across the table they were conversing in low
sentences that Democrates could not catch. But he knew well enough the
meaning as each face flashed back the beauty of the other. And his mind
wandered back darkly to the day when Glaucon had come to him, more radiant
than even his wont, and cried, "Give me joy, dear comrade, joy! Hermippus
has promised me the fairest maiden in Athens." Some evil god had made
Democrates blind to all his boon-companion's wooing. How many hopes of the
orator that day had been shattered! Yet he had even professed to rejoice
with the son of Conon.... He sat in sombre silence, until the piping voice
of Simonides awakened him.

"Friend, if you are a fool, you do a wise thing in keeping still; if a
wise man, a very foolish thing."

"Wine, boy," ordered Democrates; "and less water in it. I feel wretchedly
stupid to-day."

He spent the rest of the feast drinking deeply, and with much forced
laughter. The dinner ended toward evening. The whole company escorted the
victor toward Athens. At Daphni, the pass over the hills, the archons and
strategi--highest officials of the state--met them with cavalry and torches
and half of the city trailing at their heels. Twenty cubits of the city
wall were pulled down to make a gate for the triumphal entry. There was
another great feast at the government house. The purse of an hundred
drachmae, due by law to Isthmian victors, was presented. A street was named
for Glaucon in the new port-town of Peiraeus. Simonides recited a triumphal
ode. All Athens, in short, made merry for days. Only one man found it hard
to join the mirth whole-heartedly. And this was the victor's bosom
friend,--Democrates.




                                CHAPTER VI


                                  ATHENS


In Athens! Shall one mount the Acropolis or enter the market place?
Worship in the temple of the Virgin Athena, or descend to the Agora and
the roar of its getters and spenders? For Athens has two faces--toward the
ideal, toward the commonplace. Who can regard both at once? Let the
Acropolis, its sculptures, its landscape, wait. It has waited for men
three thousand years. And so to the Agora.



"Full market time." The Agora was a beehive. From the round Tholus at the
south to the long portico at the north all was babel and traffic. Donkeys
raised their wheezing protest against too heavy loads of farm produce.
Megarian swine squealed and tugged at their leg-cords. An Asiatic sailor
clamoured at the money-changer's stall for another obol in change for a
Persian daric. "Buy my oil!" bawled the huckster from his wicker booth
beside the line of Hermes-busts in the midst of the square. "Buy my
charcoal!" roared back a companion, whilst past both was haled a grinning
negro with a crier who bade every gentleman to "mark his chance" for a
fashionable servant. Phocian the quack was hawking his toothache salve
from the steps of the Temple of Apollo. Deira, the comely flower girl,
held out crowns of rose, violet, and narcissus to the dozen young dandies
who pressed about her. Around the Hermes-busts idle crowds were reading
the legal notices plastered on the base of each statue. A file of mules
and wagons was ploughing through the multitude with marble for some new
building. Every instant the noise grew. Pandora's box had opened, and
every clamour had flitted out.

At the northern end, where the porticos and the long Dromos street ran off
toward the Dipylon gate, stood the shop of Clearchus the potter. A low
counter was covered with the owner's wares,--tall amphorae for wine, flat
beakers, water-pots, and basins. Behind, two apprentices whirled the
wheel, another glazed on the black varnish and painted the jars with
little red loves and dancing girls. Clearchus sat on the counter with
three friends,--come not to trade but to barter the latest gossip from the
barber-shops: Agis the sharp, knavish cockpit and gaming-house keeper,
Crito the fat mine-contractor, and finally Polus, gray and pursy, who
"devoted his talents to the public weal," in other words was a perpetual
juryman and likewise busybody.

The latest rumour about Xerxes having been duly chewed, conversation began
to lag.

"An idle day for you, my Polus," threw out Clearchus.

"Idle indeed! No jury sits to-day in the King Archon's Porch or the 'Red
Court'; I can't vote to condemn that Heraclius who's exported wheat
contrary to the law."

"Condemn?" cried Agis; "wasn't the evidence very weak?"

"Ay," snorted Polus, "very weak, and the wretch pleaded piteously, setting
his wife and four little ones weeping on the stand. But we are resolved.
'You are boiling a stone--your plea's no profit,' thought we. Our hearts
vote 'guilty,' if our heads say 'innocent.' One mustn't discourage honest
informers. What's a patriot on a jury for if only to acquit? Holy Father
Zeus, but there's a pleasure in dropping into the voting-urn the black
bean which condemns!"

"Athena keep us, then, from litigation," murmured Clearchus; while Crito
opened his fat lips to ask, "And what adjourns the courts?"

"A meeting of the assembly, to be sure. The embassy's come back from
Delphi with the oracle we sought about the prospects of the war."

"Then Themistocles will speak," observed the potter; "a very important
meeting."

"Very important," choked the juror, fishing a long piece of garlic from
his wallet and cramming it into his mouth with both hands. "What a noble
statesman Themistocles is! Only young Democrates will ever be like him."

"Democrates?" squeaked out Crito.

"Why, yes. Almost as eloquent as Themistocles. What zeal for democracy!
What courage against Persia! A Nestor, I say, in wisdom--"

Agis gave a whistle.

"A Nestor, perhaps. Yet if you knew, as I do, how some of his nights
pass,--dice, Rhodian fighting-cocks, dancing-girls, and worse things,--"

"I'll scarce believe it," grunted the juror; yet then confessed somewhat
ruefully, "however, he is unfortunate in his bosom friend."

"What do you mean?" demanded the potter.

"Glaucon the Alcmaeonid, to be sure. I cried '_Io, paean!_' as loud as the
others when he came back; still I weary of having a man always so
fortunate."

"Even as you voted to banish Aristeides, Themistocles's rival, because you
were tired of hearing him called 'the Just.' "

"There's much in that. Besides, he's an Alcmaeonid, and since their old
murder of Cylon the house has been under a blood curse. He has married the
daughter of Hermippus, who is too highly born to be faithful to the
democracy. He carries a Laconian cane,--sure sign of Spartanizing
tendencies. He may conspire any day to become tyrant."

"Hush," warned Clearchus, "there he passes now, arm in arm with Democrates
as always, and on his way to the assembly."

"The men are much alike in build," spoke Crito, slowly, "only Glaucon is
infinitely handsomer."

"And infinitely less honest. I distrust your too beautiful and too lucky
men," snapped Polus.

"Envious dog," commented Agis; and bitter personalities might have
followed had not a bell jangled from an adjacent portico.

"Phormio, my brother-in-law, with fresh fish from Phaleron," announced
Polus, drawing a coin from his wonted purse,--his cheek; "quick, friends,
we must buy our dinners."

Between the columns of the portico stood Phormio the fishmonger, behind a
table heaped with his scaly wares. He was a thick, florid man with blue
eyes lit by a humourous twinkle. His arms were crusted with brine. To his
waist he was naked. As the friends edged nearer he held up a turbot,
calling for a bid. A clamour answered him. The throng pressed up the
steps, elbowing and scrambling. The competition was keen but good-natured.
Phormio's broad jests and witticisms--he called all his customers by
name--aided in forcing up the price. The turbot was knocked down to a rich
gentleman's cook marketing for his master. The pile of fish decreased, the
bidding sharpened. The "Market Wardens" seemed needed to check the
jostling. But as the last eel was held up, came a cry--

"Look out for the rope!"

Phormio's customers scattered. Scythian constables were stretching cords
dusted with red chalk across all exits from the Agora, save that to the
south. Soon the band began contracting its nets and driving a swarm of
citizens toward the remaining exit, for a red chalk-mark on a mantle meant
a fine. Traffic ceased instantly. Thousands crowded the lane betwixt the
temples and porches, seeking the assembly place,--through a narrow,
ill-built way, but the great area of the Pnyx opened before them like the
slopes of some noble theatre.

No seats; rich and poor sat down upon the rocky ground. Under the open
azure, at the focus of the semicircle, with clear view before of the city,
and to right of the red cliffs of the Acropolis, rose a low platform hewn
in the rock,--the "Bema," the orator's pulpit. A few chairs for the
magistrates and a small altar were its sole furnishings. The multitude
entered the Pnyx through two narrow entrances pierced in the massy
engirdling wall and took seats at pleasure; all were equals--the Alcmaeonid,
the charcoal-seller from Acharnae. Amid silence the chairman of the Council
arose and put on the myrtle crown,--sign that the sitting was opened. A
herald besought blessings on the Athenians and the Plataeans their allies.
A wrinkled seer carefully slaughtered a goose, proclaimed that its
entrails gave good omen, and cast the carcass on the altar. The herald
assured the people there was no rain, thunder, or other unlucky sign from
heaven. The pious accordingly breathed easier, and awaited the order of
the day.

The decree of the Council convening the assembly was read; then the
herald's formal proclamation:--

"Who wishes to speak?"

The answer was a groan from nigh every soul present. Three men ascended
the Bema. They bore the olive branches and laurel garlands, suppliants at
Delphi; but their cloaks were black. "The oracle is unfavourable! The gods
deliver us to Xerxes!" The thrill of horror went around the Pnyx.

The three stood an instant in gloomy silence. Then Callias the Rich,
solemn and impressive, their spokesman, told their eventful story.

"Athenians, by your orders we have been to Delphi to inquire of the surest
oracle in Greece your destinies in the coming war. Hardly had we completed
the accustomed sacrifices in the Temple of Apollo, when the Pythoness
Aristonice, sitting above the sacred cleft whence comes the inspiring
vapour, thus prophesied." And Callias repeated the hexameters which warned
the Athenians that resistance to Xerxes would be worse than futile; that
Athens was doomed; concluding with the fearful line, "Get from this temple
afar, and brood on the ills that await ye."

In the pause, as Callias's voice fell, the agony of the people became nigh
indescribable. Sturdy veterans who had met the Persian spears at Marathon
blinked fast. Many groaned, some cursed. Here and there a bold spirit
dared to open his heart to doubt, and to mutter, "Persian gold, the
Pythoness was corrupted," but quickly hushed even such whispers as rank
impiety. Then a voice close to the Bema rang out loudly:--

"And is this all the message, Callias?"

"The voice of Glaucon the Fortunate," cried many, finding relief in words.
"He is a friend to the ambassador. There is a further prophecy."

The envoy, who had made his theatrical pause too long, continued:--

"Such, men of Athens, was the answer; and we went forth in dire
tribulation. Then a certain noble Delphian, Timon by name, bade us take
the olive branches and return to the Pythoness, saying, 'O King Apollo,
reverence these boughs of supplication, and deliver a more comfortable
answer concerning our dear country. Else we will not leave thy sanctuary,
but stay here until we die.' Whereat the priestess gave us a second
answer, gloomy and riddling, yet not so evil as the first."

Again Callias recited his lines of doom, "that Athena had vainly prayed to
Zeus in behalf of her city, and that it was fated the foe should overrun
all Attica, yet

  " 'Safe shall the wooden wall continue for thee and thy children;
  Wait not the tramp of the horse, nor the footmen mightily moving
  Over the land, but turn your back to the foe, and retire ye.
  Yet a day shall arrive when ye shall meet him in battle.
  Oh, holy Salamis, thou shalt destroy the offspring of women
  When men scatter the seed, or when they gather the harvest.' "

"And that is all?" demanded fifty voices.

"That is all," and Callias quitted the Bema. Whereupon if agony had held
the Pnyx before, perplexity held it now. "The wooden wall?" "Holy
Salamis?" "A great battle, but who is to conquer?" The feverish anxiety of
the people at length found its vent in a general shout.

"The seers! Call the seers! Explain the oracle!"

The demand had clearly been anticipated by the president of the Council.

"Xenagoras the Cerycid is present. He is the oldest seer. Let us hearken
to his opinion."

The head of the greatest priestly family in Athens arose. He was a
venerable man, wearing his ribbon-decked robes of office. The president
passed him the myrtle crown, as token that he had the Bema. In a tense
hush his voice sounded clearly.

"I was informed of the oracles before the assembly met. The meaning is
plain. By the 'wooden wall' is meant our ships. But if we risk a battle,
we are told slaughter and defeat will follow. The god commands, therefore,
that without resistance we quit Attica, gathering our wives, our children,
and our goods, and sail away to some far country."

Xenagoras paused with the smile of him who performs a sad but necessary
duty, removed the wreath, and descended the Bema.

"Quit Attica without a blow! Our fathers' fathers' sepulchres, the shrines
of our gods, the pleasant farmsteads, the land where our Attic race have
dwelt from dimmest time!"

The thought shot chill through the thousands. Men sat in helpless silence,
while many a soul, as the gaze wandered up to the temple-crowned
Acropolis, asked once, yes twice, "Is not the yoke of Persia preferable to
that?" Then after the silence broke the clamour of voices.

"The other seers! Do all agree with Xenagoras? Stand forth! stand forth!"

Hegias, the "King Archon," chief of the state religion, took the Bema. His
speech was brief and to the point.

"All the priests and seers of Attica have consulted. Xenagoras speaks for
them all save Hermippus of the house of Eumolpus, who denies the others'
interpretation."

Confusion followed. Men rose, swung their arms, harangued madly from where
they stood. The chairman in vain ordered "Silence!" and was fain to bid
the Scythian constables restore order. An elderly farmer thrust himself
forward, took the wreath, and poured out his rustic wisdom from the Bema.
His advice was simple. The oracle said "the wooden wall" would be a
bulwark, and by the wooden wall was surely meant the Acropolis which had
once been protected by a palisade. Let all Attica shut itself in the
citadel and endure a siege.

So far he had proceeded garrulously, but the high-strung multitude could
endure no more. "_Kataba! Kataba!_" "Go down! go down!" pealed the yell,
emphasized by a shower of pebbles. The elder tore the wreath from his head
and fled the Bema. Then out of the confusion came a general cry.

"Cimon, son of Miltiades, speak to us!"

But that young nobleman preserved a discreet silence, and the multitude
turned to another favourite.

"Democrates, son of Myscelus, speak to us!"

The popular orator only wrapped his cloak about him, as he sat near the
chairman's stand, never answering the call he rejoiced of wont to hear.

There were cries for Hermippus, cries even for Glaucon, as if prowess in
the pentathlon gave ability to unravel oracles. The athlete sitting beside
Democrates merely blushed and drew closer to his friend. Then at last the
despairing people turned to their last resource.

"Themistocles, son of Neocles, speak to us!"

Thrice the call in vain; but at the fourth time a wave of silence swept
across the Pnyx. A figure well beloved was taking the wreath and mounting
the Bema.

The words of Themistocles that day were to ring in his hearer's ears till
life's end. The careless, almost sybaritic, man of the Isthmus and Eleusis
seemed transfigured. For one moment he stood silent, lofty, awe-inspiring.
He had a mighty task: to calm the superstitious fears of thirty thousand,
to silence the prophets of evil, to infuse those myriads with his own high
courage. He began with a voice so low it would have seemed a whisper if
not audible to all the Pnyx. Quickly he warmed. His gestures became
dramatic. His voice rose to a trumpet-call. He swept his hearers with him
as dry leaves before the blast. "When he began to weave his words, one
might have deemed him churlish, nay a fool, but when from his chest came
his deep voice, and words like unto flakes of winter snow, then who could
with him contend?" Thus Homer of Odysseus the Guileful, thus as truly of
Themistocles saviour of Hellas.

First he told the old, but never wearisome story of the past of Athens.
How, from the days of Codrus long ago, Athens had never bowed the knee to
an invader, how she had wrested Salamis from greedy Megara, how she had
hounded out the tyrannizing sons of Peisistratus, how she had braved all
the wrath of Persian Darius and dashed his huge armament back at Marathon.
With such a past, only a madman as well as traitor would dream of
submitting to Xerxes now. But as for the admonition of Xenagoras to quit
Attica and never strike a blow, Themistocles would have none of it. With a
clearness that appealed to every home-loving Hellene he pictured the fate
of wanderers as only one step better than that of slaves. What, then, was
left? The orator had a decisive answer. Was not the "wooden wall" which
should endure for the Athenians the great fleet they were just completing?
And as for the fate of the battle the speaker had an unexpected solution.
"Holy Salamis," spoke the Pythoness. And would she have said "holy," if
the issue had been only woe to the sons of Athens? "Luckless Salamis" were
then more reasonably the word; yet the prophetess so far from predicting
defeat had assured them victory.

Thus ran the substance of the speech on which many a soul knew hung the
mending or ending of Hellas, but lit all through with gleams of wit,
shades of pathos, outbursts of eloquence which burned into the hearers'
hearts as though the speaker were a god. Then at the end, Themistocles,
knowing his audience was with him, delivered his peroration:--

"Let him who trusts in oracles trust then in this, and in the old prophecy
of Epimenides that when the Persian comes it is to his hurt. But I will
say with Hector of Troy, 'One oracle is best--to fight for one's native
country.' Others may vote as they will. My vote is that if the foe by land
be too great, we retire before him to our ships, ay, forsake even
well-loved Attica, but only that we may trust to the 'wooden wall,' and
fight the Great King by sea at Salamis. We contend not with gods but with
men. Let others fear. I will trust to Athena Polias,--the goddess terrible
in battle. Hearken then to Solon the Wise (the orator pointed toward the
temple upon the soaring Acropolis):--

  " 'Our Athens need fear no hurt
    Though gods may conspire her ill.
  The hand that hath borne us up,
    It guides us and guards us still.
  Athena, the child of Zeus,
    She watches and knows no fear.
  The city rests safe from harm
    Beneath her protecting spear.'

Thus trusting in Athena, we will meet the foe at Salamis and will destroy
him."

"Who wishes to speak?" called the herald. The Pnyx answered together. The
vote to retire from Attica if needs be, to strengthen the fleet, to risk
all in a great battle, was carried with a shout. Men ran to Themistocles,
calling him, "Peitho,--Queen Persuasion." He made light of their praises,
and walked with his handsome head tossed back toward the general's office
by the Agora, to attend to some routine business. Glaucon, Cimon, and
Democrates went westward to calm their exhilaration with a ball-game at
the gymnasium of Cynosarges. On the way Glaucon called attention to a
foreigner that passed them.

"Look, Democrates, that fellow is wonderfully like the honest barbarian
who applauded me at the Isthmus."

Democrates glanced twice.

"Dear Glaucon," said he, "that fellow had a long blond beard, while this
man's is black as a crow." And he spoke the truth; yet despite the
disguise he clearly recognized the "Cyprian."




                               CHAPTER VII


                        DEMOCRATES AND THE TEMPTER


In the northern quarter of Athens the suburb of Alopece thrust itself
under the slopes of Mt. Lycabettus, that pyramid of tawny rock which
formed the rear bulwark, as it were, of every landscape of Athens. The
dwellings in the suburb were poor, though few even in the richer quarters
were at all handsome; the streets barely sixteen feet wide, ill-paved,
filthy, dingy. A line of dirty gray stucco house-fronts was broken only by
the small doors and the smaller windows in the second story. Occasionally
a two-faced bust of Hermes stood before a portal, or a marble lion's head
spouted into a corner water trough. All Athenian streets resembled these.
The citizen had his Pnyx, his Jury-Court, his gossiping Agora for his day.
These dingy streets sufficed for the dogs, the slaves, and the women, whom
wise Zeus ordered to remain at home.

Phormio the fishmonger had returned from his traffic, and sat in his
house-door meditating over a pot of sour wine and watching the last light
flickering on the great bulk of the mountain. He had his sorrows,--good
man,--for Lampaxo his worthy wife, long of tongue, short of temper, thrifty
and very watchful, was reminding him for the seventh time that he had sold
a carp half an obol too cheap. His patience indeed that evening was so
near to exhaustion that after cursing inwardly the "match-maker" who had
saddled this Amazon upon him, he actually found courage for an outbreak.
He threw up his arms after the manner of a tragic actor:--

"True, true is the word of Hesiod!"

"True is what?" flew back none too gently.

" 'The fool first suffers and is after wise.' Woman, I am resolved."

"On what?" Lampaxo's voice was soft as broken glass.

"Years increase. I shan't live long. We are childless. I will provide for
you in my will by giving you in marriage to Hyperphon."(3)

"Hyperphon!" screamed the virago, "Hyperphon the beggarly hunchback, the
laughing-stock of Athens! O Mother Hera!--but I see the villain's aim. You
are weary of me. Then divorce me like an honourable man. Send me back to
Polus my dear brother. Ah, you sheep, you are silent! You think of the
two-minae dowry you must then refund. Woe is me! I'll go to the King
Archon. I'll charge you with gross abuse. The jury will condemn you.
There'll be fines, fetters, stocks, prison--"

"Peace," groaned Phormio, terrified at the Gorgon, "I only thought--"

"How dared you think? What permitted--"

"Good evening, sweet sister and Phormio!" The salutation came from Polus,
who with Clearchus had approached unheralded. Lampaxo smoothed her ruffled
feathers. Phormio stifled his sorrows. Dromo, the half-starved slave-boy,
brought a pot of thin wine to his betters. The short southern twilight was
swiftly passing into night. Groups of young men wandered past, bound
homeward from the Cynosarges, the Academy, or some other well-loved
gymnasium. In an hour the streets would be dark and still, except for a
belated guest going to his banquet, a Scythian constable, or perhaps a
cloak thief. For your Athenian, when he had no supper invitation, went to
bed early and rose early, loving the sunlight far better than the flicker
of his uncertain lamps.

"And did the jury vote 'guilty'?" was Phormio's first question of his
brother-in-law.

"We were patriotically united. There were barely any white beans for
acquittal in the urn. The scoundrelly grain-dealer is stripped of all he
possesses and sent away to beg in exile. A noble service to Athens!"

"Despite the evidence," murmured Clearchus; but Lampaxo's shrill voice
answered her brother:--

"It's my opinion you jurors should look into a case directly opposite this
house. Spies, I say, Persian spies."

"Spies!" cried Polus, leaping up as from a coal; "why, Phormio, haven't
you denounced them? It's compounding with treason even to fail to report--"

"Peace, brother," chuckled the fishmonger, "your sister smells for treason
as a dog for salt fish. There is a barbarian carpet merchant--a Babylonian,
I presume--who has taken the empty chambers above Demas's shield factory
opposite. He seems a quiet, inoffensive man; there are a hundred other
foreign merchants in the city. One can't cry 'Traitor!' just because the
poor wight was not born to speak Greek."

"I do not like Babylonish merchants," propounded Polus, dogmatically; "to
the jury with him, I say!"

"At least he has a visitor," asserted Clearchus, who had long been silent.
"See, a gentleman wrapped in a long himation is going up to the door and
standing up his walking stick."

"And if I have eyes," vowed the juror, squinting through his hands in the
half light, "that closely wrapped man is Glaucon the Alcmaeonid."

"Or Democrates," remarked Clearchus; "they look much alike from behind.
It's getting dark."

"Well," decided Phormio, "we can easily tell. He has left his stick below
by the door. Steal across, Polus, and fetch it. It must be carved with the
owner's name."

The juror readily obeyed; but to read the few characters on the crooked
handle was beyond the learning of any save Clearchus, whose art demanded
the mystery of writing.

"I was wrong," he confessed, after long scrutiny, " 'Glaucon, son of
Conon.' It is very plain. Put the cane back, Polus."

The cane was returned, but the juror pulled a very long face.

"Dear friends, here is a man I've already suspected of undemocratic
sentiments conferring with a Barbarian. Good patriots cannot be too
vigilant. A plot, I assert. Treason to Athens and Hellas! Freedom's in
danger. Henceforth I shall look on Glaucon the Alcmaeonid as an enemy of
liberty."

"_Phui!_" almost shouted Phormio, whose sense of humour was keen, "a noble
conspiracy! Glaucon the Fortunate calls on a Babylonish merchant by night.
You say to plot against Athens. I say to buy his pretty wife a carpet."

"The gods will some day explain," said Clearchus, winding up the
argument,--and so for a little while the four forgot all about Glaucon.

                              * * * * * * *

Despite the cane, Clearchus was right. The visitor was Democrates. The
orator mounted the dark stair above the shield-factory and knocked against
a door, calling, "_Pai! Pai!_" "Boy! boy!" a summons answered by none
other than the ever smiling Hiram. The Athenian, however, was little
prepared for the luxury, nay splendour, which greeted him, once the
Phoenician had opened the door. The bare chamber had been transformed. The
foot sank into the glowing carpets of Kerman and Bactria. The
gold-embroidered wall tapestries were of Sidonian purple. The divans were
covered with wondrous stuff which Democrates could not name,--another age
would call it silk. A tripod smoked with fragrant Arabian frankincense.
Silver lamps, swinging from silver chains, gave brilliant light. The
Athenian stood wonderbound, until a voice, not Hiram's, greeted him.

"Welcome, Athenian," spoke the Cyprian, in his quaint, eastern accent. It
was the strange guest in the tavern by Corinth. The Prince--prince surely,
whatever his other title--was in the same rich dress as at the Isthmus,
only his flowing beard had been dyed raven black. Yet Democrates's eyes
were diverted instantly to the peculiarly handsome slave-boy on the divan
beside his master. The boy's dress, of a rare blue stuff, enveloped him
loosely. His hair was as golden as the gold thread on the round cap. In
the shadows the face almost escaped the orator,--he thought he saw clear
blue eyes and a marvellously brilliant, almost girlish, bloom and
freshness. The presence of this slave caused the Athenian to hesitate, but
the Cyprian bade him be seated, with one commanding wave of the hand.

"This is Smerdis, my constant companion. He is a mute. Yet if otherwise, I
would trust him as myself."

Democrates, putting by surprise, began to look on his host fixedly.

"My dear Barbarian, for that you are a Hellene you will not pretend, you
realize, I trust, you incur considerable danger in visiting Athens."

"I am not anxious," observed the Prince, composedly. "Hiram is watchful
and skilful. You see I have dyed my hair and beard black and pass for a
Babylonish merchant."

"With all except me, _philotate_,--'dearest friend,' as we say in Athens."
Democrates's smile was not wholly agreeable.

"With all except you," assented the Prince, fingering the scarlet tassel
of the cushion whereon he sat. "I reckoned confidently that you would come
to visit me when I sent Hiram to you. Yes--I have heard the story that is
on your tongue: one of Themistocles's busybodies has brought a rumour that
a certain great man of the Persian court is missing from the side of his
master, and you have been requested to greet that nobleman heartily if he
should come to Athens."

"You know a great deal!" cried the orator, feeling his forehead grow hot.

"It is pleasant to know a great deal," smiled back the Prince, carelessly,
while Hiram entered with a tray and silver goblets brimming with
violet-flavoured sherbet; "I have innumerable 'Eyes-and-ears.' You have
heard the name? One of the chief officers of his Majesty is 'The Royal
Eye.' You Athenians are a valiant and in many things a wise people, yet
you could grow in wisdom by looking well to the East."

"I am confident," exclaimed Democrates, thrusting back the goblet, "if
your Excellency requires a noble game of wits, you can have one. I need
only step to the window, and cry 'Spies!'--after which your Excellency can
exercise your wisdom and eloquence defending your life before one of our
Attic juries."

"Which is a polite and patriotic manner of saying, dearest Athenian, you
are not prepared to push matters to such unfortunate extremity. I omit
what his Majesty might do in the way of taking vengeance; sufficient that
if aught unfortunate befalls me, or Hiram, or this my slave Smerdis, while
we are in Athens, a letter comes to your noble chief Themistocles from the
banker Pittacus of Argos."

Democrates, who had risen to his feet, had been flushed before. He became
pale now. The hand that clutched the purple tapestry was trembling. The
words rose to his lips, the lips refused to utter them. The Prince, who
had delivered his threat most quietly, went on, "In short, good
Democrates, I was aware before I came to Athens of our necessities, and I
came because I was certain I could relieve them."

"Never!" The orator shot the word out desperately.

"You are a Hellene."

"Am I ashamed of it?"

"Do not, however, affect to be more virtuous than your race. Persians make
their boast of truth-telling and fidelity. You Hellenes, I hear, have even
a god--Hermes Dolios,--who teaches you lying and thieving. The customs of
nations differ. Mazda the Almighty alone knoweth which is best. Follow
then the customs of Hellenes."

"You speak in riddles."

"Plainer, then. You know the master I serve. You guess who I am, though
you shall not name me. For what sum will you serve Xerxes the Great King?"

The orator's breath came deep. His hands clasped and unclasped, then were
pressed behind his head.

"I told Lycon, and I tell you, I am no traitor to Hellas."

"Which means, of course, you demand a fair price. I am not angry. You will
find a Persian pays like the lord he is, and that his darics always ring
true metal."

"I'll hear no more. I was a fool to meet Lycon at Corinth, doubly a fool
to meet you to-night. Farewell."

Democrates seized the latch. The door was locked. He turned furiously on
the Barbarian. "Do you keep me by force? Have a care. I can be terrible if
driven to bay. The window is open. One shout--"

The Cyprian had risen, and quietly, but with a grip like iron on
Democrates's wrist, led the orator back to the divan.

"You can go free in a twinkling, but hear you shall. Before you boast of
your power, you shall know all of mine. I will recite your condition.
Contradict if I say anything amiss. Your father Myscelus was of the noble
house of Codrus, a great name in Athens, but he left you no large estate.
You were ambitious to shine as an orator and leader of the Athenians. To
win popularity you have given great feasts. At the last festival of the
Theseia you fed the poor of Athens on sixty oxen washed down with good
Rhodian wine. All that made havoc in your patrimony."

"By Zeus, you speak as if you lived all your life in Athens!"

"I have said 'I have many eyes.' But to continue. You gave the price of
the tackling for six of the triremes with which Themistocles pretends to
believe he can beat back my master. Worse still, you have squandered many
minae on flute girls, dice, cock-fights, and other gentle pleasures. In
short your patrimony is not merely exhausted but overspent. That, however,
is not the most wonderful part of my recital."

"How dare you pry into my secrets?"

"Be appeased, dear Athenian; it is much more interesting to know you deny
nothing of all I say. It is now five months since you were appointed by
your sagacious Athenian assembly as commissioner to administer the silver
taken from the mines at Laurium and devoted to your navy. You fulfilled
the people's confidence by diverting much of this money to the payment of
your own great debts to the banker Pittacus of Argos. At present you are
'watching the moon,' as you say here in Athens,--I mean, that at the end of
this month you must account to the people for all the money you have
handled, and at this hour are at your wits' ends to know whence the
repayment will come."

"That is all you know of me?"

"All."

Democrates sighed with relief. "Then you have yet to complete the story,
my dear Barbarian. I have adventured on half the cargo of a large
merchantman bringing timber and tin from Massalia; I look every day for a
messenger from Corinth with news of her safe arrival. Upon her coming I
can make good all I owe and still be a passing rich man."

If the Cyprian was discomposed at this announcement, he did not betray it.

"The sea is frightfully uncertain, good Democrates. Upon it, as many
fortunes are lost as are made."

"I have offered due prayers to Poseidon, and vowed a gold tripod on the
ship's arrival."

"So even your gods in Hellas have their price," was the retort, with an
ill-concealed sneer. "Do not trust them. Take ten talents from me and
to-night sleep sweetly."

"Your price?" the words slipped forth involuntarily.

"Themistocles's private memoranda for the battle-order of your new fleet."

"Avert it, gods! The ship will reach Corinth, I warn you--" Democrates's
gestures became menacing, as again he rose, "I will set you in
Themistocles's hand as soon--"

"But not to-night." The Prince rose, smiled, held out his hand. "Unbar the
door for his Excellency, Hiram. And you, noble sir, think well of all I
said at Corinth on the certain victory of my master; think also--" the
voice fell--"how Democrates the Codrid could be sovereign of Athens under
the protection of Persia."

"I tyrant of Athens?" the orator clapped his hand behind his back; "you
say enough. Good evening."

He was on the threshold, when the slave-boy touched his master's hand in
silent signal.

"And if there be any fair woman you desire,"--how gliding the Cyprian's
voice!--"shall not the power of Xerxes the great give her unto you?"

Why did Democrates feel his forehead turn to flame? Why--almost against
will--did he stretch forth his hand to the Cyprian? He went down the stair
scarce feeling the steps beneath him. At the bottom voices greeted him
from across the darkened street.

"A fair evening, Master Glaucon."

"A fair evening," his mechanical answer; then to himself; as he walked
away, "Wherefore call me Glaucon? I have somewhat his height, though not
his shoulder. Ah,--I know it, I have chanced to borrow his carved
walking-stick. Impudent creatures to read the name!"

He had not far to go. Athens was compactly built, all quarters close
together. Yet before he reached home and bed, he was fighting back an
ill-defined but terrible thought. "Glaucon! They think I am Glaucon. If I
chose to betray the Cyprian--" Further than that he would not suffer the
thought to go. He lay sleepless, fighting against it. The dark was full of
the harpies of uncanny suggestion. He arose unrefreshed, to proffer every
god the same prayer: "Deliver me from evil imaginings. Speed the ship to
Corinth."




                               CHAPTER VIII


                             ON THE ACROPOLIS


The Acropolis of Athens rises as does no other citadel in the world. Had
no workers in marble or bronze, no weavers of eloquence or song, dwelt
beneath its shadow, it would stand the centre and cynosure of a remarkable
landscape. It is "_The Rock_," no other like unto it. Is it enough to say
its ruddy limestone rises as a huge boulder one hundred and fifty feet
above the plain, that its breadth is five hundred, its length one
thousand? Numbers and measures can never disclose a soul,--and the Rock of
Athens has all but a soul: a soul seems to glow through its adamant when
the fire-footed morning steals over the long crest of Hymettus, and
touches the citadel's red bulk with unearthly brightness; a soul when the
day falls to sleep in the arms of night as Helios sinks over the western
hill by Daphni. Then the Rock seems to throb and burn with life again.

It is so bare that the hungry goats can hardly crop one spear of grass
along its jagged slopes. It is so steep it scarce needs defence against an
army. It is so commanding that he who stands on the westmost pinnacle can
look across the windy hill of the Pnyx, across the brown plain-land and
down to the sparkling blue sea with the busy havens of Peiraeus and
Phalerum, the scattered gray isles of the AEgean, and far away to the
domelike crest of Acro-Corinthus. Let him turn to the right: below him
nestles the gnarled hill of Areopagus, home of the Furies, the buzzing
plaza of the Agora, the closely clustered city. Behind, there spread
mountain, valley, plain,--here green, here brown, here golden,--with
Pentelicus the Mighty rearing behind all, his summits fretted white, not
with winter snows, but with lustrous marble. Look to the left: across the
view passes the shaggy ridge of Hymettus, arid and scarred, as if wrought
by the Titans, home only of goats and bees, of nymphs and satyrs.

That was almost the self-same vision in the dim past when the first savage
clambered this "Citadel of Cecrops" and spoke, "Here is my
dwelling-place." This will be the vision until earth and ocean are no
more. The human habitation changes, the temples rise and crumble; the red
and gray rock, the crystalline air, the sapphire sea, come from the god,
and these remain.



Glaucon and Hermione were come together to offer thanks to Athena for the
glory of the Isthmus. The athlete had already mounted the citadel heading
a myrtle-crowned procession to bear a formal thanksgiving, but his wife
had not then been with him. Now they would go together, without pomp. They
walked side by side. Nimble Chloe tripped behind with her mistress's
parasol. Old Manes bore the bloodless sacrifice, but Hermione said in her
heart there came two too many.

Many a friendly eye, many a friendly word, followed as they crossed the
Agora, where traffic was in its morning bustle. Glaucon answered every
greeting with his winsome smile.

"All Athens seems our friend!" he said, as close by the Tyrannicides'
statues at the upper end of the plaza a grave councilman bowed and an old
bread woman left her stall to bob a courtesy.

"Is _your_ friend," corrected Hermione, thinking only of her husband, "for
I have won no pentathlon."

"Ah, _makaira_, dearest and best," he answered, looking not on the
glorious citadel but on her face, "could I have won the parsley wreath had
there been no better wreath awaiting me at Eleusis? And to-day I am
gladdest of the glad. For the gods have sent me blessings beyond desert, I
no longer fear their envy as once. I enjoy honour with all good men. I
have no enemy in the world. I have the dearest of friends, Cimon,
Themistocles--beyond all, Democrates. I am blessed in love beyond Peleus
espoused to Thetis, or Anchises beloved of Aphrodite, for my golden
Aphrodite lives not on Olympus, nor Paphos, nor comes on her doves from
Cythera, but dwells--"

"Peace." The hand laid on his mouth was small but firm. "Do not anger the
goddess by likening me unto her. It is joy enough for me if I can look up
at the sun and say, 'I keep the love of Glaucon the Fortunate and the
Good.' "

Walking thus in their golden dream, the two crossed the Agora, turned to
the left from the Pnyx, and by crooked lanes went past the craggy rock of
Areopagus, till before them rose a wooden palisade and a gate. Through
this a steep path led upward to the citadel. Not to the Acropolis of fame.
The buildings then upon the Rock in one short year would lie in heaps of
fire-scarred ruin. Yet in that hour before Glaucon and Hermione a not
unworthy temple rose, the old "House of Athena," prototype of the later
Parthenon. In the morning light it stood in beauty--a hundred Doric
columns, a sculptured pediment, flashing with white marble and with tints
of scarlet, blue, and gold. Below it, over the irregular plateau of the
Rock, spread avenues of votive statues of gods and heroes in stone,
bronze, or painted wood. Here and there were numerous shrines and small
temples, and a giant altar for burning a hundred oxen. So hand in hand the
twain went to the bronze portal of the Temple. The kindly old priest on
guard smiled as he sprinkled them with the purifying salt water out of the
brazen laver. The door closed behind them. For a moment they seemed to
stand in the high temple in utter darkness. Then far above through the
marble roof a softened light came creeping toward them. As from unfolding
mist, the great calm face of the ancient goddess looked down with its
unchanging smile. A red coal glowed on the tripod at her feet. Glaucon
shook incense over the brazier. While it smoked, Hermione laid the crown
of lilies between the knees of the half-seen image, then her husband
lifted his hands and prayed aloud.

"Athena, Virgin, Queen, Deviser of Wisdom,--whatever be the name thou
lovest best,--accept this offering and hear. Bless now us both. Give us to
strive for the noblest, to speak the wise word, to love one another. Give
us prosperity, but not unto pride. Bless all our friends; but if we have
enemies, be thou their enemy also. And so shall we praise thee forever."

This was all the prayer and worship. A little more meditation, then
husband and wife went forth from the sacred cella. The panorama--rocks,
plain, sea, and bending heavens--opened before them in glory. The light
faded upon the purple breasts of the western mountains. Behind the
Acropolis, Lycabettus's pyramid glowed like a furnace. The marble on
distant Pentelicus shone dazzlingly.

Glaucon stood on the easternmost pinnacle of the Rock, watching the
landscape.

"Joy, _makaira_, joy," he cried, "we possess one another. We dwell in
'violet-crowned Athens'; for what else dare we to pray?"

But Hermione pointed less pleased toward the crest of Pentelicus.

"Behold it! How swiftly yonder gray cloud comes on a rushing wind! It will
cover the brightness. The omen is bad."

"Why bad, _makaira_?"

"The cloud is the Persian. He hangs to-day as a thunder-cloud above Athens
and Hellas. Xerxes will come. And you--"

She pressed closer to her husband.

"Why speak of me?" he asked lightly.

"Xerxes brings war. War brings sorrow to women. It is not the hateful and
old that the spears and the arrows love best."

Half compelled by the omen, half by a sudden burst of unoccasioned fear,
her eyes shone with tears; but her husband's laugh rang clearly.

"_Euge!_ dry your eyes, and look before you. King AEolus scatters the cloud
upon his briskest winds. It breaks into a thousand bits. So shall
Themistocles scatter the hordes of Xerxes. The Persian shadow shall come,
shall go, and again we shall be happy in beautiful Athens."

"Athena grant it!" prayed Hermione.

"We can trust the goddess," returned Glaucon, not to be shaken from his
happy mood. "And now that we have paid our vows to her, let us descend.
Our friends are already waiting for us by the Pnyx before they go down to
the harbours."

As they went down the steep, Cimon and Democrates came running to join
them, and in the brisk chatter that arose the omen of the cloud and fears
of the Persian faded from Hermione's mind.

                              * * * * * * *

It was a merry party such as often went down to the havens of Athens in
the springtime and summer: a dozen gentlemen, old and young, for the most
part married, and followed demurely by their wives with the latter's
maids, and many a stout Thracian slave tugging hampers of meat and drink.
Laughter there was, admixed with wiser talk; friends walking by twos and
threes, with Themistocles, as always, seeming to mingle with all and to
surpass every one both in jests and in wisdom. So they fared down across
the broad plain-land to the harbours, till the hill Munychia rose steep
before them. A scramble over a rocky, ill-marked way led to the top; then
before them broke a second view comparable almost to that from the Rock of
Athena: at their feet lay the four blue havens of Athens, to the right
Phaleron, closer at hand the land-locked bay of Munychia, beyond that Zea,
beyond that still a broader sheet--Peiraeus, the new war-harbour of Athens.
They could look down on the brown roofs of the port-town, the forest of
masts, the merchantman unloading lumber from the Euxine, the merchantman
loading dried figs for Syria; but most of all on the numbers of long black
hulls, some motionless on the placid harbour, some propped harmlessly on
the shore. Hermione clouded as she saw them, and glanced away.

"I do not love your new fleet, Themistocles," she said, frowning at the
handsome statesman; "I do not love anything that tells so clearly of war.
It mars the beauty."

"Rather you should rejoice we have so fair a wooden wall against the
Barbarian, dear lady," answered he, quite at ease. "What can we do to
hearten her, Democrates?"

"Were I only Zeus," rejoined the orator, who never was far from his best
friend's wife, "I would cast two thunderbolts, one to destroy Xerxes, the
second to blast Themistocles's armada,--so would the Lady Hermione be
satisfied."

"I am sorry, then, you are not the Olympian," said the woman, half smiling
at the pleasantry. Cimon interrupted them. Some of the party had caught a
sun-burned shepherd in among the rocks, a veritable Pan in his shaggy
goat-skin. The bribe of two obols brought him out with his pipe. Four of
the slave-boys fell to dancing. The party sat down upon the burnt
grass,--eating, drinking, wreathing poppy-crowns, and watching the nimble
slaves and the ships that crawled like ants in the haven and bay below.
Thus passed the noon, and as the sun dropped toward craggy Salamis across
the strait, the men of the party wandered down to the ports and found
boats to take them out upon the bay.

The wind was a zephyr. The water spread blue and glassy. The sun was
sinking as a ball of infinite light. Themistocles, Democrates, and Glaucon
were in one skiff, the athlete at the oars. They glided past the scores of
black triremes swinging lazily at anchor. Twice they pulled around the
proudest of the fleet,--the _Nausicaae_, the gift of Hermippus to the state,
a princely gift even in days when every Athenian put his all at the public
service. She would be Themistocles's flag-ship. The young men noted her
fine lines, her heavy side timbers, the covered decks, an innovation in
Athenian men-of-war, and Themistocles put a loving hand on the keen bronze
beak as they swung around the prow.

"Here's a tooth for the Persian king!" he was laughing, when a second
skiff, rounding the trireme in an opposite direction, collided abruptly. A
lurch, a few splinters was all the hurt, but as the boats parted
Themistocles rose from his seat in the stern, staring curiously.

"Barbarians, by Athena's owls, the knave at the oars is a sleek Syrian,
and his master and the boy from the East too. What business around our
war-fleet? Row after them, Glaucon; we'll question--"

"Glaucon does no such folly," spoke Democrates, instantly, from the bow;
"if the harbour-watch doesn't interfere with honest traders, what's it to
us?"

"As you like it." Themistocles resumed his seat. "Yet it would do no harm.
Now they row to another trireme. With what falcon eyes the master of the
trio examines it! Something uncanny, I repeat."

"To examine everything strange," proclaimed Democrates, sententiously,
"needs the life of a crow, who, they say, lives a thousand years, but I
don't see any black wings budding on Themistocles's shoulders. Pull
onward, Glaucon."

"Whither?" demanded the rower.

"To Salamis," ordered Themistocles. "Let us see the battle-place foretold
by the oracle."

"To Salamis or clear to Crete," rejoined Glaucon, setting his strength
upon the oars and making the skiff bound, "if we can find water deep
enough to drown those gloomy looks that have sat on Democrates's brows of
late."

"Not gloomy but serious," said the young orator, with an attempt at
lightness; "I have been preparing my oration against the contractor I've
indicted for embezzling the public naval stores."

"Destroy the man!" cried the rower.

"And yet I really pity him; he was under great temptation."

"No excuses; the man who robs the city in days like these is worse than he
who betrays fortresses in most wars."

"I see you are a savage patriot, Glaucon," said Themistocles, "despite
your Adonis face. We are fairly upon the bay; our nearest eavesdroppers,
yon fishermen, are a good five furlongs. Would you see something?" Glaucon
rested on the oars, while the statesman fumbled in his breast. He drew out
a papyrus sheet, which he passed to the rower, he in turn to Democrates.

"Look well, then, for I think no Persian spies are here. A month long have
I wrought on this bit of papyrus. All my wisdom flowed out of my pen when
I spread the ink. In short here is the ordering of the ships of the allied
Greeks when we meet Xerxes in battle. Leonidas and our other chiefs gave
me the task when we met at Corinth. To-day it is complete. Read it, for it
is precious. Xerxes would give twenty talents for this one leaf from
Egypt."

The young men peered at the sheet curiously. The details and diagrams were
few and easy to remember, the Athenian ships here, the AEginetan next, the
Corinthian next, and so with the other allies. A few comments on the use
of the light penteconters behind the heavy triremes. A few more comments
on Xerxes's probable naval tactics. Only the knowledge that Themistocles
never committed himself in speech or writing without exhausting every
expedient told the young men of the supreme importance of the paper. After
due inspection the statesman replaced it in his breast.

"You two have seen this," he announced, seemingly proud of his handiwork;
"Leonidas shall see this, then Xerxes, and after that--" he laughed, but
not in jest--"men will remember Themistocles, son of Neocles!"

The three lapsed into silence for a moment. The skiff was well out upon
the sea. The shadows of the hills of Salamis and of AEgelaos, the opposing
mountain of Attica, were spreading over them. Around the islet of
Psyttaleia in the strait the brown fisher-boats were gliding. Beyond the
strait opened the blue hill-girdled bay of Eleusis, now turning to fire in
the evening sun. Everything was peaceful, silent, beautiful. Again Glaucon
rested on his oars and let his eyes wander.

"How true is the word of Thales the Sage," he spoke; " 'the world is the
fairest of all fair things, because it is the work of God.' It cannot be
that, here, between these purple hills and the glistening sea, there will
come that battle beside which the strife of Achilles and Hector before
Troy shall pass as nothing!"

Themistocles shook his head.

"We do not know; we are dice in the high gods' dice-boxes.

  " 'Man all vainly shall scan the mind of the Prince of Olympus.'

"We can say nothing wiser than that. We can but use our Attic mother wit,
and trust the rest to destiny. Let us be satisfied if we hope that destiny
is not blind."

They drifted many moments in silence.

"The sun sinks lower," spoke Democrates, at length; "so back again to the
havens."

On the return Themistocles once more vowed he caught a glimpse of the
skiff of the unknown foreigners, but Democrates called it mere phantasy.
Hermione met them at the Peiraeus, and the party wandered back through the
gathering dusk to the city, where each little group went its way.
Themistocles went to his own house, where he said he expected Sicinnus;
Cimon and Democrates sought a tavern for an evening cup; Glaucon and
Hermione hastened to their house in the Colonus suburb near the trickling
Cephissus, where in the starlit night the tettix(4) in the black old
olives by the stream made its monotonous music, where great fireflies
gleamed, where Philomela the nightingale called, and the tall plane trees
whispered softly to the pines. When Hermione fell asleep, she had
forgotten about the coming of the Persian, and dreamed that Glaucon was
Eros, she was Psyche, and that Zeus was giving her the wings of a
butterfly and a crown of stars.

Democrates went home later. After the heady Pramnian at the tavern, he
roved away with Cimon and others to serenade beneath the lattice of a
lady--none too prudish--in the Ceramicus quarter. But the fair one was cruel
that night, and her slaves repelled the minstrels with pails of hot water
from an upper window. Democrates thereupon quitted the party. His head was
very befogged, but he could not expel one idea from it--that Themistocles
had revealed that day a priceless secret, that the statesman and Glaucon
and he himself were the only men who shared it, and that it was believed
that Glaucon had visited the Babylonish carpet-seller. Joined to this was
an overpowering consciousness that Helen of Troy was not so lovely as
Hermione of Eleusis. When he came to his lodgings, however, his wits
cleared in a twinkling after he had read two letters. The first was short.

"Themistocles to Democrates:--This evening I begin to discover something.
Sicinnus, who has been searching in Athens, is certain there is a Persian
agent in the city. Seize him.--_Chaire._"

The second was shorter. It came from Corinth.

"Socias the merchant to Democrates:--Tyrrhenian pirates have taken the
ship. Lading and crew are utterly lost.--_Chaire._"

The orator never closed his eyes that night.




                                CHAPTER IX


                           THE CYPRIAN TRIUMPHS


Democrates fronted ruin. What profit later details from Socias of the
capture of the merchantman? Unless three days before the coming festival
of the Panathenaea the orator could find a large sum, he was forever
undone. His sequestering of the ship-money would become public property.
He would be tried for his life. Themistocles would turn against him. The
jury would hardly wait for the evidence. He would drink the poisonous
hemlock and his corpse be picked by the crows in the Barathrum,--an open
pit, sole burial place for Athenian criminals.

One thing was possible: to go to Glaucon, confess all, and beg the money.
Glaucon was rich. He could have the amount from Conon and Hermippus for
the asking. But Democrates knew Glaucon well enough to perceive that while
the athlete might find the money, he would be horrified at the foul
disclosure. He would save his old comrade from death, but their friendship
would be ended. He would feel in duty bound to tell Themistocles enough to
ruin Democrates's political prospects for all time. An appeal to Glaucon
was therefore dismissed, and the politician looked for more desperate
remedies.

Democrates enjoyed apartments on the street of the Tripods east of the
Acropolis, a fashionable promenade of Athens. He was regarded as a
confirmed bachelor. If, therefore, two or three dark-eyed flute girls in
Phaleron had helped him to part with a good many minae, no one scolded too
loudly; the thing had been done genteelly and without scandal. Democrates
affected to be a collector of fine arms and armour. The ceiling of his
living room was hung with white-plumed helmets, on the walls glittered
brass greaves, handsomely embossed shields, inlaid Chalcidian scimitars,
and bows tipped with gold. Under foot were expensive rugs. The orator's
artistic tastes were excellent. Even as he sat in the deeply pillowed
arm-chair his eye lighted on a Nike,--a statuette of the precious
Corinthian bronze, a treasure for which the dealer's unpaid account lay
still, alas! in the orator's coffer.

But Democrates was not thinking so much of the unpaid bronze-smith as of
divers weightier debts. On the evening in question he had ordered Bias,
the sly Thracian, out of the room; with his own hands had barred the door
and closed the lattice; then with stealthy step thrust back the scarlet
wall tapestry to disclose a small door let into the plaster. A key made
the door open into a cupboard, out of which Democrates drew a brass-bound
box of no great size, which he carried gingerly to a table and opened with
a complex key.

The contents of the box were curious, to a stranger enigmatic. Not money,
nor jewels, but rolls of closely written papyri, and things which the
orator studied more intently,--a number of hard bits of clay bearing the
impressions of seals. As Democrates fingered these, his face might have
betrayed a mingling of keen fear and keener satisfaction.

"There is no such collection in all Hellas,--no, not in the world," ran his
commentary; "here is the signet of the Tagos of Thessaly, here of the
Boeotarch of Thebes, here of the King of Argos. I was able to secure the
seal of Leonidas while in Corinth. This, of course, is Themistocles's,--how
easily I took it! And this--of less value perhaps to a man of the world--is
of my beloved Glaucon. And here are twenty more. Then the papyri,"--he
unrolled them lovingly, one after another,--"precious specimens, are they
not? Ah, by Zeus, I must be a very merciful and pious man, or I'd have
used that dreadful power heaven has given me and never have drifted into
these straits."

What that "power" was with which Democrates felt himself endued he did not
even whisper to himself. His mood changed suddenly. He closed the box with
a snap and locked it hurriedly.

"Cursed casket!--I think I would be happier if Phorcys, the old man of the
deep, could drown it all! I would be better for it and kept from foul
thoughts."

He thrust the box back in the cupboard, drew forth a second like it,
unlocked it, and took out more writings. Selecting two, he spread ink and
papyrus before him, and copied with feverish haste. Once he hesitated, and
almost flung back the writings into the casket. Once he glanced at the
notes he had prepared for his speech against the defrauding contractor. He
grimaced bitterly. Then the hesitation ended. He finished the copying,
replaced the second box, and barred and concealed the cupboard. He hid his
new copies in his breast and called in Bias.

"I am going out, but I shall not be late."

"Shall not Hylas and I go with lanterns?" asked the fellow. "Last night
there were foot-pads."

"I don't need you," rejoined his master, brusquely.

He went down into the dimly lighted street and wound through the maze of
back alleys wherein Athens abounded, but Democrates never missed his way.
Once he caught the glint of a lantern--a slave lighting home his master
from dinner. The orator drew into a doorway; the others glided by, seeing
nothing. Only when he came opposite the house of the Cyprian he saw light
spreading from the opposite doorway and knew he must pass under curious
eyes. Phormio was entertaining friends very late. But Democrates took
boldness for safety, strode across the illumined ring, and up to the
Cyprian's stairway. The buzz of conversation stopped a moment. "Again
Glaucon," he caught, but was not troubled.

"After all," he reflected, "if seen at all, there is no harm in such a
mistake."

The room was again glittering in its Oriental magnificence. The Cyprian
advanced to meet his visitor, smiling blandly.

"Welcome, dear Athenian. We have awaited you. We are ready to heal your
calamity."

Democrates turned away his face.

"You know it already! O Zeus, I am the most miserable man in all Hellas!"

"And wherefore miserable, good friend?" The Cyprian half led, half
compelled the visitor to a seat on the divan. "Is it such to be enrolled
from this day among the benefactors of my most gracious lord and king?"

"Don't goad me!" Democrates wrung his hands. "I am desperate. Take these
papyri, read, pay, then let me never see your face again." He flung the
two rolls in the Prince's lap and sat in abject misery.

The other unrolled the writings deliberately, read slowly, motioned to
Hiram, who also read them with catlike scrutiny. During all this not a
word was spoken. Democrates observed the beautiful mute emerge from an
inner chamber and silently take station at his master's side, following
the papers also with wonderful, eager eyes. Only after a long interval the
Prince spoke.

"Well--you bring what purports to be private memoranda of Themistocles on
the equipment and arraying of the Athenian fleet. Yet these are only
copies."

"Copies; the originals cannot stay in my possession. It were ruin to give
them up."

The Prince turned to Hiram.

"And do you say, from what you know of these things, these memoranda are
genuine?"

"Genuine. That is the scanty wisdom of the least of your Highness's
slaves."

The Oriental bowed himself, then stood erect in a manner that reminded
Democrates of some serpent that had just coiled and uncoiled.

"Good," continued the emissary; "yet I must ask our good Athenian to
confirm them with an oath."

The orator groaned. He had not expected this last humiliation; but being
forced to drink the cup, he drained it to the lees. He swore by Zeus
Orchios, Watcher of Oaths, and Dike, the Eternal Justice, that he brought
true copies, and that if he was perjured, he called a curse upon himself
and all his line. The Cyprian received his oath with calm satisfaction,
then held out the half of a silver shekel broken in the middle.

"Show this to Mydon, the Sicyonian banker at Phaleron. He holds its
counterpart. He will pay the man who completes the coin ten talents."

Democrates received the token, but felt that he must stand upon his
dignity.

"I have given an oath, stranger, but give the like to me. What proof have
I of this Mydon?"

The question seemed to rouse the unseen lion in the Cyprian. His eye
kindled. His voice swelled.

"We leave oaths, Hellene, to men of trade and barter, to men of trickery
and guile. The Aryan noble is taught three things: to fear the king, to
bend the bow, to speak the truth. And he learns all well. I have
spoken,--my word is my oath."

The Athenian shrank at the storm he had roused. But the Prince almost
instantly curbed himself. His voice sank again to its easy tone of
conciliation.

"So much for my word, good friend; yet better than an oath, look here. Can
the man who bears this ring afford to tell a lie?"

He extended his right hand. On the second finger was a huge beryl signet.
Democrates bent over it.

"Two seated Sphynxes and a winged cherub flying above,--the seal of the
royal Achaemenians of Persia! You are sent by Xerxes himself. You are--"

The Prince raised a warning finger. "Hush, Athenian. Think what you will,
but do not name me, though soon my name shall fly through all the world."

"So be it," rejoined Democrates, his hands clutching the broken coin as at
a last reprieve from death. "But be warned, even though I bear you no
good-will. Themistocles is suspicious. Sicinnus his agent, a sly cat, is
searching for you. The other day Themistocles, in the boat at Peiraeus, was
fain to have you questioned. If detected, I cannot save you."

The Prince shrugged his shoulders.

"Good Democrates, I come of a race that trusts in the omnipotence of God
and does the right. Duty requires me in Athens. What Ahura-Mazda and
Mithra his glorious vicegerent will, that shall befall me, be I in Hellas
or in safe Ecbatana. The decree of the Most High, written among the stars,
is good. I do not shun it."

The words were spoken candidly, reverently. Democrates drew toward the
door, and the others did not strive to detain him.

"As you will," spoke the Athenian; "I have warned you. Trust then your
God. I have sold myself this once, but do not call me friend. Necessity is
a sharp goad. May our paths never cross again!"

"Until you again have need," said the Prince, not seeking to wring from
the other any promise.

Democrates muttered a sullen farewell and went down the dark stairs. The
light in Phormio's house was out. No one seemed to be watching. On the way
homeward Democrates comforted himself with the reflection that although
the memoranda he sold were genuine, Themistocles often changed his plans,
and he could see to it this scheme for arraying the war fleet was speedily
altered. No real harm then would come to Hellas. And in his hand was the
broken shekel,--the talisman to save him from destruction. Only when
Democrates thought of Glaucon and Hermione he was fain to grit his teeth,
while many times it returned to him, "They think it was _Glaucon_ who has
been twice now to visit the Babylonish carpet-seller."

                              * * * * * * *

As the door had closed behind the orator, the Prince had strode across the
rugs to the window--and spat forth furiously as in extreme disgust.

"Fool, knave, villain! I foul my lips by speaking to his accursed ears!"

The tongue in which he uttered this was the purest "Royal Persian," such
as one might hear in the king's court. The beautiful "mute," mute no
longer, glided across the chamber and laid both hands upon his shoulder
with a gracious caress.

"And yet you bear with these treacherous creatures, you speak them fair?"
was the remark in the same musical tongue.

"Yes, because there is sore need. Because, with all their faithlessness,
covetousness, and guile, these Hellenes are the keenest, subtlest race
beneath Mithra's glorious light. And we Persians must play with them,
master them, and use them to make us lords of all the world."

Hiram had disappeared behind a curtain. The Prince lifted her silver
embroidered red cap. Over the graceful shoulders fell a mass of clear gold
hair, so golden one might have hidden shining darics within it. The
shining head pressed against the Persian's breast. In this attitude, with
the loose dress parting to show the tender lines, there could be no doubt
of the other's sex. The Prince laid his hand upon her neck and drew her
bright face nearer.

"This is a mad adventure on which we two have come," he spoke; "how nearly
you were betrayed at the Isthmus, when the Athenian saved you! A blunder
by Hiram, an ill-turn of Fate, will ruin us yet. It is far, Rose of Eran,
from Athens to the pleasant groves of Susa and the sparkling Choaspes."

"But the adventure is ending," answered she, with smiling confidence;
"Mazda has guarded us. As you have said--we are in his hand, alike here and
in my brother's palace. And we have seen Greece and Athens--the country and
city which you will conquer, which you will rule."

"Yes," he said, letting his eyes pass from her face to the vista of the
Acropolis, which lay in fair view under the moonlight. "How noble a city
this! Xerxes has promised that I shall be satrap of Hellas, Athens shall
be my capital, and you, O best beloved, you shall be mistress of Athens."

"I shall be mistress of Athens," echoed she, "but you, husband and lord,
would that men might give you a higher name than satrap, chief of the
Great King's slaves!"

"Xerxes is king," he answered her.

"My brother wears the purple cap. He sits on the throne of Cyrus the Great
and Darius the Dauntless. I would be a loyal Aryan, the king is indeed in
Susa or Babylon. But for me the true king of Media and Persia--is here."
And she lifted proud eyes to her husband.

"You are bold, Rose of Eran," he smiled, not angry at her implication;
"more cautious words than these have brought many in peril of the
bow-string. But, by Mithra the Fiend-Smiter, why were you not made a man?
Then truly would your mother Atossa have given Darius an heir right worthy
the twenty kingdoms!"

She gave a gentle laugh.

"The Most High ordains the best. Have I not the noblest kingdom? Am I not
your wife?"

His laugh answered her.

"Then I am greater than Xerxes. I love my empire the best!"

He leaned again from the lattice, "O, fairest of cities, and we shall win
it! See how the tawny rock turns to silver beneath the moonbeams! How
clearly burn the stars over the plain and the mountain! And these Greeks,
clever, wise, beautiful, when we have mastered them, have taught them our
Aryan obedience and love of truth, what servants will they not become! For
we are ordained to conquer. Mazda has given us empire without limit, from
the Indus to the Great Ocean of the West,--all shall be ours; for we are
Persians, the race to rule forever."

"We will conquer," she said dreamily, as enchanted as was he by the
beauties of the night.

"From the day Cyrus your grandfather flung down Cambyses the Mede, the
High God has been with us. Egypt, Assyria, Babylon--have all bowed under
our yoke. The Lydian at golden Sardis, the Tartar on the arid steppes, the
Hindoo by his sacred river, all send tribute to our king, and Hellas--" he
held out his arms confidently--"shall be the brightest star in the Persian
tiara. When Darius your father lay dying, I swore to him, 'Master, fear
not; I will avenge you on Athens and on all the Greeks.' And in one brief
year, O _fravashi_, soul of the great departed, I may make good the vow. I
will make these untamed Hellenes bow their proud necks to a king."

Her own eyes brightened, looking on him, as he spoke in pride and power.

"And yet," she could not keep back the question, "as we have moved through
this Hellas, and seen its people, living without princes, or with princes
of little power, sometimes a strange thought comes. These perverse,
unobedient folk, false as they are, and ununited, have yet a strength to
do great things, a strength which even we Aryans lack."

He shook his head.

"It cannot be. Mazda ordained a king to rule, the rest to obey. And all
the wits of Hellas have no strength until they learn that lesson well. But
I will teach it them."

"For some day you will be their king?" spoke the woman. He did not
reprove, but stood beside her, gazing forth upon the night. In the
moonlight the columns and sculptures of the great temple on the Acropolis
stood out in minute tracery They could see all the caverns and jagged
ledges on the massy Rock. The flat roofs of the sleeping city lay like a
dark and peaceful ocean. The mountains spread around in shadow-wrapped
hush. Far away the dark stretch of the sea sent back a silver shimmering
in answer to the moon. A landscape only possible at Athens! The two
sensitive Orientals' souls were deeply touched. For long they were silent,
then the husband spoke.

"Twenty days more; we are safe in Sardis, the adventure ended. The war
only remains, and the glory, the conquest,--and thou. O Ahura-Mazda," he
spoke upward to the stars, "give to thy Persians this land. For when Thou
hast given this, Thou wilt keep back nothing of all the world."




                                CHAPTER X


                           DEMOCRATES RESOLVES


Democrates surpassed himself when arraigning the knavish contractor.
"Nestor and Odysseus both speak to us," shouted Polus in glee, flinging
his black bean in the urn. "What eloquence, what righteous fury when he
painted the man's infamy to pillage the city in a crisis like this!"

So the criminal was sent to death and Democrates was showered with
congratulations. Only one person seemed hardly satisfied with all the
young orator did,--Themistocles. The latter told his lieutenant candidly he
feared all was not being done to apprehend the Persian emissary.
Themistocles even took it upon himself to send Sicinnus to run down
several suspects, and just on the morning of the day preceding the
Panathenaea--the great summer festival--Democrates received a hint which sent
him home very thoughtful. He had met his chief in the Agora as he was
leaving the Government-House, and Themistocles had again asked if he had
smelt aught of the Persian agent. He had not.

"Then you would well devote more time to finding his scent, and less to
convicting a pitiful embezzler. You know the Alopece suburb?"

"Certainly."

"And the house of Phormio the fishmonger?" to which Democrates nodded.

"Well, Sicinnus has been watching the quarter. A Babylonish carpet-seller
has rooms opposite Phormio. The man is suspicious, does no trading, and
Phormio's wife told Sicinnus an odd tale."

"What tale?" Democrates glanced at a passing chariot, avoiding
Themistocles's gaze.

"Why, twice the Barbarian, she swears, has had an evening visitor--and he
our dear Glaucon."

"Impossible."

"Of course. The good woman is mistaken. Still, question her. Pry into this
Babylonian's doings. He may be selling more things than carpets. If he has
corrupted any here in Athens,--by Pluto the Implacable, I will make them
tell out the price!"

"I'll inquire at once."

"Do so. The matter grows serious."

Themistocles caught sight of one of the archons and hastened across the
Agora to have a word with him. Democrates passed his hand across his
forehead, beaded with sudden sweat-drops. He knew--though Themistocles had
said not a word--that his superior was beginning to distrust his efforts,
and that Sicinnus was working independently. Democrates had great respect
for the acuteness of that Asiatic. He was coming perilously near the truth
already. If the Cyprian and Hiram were arrested, the latter at least would
surely try to save his life by betraying their nocturnal visitor. To get
the spy safely out of Athens would be the first step,--but not all.
Sicinnus once upon the scent would not readily drop it until he had
discovered the emissary's confederate. And of the fate of that confederate
Themistocles had just given a grim hint. There was one other solution
possible. If Democrates could discover the confederate _himself_, Sicinnus
would regard the matter as cleared up and drop all interest therein. All
these possibilities raced through the orator's head, as does the past
through one drowning. A sudden greeting startled him.

"A fair morning, Democrates." It was Glaucon. He walked arm-in-arm with
Cimon.

"A fair morning, indeed. Where are you going?"

"To the Peiraeus to inspect the new tackling of the _Nausicaae_. You will
join us?"

"Unfortunately I argue a case before the King Archon."

"Be as eloquent as in your last speech. Do you know, Cimon declares I am
disloyal too, and that you will soon be prosecuting me?"

"Avert it, gods! What do you mean?"

"Why, he is sending a letter to Argos," asserted Cimon. "Now I say Argos
has Medized, therefore no good Hellene should correspond with a traitorous
Argive."

"Be jury on my treachery," commanded Glaucon. "Ageladas the
master-sculptor sends me a bronze Perseus in honour of my victory. Shall I
churlishly send him no thanks because he lives in Argos?"

" 'Not guilty' votes the jury; the white beans prevail. So the letter goes
to-day?"

"To-morrow afternoon. You know Seuthes of Corinth--the bow-legged fellow
with a big belly. He goes home to-morrow afternoon after seeing the
procession and the sacrifice."

"He goes by sea?" asked Democrates, casually.

"By land; no ship went to his liking. He will lie overnight at Eleusis."

The friends went their ways. Democrates hardly saw or heard anything until
he was in his own chambers. Three things were graven on his mind: Sicinnus
was watching, the Babylonian was suspected, Glaucon was implicated and was
sending a letter to Argos.

                              * * * * * * *

Bias the Thracian was discovered that afternoon by his master lurking in a
corner of the chamber. Democrates seized a heavy dog-whip, lashed the boy
unmercifully, then cast him out, threatening that eavesdropping would be
rewarded by "cutting into shoe soles." Then the master resumed his
feverish pacings and the nervous twisting of his fingers. Unfortunately,
Bias felt certain the threat would never have been uttered unless the
weightiest of matters had been on foot. As in all Greek dwellings,
Democrates's rooms were divided not by doors but by hanging curtains, and
Bias, letting curiosity master fear, ensconced himself again behind one of
these and saw all his master's doings. What Democrates said and did,
however, puzzled his good servant quite sufficiently.

Democrates had opened the privy cupboard, taken out one of the caskets and
scattered its contents upon the table, then selected a papyrus, and seemed
copying the writing thereon with extreme care. Next one of the clay seals
came into play. Democrates was testing it upon wax. Then the orator rose,
dashed the wax upon the floor, put his sandal thereon, tore the papyrus on
which he wrote to bits. Again he paced restlessly, his hands clutching his
hair, his forehead frowns and blackness, while Bias thought he heard him
muttering as he walked:--

"O Zeus! O Apollo! O Athena! I cannot do this thing! Deliver me! Deliver!"

Then back to the table again, once more to pick up the mysterious clay,
again to copy, to stamp on the wax, to fling down, mutilate, and destroy.
The pantomime was gone through three times. Bias could make nothing of it.
Since the day his parents--following the barbarous Thracian custom--had sold
him into slavery and he had passed into Democrates's service, the lad had
never seen his master acting thus.

"Clearly the _kyrios_ is mad," was his own explanation, and growing
frightened at following the strange movements of his lord, he crept from
his retreat and tried to banish uncanny fears at a safe distance, by tying
a thread to the leg of a gold-chafer(5) and watching its vain efforts at
flight. Yet had he continued his eavesdropping he might have found--if not
the key to all Democrates's doings--at least a partial explanation. For the
fourth time the papyrus had been written, for the fourth time the orator
had torn it up. Then his eyes went down to the lump of clay before him on
the table.

"Curses upon the miserable stuff!" he swore almost loudly; "it is this
which has set the evil thoughts to racing. Destroy _that_, and the deed is
beyond my power."

He held up the clay and eyed it as a miser might his gold.

"What a little lump! Not very hard. I can dash it on the floor and it
dissolves in dust. And yet, and yet--all Elysium, all Tartarus, are pent up
for me in just this bit of clay."

He picked at it with his finger and broke a small piece from the edge.

"A little more, the stamp is ruined. I could not use it. Better if it were
ruined. And yet,--and yet,--"

He laid the clay upon the table and sat watching it wistfully.

"O Father Zeus!" he broke out after silence, "if I were not compelled by
fear! Sicinnus is so sharp, Themistocles so unmerciful! It would be a
terrible death to die,--and every man is justified in shunning death."

He looked at the inanimate lump as if he expected it to answer him.

"Ah, I am all alone. No one to counsel me. In every other trouble when has
it been as this? Glaucon? Cimon? Themistocles?--What would they advise?"--he
ended with a laugh more bitter than a sob. "And I must save myself, but at
such a price!"

He pressed his hands over his eyes.

"Curses on the hour I met Lycon! Curses on the Cyprian and his gold! It
would have been better to have told Glaucon and let him save me now and
hate me forever after. But I have sold myself to the Cyprian. The deed
cannot be taken back."

But as he said it, he arose, took the charmed bit of clay, replaced in the
box, and locked the coffer. His hand trembled as he did it.

"I cannot do this thing. I have been foolish, wicked,--but I must not be
driven mad by fear. The Cyprian must quit Athens to-morrow. I can throw
Sicinnus off the scent. I shall never be the worse."

He walked with the box toward the cupboard, but stopped halfway.

"It is a dreadful death to die;"--his thoughts raced and were half
uttered,--"hemlock!--men grow cold limb by limb and keep all their faculties
to the end. And the crows in the Barathrum, and the infamy upon my
father's name! When was a son of the house of Codrus branded 'A Traitor to
Athens'? Is it wickedness to save one's own life?"

Instead of going to the cupboard he approached the window. The sun beat
hotly, but as he leaned forth into the street he shivered as on a winter's
morn. In blank wretchedness he watched the throng beneath the window,
pannier-laden asses, venders of hot sausage with their charcoal stoves and
trays, youths going to and from the gymnasium, slaves returning from
market. How long he stood thus, wretched, helpless, he did not know. At
last he stirred himself.

"I cannot stand gaping like a fool forever. An omen, by every god an omen!
Ah! what am I to do?" He glanced toward the sky in vain hope of a lucky
raven or eagle winging out of the east, but saw only blue and brightness.
Then his eye went down the street, and at the glance the warm blood
tingled from his forehead to his heels.

She was passing,--Hermione, child of Hermippus. She walked before, two
comely maids went after with her stool and parasol; but they were the
peonies beside the rose. She had thrown her blue veil back. The sun played
over the sheen of her hair. As she moved, her floating saffron dress of
the rare muslin of Amorgos now revealed her delicate form, now clothed her
in an enchanting cloud. She held her head high, as if proud of her own
grace and of the beauty and fair name of her husband. She never looked
upward, nor beheld how Democrates's eyes grew like bright coals as he
gazed on her. He saw her clear high forehead, he heard--or thought he heard
despite the jar of the street--the rustle of the muslin robe. Hermione
passed, nor ever knew how, by taking this way from the house of a friend,
she coloured the skein of life for three mortals--for herself, her husband,
and Democrates.

Democrates followed her with his eyes until she vanished around the
fountain at the street corner; then sprang back from the window. The
workings of his face were terrible. It was an instant when men grasp the
godlike or sink to the demon, when they do deeds never to be recalled.

"The omen!" he almost cried, "the omen! Not Zeus but Hermes the Guileful
sent it. He will be with me. She is Glaucon's wife. But if not his, whose
then but mine? I will do the deed to the uttermost. The god is with me."

He flung the casket upon the table and spread its fateful contents again
before him. His hand flew over the papyrus with marvellous speed and
skill. He knew that all his faculties were at his full command and
unwontedly acute.

Bias was surprised at his sport by a sudden clapping of his master's
hands.

"What is it, _kyrie_?"

"Go to Agis. He keeps the gaming-house in the Ceramicus. You know where.
Tell him to come hither instantly. He shall not lack reward. Make your
feet fly. Here is something to speed them."

He flung at the boy a coin. Bias opened eyes and mouth in wonder. It was
not silver, but a golden daric.

"Don't blink at it, sheep, but run. Bring Agis," ordered the master,--and
Bias's legs never went faster than on that afternoon.

Agis came. Democrates knew his man and had no difficulty in finding his
price. They remained talking together till it was dark, yet in so guarded
a tone that Bias, though he listened closely, was unable to make out
anything. When Agis went away, he carried two letters. One of these he
guarded as if holding the crown jewels of the Great King; the second he
despatched by a discreet myrmidon to the rooms of the Cyprian in Alopece.
Its contents were pertinent and ran thus:--

"Democrates to the stranger calling himself a prince of Cyprus,
greeting:--Know that Themistocles is aware of your presence in Athens, and
grows suspicious of your identity. Leave Athens to-morrow or all is lost.
The confusion accompanying the festival will then make escape easy. The
man to whom I entrust this letter will devise with Hiram the means for
your flight by ship from the havens. May our paths never cross
again!--_Chaire._"

After Agis was gone the old trembling came again to Democrates. He had
Bias light all the lamps. The room seemed full of lurking
goblins,--harpies, gorgons, the Hydra, the Minotaur, every other foul and
noxious shape was waiting to spring forth. And, most maddening of all, the
chorus of AEschylus, that Song of the Furies Democrates had heard recited
at the Isthmus, rang in the miserable man's ears:--

    "With scourge and with ban
    We prostrate the man,
    Who with smooth-woven wile,
    And a fair-faced smile
  Hath planted a snare for his friend.
    Though fleet, we shall find him;
    Though strong, we shall bind him,
  Who planted a snare for his friend."

Democrates approached the bust of Hermes standing in one corner. The
brazen face seemed to wear a smile of malignant gladness at the fulfilment
of his will.

"Hermes," prayed the orator, "Hermes Dolios, god of craft and lies,
thieves' god, helper of evil,--be with me now. To Zeus, to Athena the pure,
I dare not pray. Prosper me in the deed to which I set my hand,"--he
hesitated, he dared not bribe the shrewd god with too mean a gift, "and I
vow to set in thy temple at Tanagra three tall tripods of pure gold. So be
with me on the morrow, and I will not forget thy favour."

The brazen face still smiled on; the room was very still. Yet Democrates
took comfort. Hermes was a great god and would help him. When the song of
the Furies grew too loud, Democrates silenced it by summoning back
Hermione's face and asking one triumphant question:--

"She is Glaucon's wife. But if not his, whose then but mine?"




                                CHAPTER XI


                              THE PANATHENAEA


Flowers on every head, flowers festooned about each pillar, and flowers
under foot when one crossed the Agora. Beneath the sheltering porticos
lurked bright-faced girls who pelted each passer with violets, narcissus,
and hyacinths. For this was the morn of the final crowning day of the
Panathenaea, greatest, gladdest of Athenian festivals.

Athletic contests had preceded it and stately Pyrrhic dances of men in
full armour. There had been feasting and merry-making despite the
darkening shadow of the Persian. Athens seemed awakened only to rejoice.
To-day was the procession to the Acropolis, the bearing of the sacred robe
to Athena, the public sacrifice for all the people. Not even the peril of
Xerxes could hinder a gladsome holiday.

The sun had just risen above Hymettus, the Agora shops were closed, but
the plaza itself and the lesches--the numerous little club houses about
it--overran with gossipers. On the stone bench before one of these buzzed
the select coterie that of wont assembled in Clearchus's booth; only Polus
the juror now and then nodded and snored. He had sat up all night hearing
the priestesses chant their ceaseless litanies on the Acropolis.

"Guilty--I vote guilty," the others heard him muttering, as his head sank
lower.

"Wake up, friend," ordered Clearchus; "you're not condemning any poor
scoundrel now."

"_Ai!_ ah!" Polus rubbed his eyes, "I only thought I was dropping the
black bean--"

"Against whom?" quoth Crito, the fat contractor.

"Whom? Why that aristocrat Glaucon, surely,--to-night--" Polus suddenly
checked himself and began to roll his eyes.

"You've a dreadful grievance against him," remarked Clearchus; "the gods
know why."

"The wise patriot can see many things," observed Polus, complacently,
"only I repeat--wait till to-night--and then--"

"What then?" demanded all the others.

"Then you shall see," announced the juror, with an oratorical flourish of
his dirty himation, "and not you only but all of Athens."

Clearchus grinned.

"Our dear Polus has a vast sense of his own importance. And who has been
making you partner of the state secrets--Themistocles?"

"A man almost his peer, the noble patriot Democrates. Ask Phormio's wife,
Lampaxo; ask--" Once more he broke off to lay a finger on his lips. "This
will be a notable day for Athens!"

"Our good friend surely thinks so!" rejoined the potter, dryly; "but since
he won't trust us with his precious secret, I think it much more
interesting to watch the people crossing the square. The procession must
be gathering outside the Dipylon Gate. Yonder rides Themistocles now to
take command."

The statesman cantered past on a shining white Thessalian. At his heels
were prancing Cimon, Democrates, Glaucon, and many another youth of the
noble houses of Athens. At sight of the son of Conon, Polus had wagged his
head in a manner utterly perplexing to his associates, and they were again
perplexed when they saw Democrates wheel back from the side of his chief
and run up for a hurried word with a man in the crowd they recognized as
Agis.

"Agis is a strange fish to have dealings with a 'steward' of the
procession to-day," wondered Crito.

"You'll be enlightened to-morrow," said Polus, exasperatingly. Then as the
band of horsemen cantered down the broad Dromos street, "Ah, me,--I wish I
could afford to serve in the cavalry. It's far safer than tugging a spear
on foot. But there's one young man out yonder on whose horse I'd not
gladly be sitting."

"_Phui_," complained Clearchus, "you are anxious to eat Glaucon skin and
bones! There goes his wife now, all in white flowers and ribbons, to take
her place in the march with the other young matrons. Zeus! But she is as
handsome as her husband."

"She needn't 'draw up her eyebrows,' "(6) growled the juror, viciously;
"they're marks of disloyalty even in her. Can't you see she wears shoes of
the Theban model, laced open so as to display her bare feet, though
everybody knows Thebes is Medizing? She's no better than Glaucon."

"Hush," ordered Clearchus, rising, "you have spoken folly enough. Those
trumpets tell us we must hasten if we hope to join in the march
ourselves."

                              * * * * * * *

Who can tell the great procession? Not the maker of books,--what words call
down light on the glancing eyes, on the moving lines of colour? Not the
artist,--his pencil may not limn ten thousand human beings, beautiful and
glad, sweeping in bright array across the welcoming city. Nor can the
sculptor's marble shape the marching forms, the rippling draperies, the
warm and buoyant life. The life of Athens was the crown of Greece. The
festival of the Panathenaea was the crown of Athens.

Never had Helios looked down on fairer landscape or city. The doors of the
patrician houses were opened; for a day unguarded, unconstrained, the
daughters, wives, and mothers of the nobility of Athens walked forth in
their queenly beauty. One could see that the sculptor's master works were
but rigid counterparts of lovelier flesh and blood. One could see
veterans, stalwart almost as on the day of the old-time battles, but
crowned with the snow of years. One could see youths, and need no longer
marvel the young Apollo was accounted fair. Flowers, fluttering mantles,
purple, gold, the bravery of armour, rousing music--what was missing? All
conjoined to make a perfect spectacle.

The sun had chased the last vapours from the sky. The little ravines on
distant Hymettus stood forth sharply as though near at hand. The sun grew
hot, but men and women walked with bared heads, and few were the untanned
cheeks and shoulders. Children of the South, and lovers of the Sun-King,
the Athenians sought no shelter, their own bright humour rejoicing in the
light.

On the broad parade ground outside the Dipylon, the towering northwestern
gate, the procession gathered. Themistocles the Handsome, never more
gallant than now upon the white Thessalian, was ordering the array, the
ten young men, "stewards of the Panathenaea," assisting. He sent his last
glance down the long files, his ivory wand signed to the musicians in the
van.

"Play! march!"

Fifty pipers blew, fifty citharas tinkled. The host swept into the city.

Themistocles led. Under the massy double gate caracoled the charger. The
robe of his rider blew out behind him like purple wings. There was the cry
and clang of cymbals and drums. From the gray battlement yellow daisies
rained down like gold. Cantering, halting, advancing, beckoning, the chief
went forward, and behind swept the "knights," the mounted chivalry of
Athens,--three hundred of the noblest youths of Attica, on beasts sleek and
spirited, and in burnished armour, but about every helm a wreath. Behind
the "knights" rode the magistracy, men white-headed and grave, some
riding, some in flower-decked cars. After these the victors in the games
and contests of the preceding day. Next the elders of Athens--men of
blameless life, beautiful in hale and honoured age. Next the _ephebi_,--the
youths close to manhood, whose fair limbs glistened under their sweeping
chitons. Behind them, their sisters, unveiled, the maidens of Athens,
walking in rhythmic beauty, and with them their attendants, daughters of
resident foreigners. Following upon these was the long line of bleating
victims, black bulls with gilded horns and ribbon-decked rams without
blemish. And next--but here the people leaned from parapet, house-roof,
portico, and shouted louder than ever:

"The car and the robe of Athena! Hail, _Io, paean!_ hail!"

Up the street on a car shaped like a galley moved the peplus, the great
robe of the sovran goddess. From afar one could see the wide folds spread
on a shipyard and rippling in the breeze. But what a sail! One year long
had the noblest women of Attica wrought on it, and all the love and art
that might breathe through a needle did not fail. It was a sheen of
glowing colour. The strife of Athena with the brutish giants, her contest
with Arachne, the deeds of the heroes of Athens--Erechtheus, Theseus,
Codrus: these were some of the pictures. The car moved noiselessly on
wheels turned by concealed mechanism. Under the shadow of the sail walked
the fairest of its makers, eight women, maids and young matrons, clothed
in white mantles and wreaths, going with stately tread, unmoved by the
shouting as though themselves divine. Seven walked together. But one,
their leader, went before,--Hermione, child of Hermippus.

Many an onlooker remembered this sight of her, the deep spiritual eyes,
the symmetry of form and fold, the perfect carriage. Fair wishes flew out
to her like doves.

"May she be blessed forever! May King Helios forever bring her joy!"

Some cried thus. More thought thus. All seemed more glad for beholding
her.

Behind the peplus in less careful array went thousands of citizens of
every age and station, all in festival dress, all crowned with flowers.
They followed the car up the Dromos Street, across the cheering Agora, and
around the southern side of the Acropolis, making a full circuit of the
citadel. Those who watched saw Glaucon with Democrates and Cimon give
their horses to slaves, and mount the bare knoll of Areopagus, looking
down upon the western face of the Acropolis. As the procession swung about
to mount the steep, Hermione lifted her glance to Areopagus, saw her
husband gazing down on her, raised her hands in delighted gesture, and he
answered her. It was done in the sight of thousands, and the thousands
smiled with the twain.

"Justice! The beautiful salutes the beautiful." And who thought the less
of Hermione for betraying the woman beneath the mien of the goddess?

But now the march drew to an end. The procession halted, reformed,
commenced the rugged way upward. Suddenly from the bastion of the
Acropolis above wafted new music. Low, melancholy at first, as the pipers
and harpers played in the dreamy Lydian mode, till, strengthening into the
bolder AEolic, the strains floated down, inviting, "Come up hither," then
stronger still it pealed in the imperious crash of the Doric as the
procession mounted steadily. Now could be seen great Lamprus, Orpheus's
peer, the master musician, standing on the balcony above the gate, beating
time for the loud choral.

A chorus amongst the marchers and a second chorus in the citadel joined
together, till the red crags shook,--singing the old hymn of the Homeridae
to Athena, homely, rude, yet dear with the memory of ages:--

  "Pallas Athena, gray-eyed queen of wisdom,
          Thy praise I sing!
  Steadfast, all holy, sure ward of our city,
    Triton-born rule whom High Zeus doth bring
  Forth from his forehead.
  Thou springest forth valiant;
    The clangour swells far as thy direful arms ring.

  "All the Immortals in awed hush are bending,
  Beautiful, terrible, thy light thou'rt sending
    Flashed from thine eyes and thy pitiless spear.
  Under thy presence Olympus is groaning,
  Earth heaves in terrors, the blue deeps are moaning;
    'Wisdom, the All-Seeing Goddess is here!'

  "Now the sea motionless freezes before thee;
  Helios, th' Sun-Lord, draws rein to adore thee;
    Whilst thou, O Queen, puttest on divine might.
  Zeus, the deep-councillor, gladly greets thee!
  Hail, Holy Virgin--our loud paean meets thee,
    PALLAS, CHASTE WISDOM, DISPELLER OF NIGHT!"

Up the face of the Rock, up the long, statue-lined way, till through the
gate the vision burst,--the innumerable fanes and altars, the assembly of
singers and priests, the great temple in its pride of glittering marble.
Clearer, stronger sounded the choral, shot up through the limpid azure;
swaying, burning, throbbing, sobs and shouting, tears and transports, so
mounted new strains of the mighty chorus, lit through with the flames of
Homeric verse. Then stronger yet was the mingling of voices, earth, sky,
deep, beasts' cry and gods' cry, all voiced, as chorus answered to chorus.
Now the peplus was wafted on a wave of song toward the temple's
dawn-facing portal, when from beneath the columns, as the tall valves
turned and the sun leaped into the cella, hidden voices returned the
former strains--mournful at first. Out of the adytum echoed a cry of
anguish, the lament of the Mother of Wisdom at her children's deathly
ignorance, which plucks them down from the Mount of the Beautiful Vision.
But as the thousands neared, as its paeans became a prayer, as yearning
answered to yearning, lo! the hidden song swelled and soared,--for the
goddess looked for her own, and her own were come to her. And thus in
beneath the massy pediment, in through the wide-flung doors, floated the
peplus, while under its guardian shadow walked Hermione.

So they brought the robe to Athena.

                              * * * * * * *

Glaucon and his companions had watched the procession ascend, then
followed to see the sacrifice upon the giant altar. The King Archon cut
the throat of the first ox and made public prayer for the people. Wood
soaked in perfumed oil blazed upon the huge stone platform of the
sacrifice. Girls flung frankincense upon the roaring flames. The music
crashed louder. All Athens seemed mounting the citadel. The chief
priestess came from the holy house, and in a brief hush proclaimed that
the goddess had received the robe with all favour. After her came the
makers of the peplus, and Hermione rejoined her husband.

"Let us not stay to the public feast," was her wish; "let these hucksters
and charcoal-burners who live on beans and porridge scramble for a bit of
burned meat, but we return to Colonus."

"Good then," answered Glaucon, "and these friends of course go with us."

Cimon assented readily. Democrates hesitated, and while hesitating was
seized by the cloak by none other than Agis, who gave a hasty whisper and
vanished in the swirling multitude before Democrates could do more than
nod.

"He's an uncanny fox," remarked Cimon, mystified; "I suppose you know his
reputation?"

"The servant of Athens must sometimes himself employ strange servants,"
evaded the orator.

"Yet you might suffer your friends to understand--"

"Dear son of Miltiades," Democrates's voice shook in the slightest, "the
meaning of my dealings with Agis I pray Athena you may never have cause to
know."

"Which means you will not tell us. Then by Zeus I swear the secret no
doubt is not worth the knowing." Cimon stopped suddenly, as he saw a look
of horror on Hermione's face. "Ah, lady! what's the matter?"

"Glaucon," she groaned, "frightful omen! I am terrified!"

Glaucon's hands dropped at her cry. He himself paled slightly. In one of
his moods of abstraction he had taken the small knife from his belt and
begun to pare his nails,--to do which after a sacrifice was reputed an
infallible means of provoking heaven's anger. The friends were grave and
silent. The athlete gave a forced laugh.

"The goddess will be merciful to-day. To-morrow I will propitiate her with
a goat."

"Now, now, not to-morrow," urged Hermione, with white lips, but her
husband refused.

"The goddess is surfeited with sacrifices this morning. She would forget
mine."

Then he led the rest, elbowing the way through the increasing swarms of
young and old, and down into the half-deserted city. Democrates left them
in the Agora, professing great stress of duties.

"Strange man," observed Cimon, as he walked away; "what has he this past
month upon his mind? That Persian spy, I warrant. But the morning wanes.
It's a long way to Colonus. 'Let us drink, for the sun is in the zenith.'
So says Alcaeus--and I love the poet, for he like myself is always thirsty."

The three went on to the knoll of Colonus where Glaucon dwelt. Cimon was
overrunning with puns and jests, but the others not very merry. The omen
of Glaucon's thoughtlessness, or something else, made husband and wife
silent, yet it was a day when man or maid should have felt their spirits
rise. The sky had never been brighter, not in Athens. Never had the
mountains and sea spread more gloriously. From the warm olive-groves
sounded the blithesome note of the Attic grasshopper. The wind sweeping
over the dark cypresses by the house set their dark leaves to talking. The
afternoon passed in pleasure, friends going and coming; there was
laughter, music, and good stories. Hermione at least recovered part of her
brightness, but her husband, contrary to all custom, remained taciturn,
even melancholy. At last as the gentle tints of evening began to cover
hill and plain and the red-tiled roofs of the ample city, all the friends
were gone, saving only Cimon, and he--reckless fellow--was well able to
dispense with companionship, being, in the words of Theognis, "not
absolutely drunk, nor sober quite." Thus husband and wife found themselves
alone together on the marble bench beneath the old cypress.

"Oh, _makaire_! dearest and best," asked Hermione, her hands touching his
face, "is it the omen that makes you grow so sad? For the sun of your life
is so seldom under clouds that when it is clouded at all, it seems as deep
darkness."

He answered by pressing back her hair, "No, not the omen. I am not a slave
to chance like that. Yet to-day,--the wise God knows wherefore,--there comes
a sense of brooding fear. I have been too happy--too blessed with
friendship, triumph, love. It cannot last. Clotho the Spinner will weary
of making my thread of gold and twine in a darker stuff. Everything lovely
must pass. What said Glaucus to Diomedes? 'Even as the race of leaves, so
likewise are those of men; the leaves that now are, the wind scattereth,
and the forest buddeth forth more again; thus also with the race of men,
one putteth forth, another ceaseth.' So even my joy must pass--"

"Glaucon,--take back the words. You frighten me."

He felt her in his arms trembling, and cursed himself for what he had
uttered.

"A blight upon my tongue! I have frightened you, and without cause. Surely
the day is bright enough, surely Athena having been thus far good we can
trust her goodness still. Who knows but that it be many a year before our
sun comes to his setting!"

He kissed her many times. She grew comforted, but they had not been
together long when they were surprised by the approach of Themistocles and
Hermippus. Hermione ran to her father.

"Themistocles and I were summoned hither," explained Hermippus, "by a
message from Democrates bidding us come to Colonus at once, on an urgent
matter touching the public weal."

"He is not here. I cannot understand," marvelled Glaucon; but while he
spoke, he was interrupted by the clatter of hoofs from a party of horsemen
spurring furiously and heading from the pass of Daphni.




                               CHAPTER XII


                           A TRAITOR TO HELLAS


Before the house six riders were reining,--five Scythian "bowmen" of the
constabulary of Athens, tow-headed Barbarians, grinning but mute; the
sixth was Democrates. He dismounted with a bound, and as he did so the
friends saw that his face was red as with pent-up excitement. Themistocles
advanced hastily.

"What's this? Your hands seem a-quiver. Whom has that constable tied up
behind him?"

"Seuthes!" cried Glaucon, bounding back, "Seuthes, by every god, and
pinioned like a felon."

"Ay!" groaned the prisoner, lashed to a horse, "what have I done to be
seized and tried like a bandit? Why should I be set upon by these
gentlemen while I was enjoying a quiet pot of wine in the tavern at
Daphni, and be haled away as if to crucifixion? _Mu! Mu!_ make them untie
me, dear Master Glaucon."

"Put down your prisoner," ordered Democrates, "and all you constables stay
without the house. I ask Themistocles, Hermippus, and Glaucon to come to
an inner room. I must examine this man. The matter is serious."

"Serious?" echoed the bewildered athlete, "I can vouch for Seuthes--an
excellent Corinthian, come to Athens to sell some bales of wool--"

"Answer, Glaucon," Democrates's voice was stern. "Has he no letters from
you for Argos?"

"Certainly."

"You admit it?"

"By the dog of Egypt, do you doubt my word?"

"Friends," called Democrates, dramatically, "mark you that Glaucon admits
he has employed this Seuthes as his courier."

"Whither leads this mummery?" cried the athlete, growing at last angry.

"If to nothing, I, Democrates, rejoice the most. Now I must bid you to
follow me."

Seizing the snivelling Seuthes, the orator led into the house and to a
private chamber. The rest followed, in blank wonderment. Cimon had
recovered enough to follow--none too steadily. But when Hermione
approached, Democrates motioned her back.

"Do not come. A painful scene may be impending."

"What my husband can hear, that can I," was her retort. "Ah! but why do
you look thus dreadfully on Glaucon?"

"I have warned you, lady. Do not blame me if you hear the worst," rejoined
Democrates, barring the door. A single swinging lamp shed a fitful light
on the scene--the whimpering prisoner, the others all amazed, the orator's
face, tense and white. Democrates's voice seemed metallic as he
continued:--

"Now, Seuthes, we must search you. Produce first the letter from Glaucon."

The fat florid little Corinthian was dressed as a traveller, a gray
chalmys to his hips, a brimmed brown hat, and high black boots. His hands
were now untied. He tugged from his belt a bit of papyrus which Democrates
handed to Themistocles, enjoining "Open."

Glaucon flushed.

"Are you mad, Democrates, to violate my private correspondence thus?"

"The weal of Athens outweighs even the pleasure of Glaucon," returned the
orator, harshly, "and you, Themistocles, note that Glaucon does not deny
that the seal here is his own."

"I do not deny," cried the angry athlete. "Open, Themistocles, and let
this stupid comedy end."

"And may it never change to tragedy!" proclaimed Democrates. "What do you
read, Themistocles?"

"A courteous letter of thanks to Ageladas." The senior statesman was
frowning. "Glaucon is right. Either you are turned mad, or are victim of
some prank,--is it yours, Cimon?"

"I am as innocent as a babe. I'd swear it by the Styx," responded that
young man, scratching his muddled head.

"I fear we are not at the end of the examination," observed Democrates,
with ominous slowness. "Now, Seuthes, recollect your plight. Have you no
other letter about you?"

"None!" groaned the unheroic Corinthian. "Ah! pity, kind sirs; what have I
done? Suffer me to go."

"It is possible," remarked his prosecutor, "you are an innocent victim, or
at least do not realize the intent of what you bear. I must examine the
lining of your chalmys. Nothing. Your girdle. Nothing. Your hat, remove
it. Quite empty. Blessed be Athena if my fears prove groundless. But my
first duty is to Athens and Hellas. Ah! Your high boots. Remove the right
one." The orator felt within, and shook the boot violently. "Nothing
again. The left one, empty it seems. _Ei!_ what is this?"

In a tense silence he shook from the boot a papyrus, rolled and sealed. It
fell on the floor at the feet of Themistocles, who, watching all his
lieutenant did, bent and seized it instantly; then it dropped from his
hands as a live coal.

"The seal! The seal! May Zeus smite me blind if I see aright!"

Hermippus, who had been following all the scene in silence, bent, lifted
the fateful paper, and he too gave a cry of grief.

"It is the seal of Glaucon. How came it here?"

"Glaucon,"--hard as Democrates's voice had been that night, it rang like
cold iron now,--"as the friend of your boyhood, and one who would still do
for you all he may, I urge you as you love me to look upon this seal."

"I am looking," but as he spoke paleness followed the angry flush on the
athlete's forehead. He needed no omen to tell him something fearful was
about to ensue.

"The seal is yours?"

"The very same, two dancing maenads and over them a winged Eros. But how
came this letter here? I did not--"

"As you love life or death, as you preserve any regard for our friendship,
I adjure you,--not to brave it longer, but to confess--"

"Confess what? My head is reeling."

"The treason in which you have dipped your hands, your dealings with the
Persian spy, your secret interviews, and last of all this letter,--I fear a
gross betrayal of all trust,--to some agent of Xerxes. I shudder when I
think of what may be its contents."

"And--this--from--you! Oh,--Democrates,--"

The accused man's hands snatched at the air. He sank upon a chest.

"He does not deny it," threw out the orator, but Glaucon's voice rang
shrilly:--

"Ever! Ever will I deny! Though the Twelve Gods all cried out 'guilty!'
The charge is monstrous."

"It is time, Democrates," said Themistocles, who had preserved a grim
silence, "that you showed us clearly whither your path is leading. This is
a fearful accusation you launch against your best-loved friend."

"Themistocles is right," assented the orator, moving away from the
luckless Seuthes as from a pawn no longer important in the game of life
and death. "The whole of the wretched story I fear I must tell on the Bema
to all Athens. I must be brief, but believe me, I can make good all I say.
Since my return from the Isthmia, I have been observed to be sad.
Rightly--for knowing Glaucon as I did, I grew suspicious, and I loved him.
You have thought me not diligent in hunting down the Persian spy. You were
wrong. But how could I ruin my friend without full proof? I made use of
Agis,--no genteel confederate, to be sure, but honest, patriotic,
indefatigable. I soon had my eyes on the suspected Babylonish
carpet-seller. I observed Glaucon's movements closely, they gave just
ground for suspicion. The Babylonian, I came to feel, was none other than
an agent of Xerxes himself. I discovered that Glaucon had been making this
emissary nocturnal visits."

"A lie!" groaned the accused, in agony.

"I would to Athena I believed you," was the unflinching answer; "I have
direct evidence from eye-witnesses that you went to him. In a moment I can
produce it. Yet still I hesitated. Who would blast a friend without
damning proof? Then yesterday with your own lips you told me you sent a
messenger to disloyal Argos. I suspected two messages, not one, were
entrusted to Seuthes, and that you proclaimed the more innocent matter
thus boldly simply to blind my eyes. Before Seuthes started forth this
morning Agis informed me he had met him in a wine-shop--"

"True," whimpered the unhappy prisoner.

"And this fellow as much as admitted he carried a second and secret
message--"

"Liar!" roared Seuthes.

"Men hint strange things in wine-shops," observed Democrates,
sarcastically. "Enough that a second papyrus with Glaucon's seal has been
found hidden upon you."

"Open it then, and know the worst," interjected Themistocles, his face
like a thunder-cloud; but Democrates forbade him.

"A moment. Let me complete my story. This afternoon I received warning
that the Babylonish carpet-vender had taken sudden flight, presumably
toward Thebes. I have sent mounted constables after him. I trust they can
seize him at the pass of Phyle. In the meantime, I may assure you I have
irrefutable evidence--needless to present here--that the man was a Persian
agent, and to more purpose hear this affidavit, sworn to by very worthy
patriots.

"Polus, son of Phodrus of the Commune of Diomea, and Lampaxo his sister
take oath by Zeus, Dike, and Athena, thus: We swear we saw and recognized
Glaucon, son of Conon, twice visiting by night in the past month of
Scirophorion a certain Babylonish carpet-seller, name unknown, who had
lodgings above Demas's shield factory in Alopece."

"Details lack," spoke Themistocles, keenly.

"To be supplied in full measure at the trial," rejoined the orator. "And
now to the second letter itself."

"Ay, the letter, whatever the foul Cyclops that wrought it!" groaned
Glaucon through his teeth.

Themistocles took the document from Hermippus's trembling hands. His own
trembled whilst he broke the seal.

"The handwriting of Glaucon. There is no doubt," was his despairing
comment. His frown darkened. Then he attempted to read.

"Glaucon of Athens to Cleophas of Argos wishes health:--

"Cleophas leads the Medizers of Argos, the greatest friend of Xerxes in
Greece. O Zeus, what is this next--

"Our dear friend, whom I dare not name, to-day departs for Thebes, and in
a month will be safe in Sardis. His visit to Athens has been most
fruitful. Since you at present have better opportunity than we for
forwarding packets to Susa, do not fail to despatch this at once. A happy
chance led Themistocles to explain to me his secret memorandum for the
arraying of the Greek fleet. You can apprize its worth, for the only
others to whom it is entrusted are Democrates and later Leonidas--"

Themistocles flung the papyrus down. His voice was broken. Tears stood in
his eyes.

"O Glaucon, Glaucon,--whom I have trusted? Was ever trust so betrayed! May
Apollo smite me blind, if so I could forget what I read here! It is all
written--the secret ordering of the fleet--"

For a terrible moment there was silence in the little room, a silence
broken by a wild, shrill cry,--Hermione's, as she cast her arms about her
husband.

"A lie! A snare! A wicked plot! Some jealous god has devised this guile,
seeing we were too happy!"

She shook with sobs, and Glaucon, roused to manhood by her grief, uprose
and faced the stern face of Democrates, the blenching faces of the rest.

"I am the victim of a conspiracy of all the fiends in Tartarus,"--he strove
hard to speak steadily; "I did not write that second letter. It is a
forgery."

"But who, then," groaned Themistocles, hopelessly, "_can_ claim this
handiwork? Democrates or I?--for no other has seen the memorandum,--that I
swear. It has not yet gone to Leonidas. It has been guarded as the apple
of my eye. We three alone knew thereof. And it is in this narrow room the
betrayer of Hellas must stand."

"I cannot explain." Glaucon staggered back to his seat. His wife's head
sank upon his lap. The two sat in misery.

"Confess, by the remnants of our friendship I implore, confess," ordered
Democrates, "and then Themistocles and I will strive to lighten if
possible your inevitable doom."

The accused man sat dumb, but Hermione struck back as some wild creature
driven to bay. She lifted her head.

"Has Glaucon here no friend but me, his wife?" She sent beseeching eyes
about the room. "Do you all cry 'guilty, guilty'? Then is your friendship
false, for when is friendship proved, save in the hour of need?"

The appeal brought an answer from her father, who had been standing
silent; and in infinite distress kindly, cautious, charitable Hermippus
began:--

"Dear Glaucon, Hermione is wrong; we were never more your friends. We are
willing to believe the best and not the worst. Therefore tell all frankly.
You have been a victim of great temptation. The Isthmian victory has
turned your head. The Persian was subtle, plausible. He promised I know
not what. You did not realize all you were doing. You had confederates
here in Athens who are more guilty. We can make allowances. Tell only the
truth, and the purse and influence of Hermippus of Eleusis shall never be
held back to save his son-in-law."

"Nor mine, nor mine," cried Themistocles, snatching at every straw; "only
confess, the temptation was great, others were more guilty, everything
then may be done--"

Glaucon drew himself together and looked up almost proudly. Slowly he was
recovering strength and wit.

"I have nothing to confess," he spoke, "nothing. I know nothing of this
Persian spy. Can I swear the god's own oath--by Earth, by Sky, by the
Styx--"

Themistocles shook his head wearily.

"How can we say you are innocent? You never visited the Babylonian?"

"Never. Never!"

"Polus and Lampaxo swear otherwise. The letter?"

"A forgery."

"Impossible. Is the forger Democrates or I?"

"Some god has done this thing in malice, jealous of my great joy."

"I fear Hermes no longer strides so frequently about Athens. The hand and
seal are yours,--and still you do not confess?"

"If I must die," Glaucon was terribly pale, but his voice was steady, "it
is not as a perjurer!"

Themistocles turned his back with a groan.

"I can do nothing for you. This is the saddest hour in my life." He was
silent, but Democrates sprang to the athlete's side.

"Have I not prayed each god to spare me this task?" he spoke. "Can I
forget our friendship? Do not brave it to the end. Pity at least your
friends, your wife--"

He threw back his cloak, pointing to a sword.

"_Ai_," cried the accused, shrinking. "What would you have me do?"

"Save the public disgrace, the hooting jury, the hemlock, the corpse flung
into the Barathrum. Strike this into your breast and end the shame."

No further. Glaucon smote him so that he reeled. The athlete's tone was
terrible.

"Villain! You shall not tempt me." Then he turned to the rest, and stood
in his white agony, yet beautiful as ever, holding out his arms.

"O friends, do you all believe the worst? Do you, Themistocles, turn
silently against me?" No answer. "And you, Hermippus?" No answer again.
"And you, Cimon, who praised me as the fairest friend in all the world?"
The son of Miltiades simply tore his hair. Then the athlete turned to
Democrates.

"And you I deemed more than comrade, for we were boys at school together,
were flogged with the same rod, and drank from the same cup, had like
friends, foes, loves, hates; and have lived since as more than
brothers,--do you too turn utterly away?"

"I would it were otherwise," came the sullen answer. Again Democrates
pointed to the sword, but Glaucon stood up proudly.

"No. I am neither traitor, nor perjurer, nor coward. If I must perish, it
shall be as becomes an Alcmaeonid. If you have resolved to undo me, I know
your power over Athenian juries. I must die. But I shall die with
unspotted heart, calling the curse of the innocent upon the god or man who
plotted to destroy me."

"We have enough of this direful comedy," declared Democrates, pale
himself. "Only one thing is left. Call in the Scythians with their gyves,
and hale the traitor to prison."

He approached the door; the others stood as icy statues, but not Hermione.
She had her back against the door before the orator could open.

"Hold," she commanded, "for you are doing murder!"

Democrates halted at the menacing light in her eyes. All the fear had gone
out of them. Athena Promachos, "Mistress of Battles," must have stood in
that awful beauty when aroused. Did the goddess teach her in that dread
moment of her power over the will of the orator? Glaucon was still
standing motionless, helpless, his last appeal having ended in mute
resignation to inevitable fate. She motioned to him desperately.

"Glaucon! Glaucon!" she adjured, "do not throw your life away. They shall
not murder you. Up! Rouse yourself! There is yet time. Fly, or all is
lost."

"Fly!" spoke the athlete, almost vacantly. "No, I will brave them to the
end."

"For my sake, fly," she ordered, and conjured by that potent talisman,
Glaucon moved toward her.

"How? Whither?"

"To the ends of the earth, Scythia, Atlantis, India, and remain till all
Athens knows you are innocent."

As men move who know not what they do, he approached the door. Held by the
magic of her eyes the others stood rigid. They saw Hermione raise the
latch. Her husband's face met hers in one kiss. The door opened, closed.
Glaucon was gone, and as the latch clicked Democrates shook off the charm
and leaped forward.

"After the traitor! Not too late!--"

For an instant he wrestled with Hermione hand to hand, but she was strong
through fear and love. He could not master her. Then a heavy grasp fell on
his shoulder--Cimon's.

"You are beside yourself, Democrates. My memory is longer than yours. To
me Glaucon is still a friend. I'll not see him dragged to death before my
eyes. When we follow even a fox or a wolf, we give fair start and fair
play. You shall not pursue him yet."

"Blessing on you!" cried the wife, falling on her knees and seizing
Cimon's cloak. "Oh, make Themistocles and my father merciful!"

Hermippus--tender-hearted man--was in tears. Themistocles was pacing the
little chamber, his hand tugging his beard, clearly in grievous doubt.

"The Scythians! The constables!" Democrates clamoured frantically; "every
instant gives the traitor better start."

But Cimon held him fast, and Themistocles was not to be interrupted. Only
after a long time he spoke, and then with authority which brooked no
contradiction.

"There is no hole in the net of Democrates's evidence that Glaucon is
guilty of foul disloyalty, disloyalty worthy of shameful death. Were he
any other there would be only one way with him and that a short one. But
Glaucon I know, if I know any man. The charges even if proved are nigh
incredible. For of all the thousands in Hellas his soul seemed the purest,
noblest, most ingenuous. Therefore I will not hasten on his death. I will
give the gods a chance to save him. Let Democrates arraign me for
'misprision of treason' if he will, and of failing in duty to Athens.
There shall be no pursuit of Glaucon until morning. Then let the Eleven(7)
issue their hue and cry. If they take him, let the law deal with him. Till
then give respite."

Democrates attempted remonstrance. Themistocles bade him be silent
sharply, and the other bowed his head in cowed acquiescence. Hermione
staggered from the door, her father unbarred, and the whole wretched
company went forth. In the passage hung a burnished steel mirror; Hermione
gave a cry as she passed it. The light borne by Hermippus showed her in
her festival dress, the rippling white drapery, the crown of white
violets.

"My father!" she cried, falling into his arms, "is it still the day of the
Panathenaea, when I marched in the great procession, when all Athens called
me happy? It was a thousand years ago! I can never be glad again--"

He lifted her tenderly as she fainted. Old Cleopis, the Spartan nurse who
had kissed her almost before her mother, ran to her. They carried her to
bed, and Athena in mercy hid her from consciousness that night and all the
following day.




                               CHAPTER XIII


                        THE DISLOYALTY OF PHORMIO


On the evening of the Panathenaea, Bias, servant of Democrates, had supped
with Phormio,--for in democratic Athens a humble citizen would not disdain
to entertain even a slave. The Thracian had a merry wit and a
story-teller's gift that more than paid for the supper of barley-porridge
and salt mackerel, and after the viands had disappeared was ready even to
tell tales against his master.

"I've turned my brain inside out, and shaken it like a meal sack. No
wisdom comes. The _kyrios_ has something on his mind. He prays to Hermes
Dolios as often as if he were a cut-purse. Then yesterday he sent me for
Agis--"

"Agis?" Phormio pricked up his ears. "The gambling-house keeper? What does
Democrates with _him_?"

"Answer yourself. My master has been to Agis's pretty place before to see
his cocks. However, this is different. To-day I met Theon."

"Who's he?"

"Agis's slave, the merriest scoundrel in Athens. Agis, he says, has been
prancing like an ass stuffed with barley. He gave Theon a letter from
Democrates to take to your Babylonian opposite; Theon must hunt up
Seuthes, a Corinthian, and worm out of him when and how he was leaving
Athens. Agis promised Theon a gold stater if all was right."

Phormio whistled. "You mean the carpet-dealer here? By Athena's owls,
there is no light in his window to-night!"

"None, indeed," crackled Lampaxo; "didn't I see that cursed Babylonian
with his servants gliding out just as Bias entered? Zeus knows whither! I
hope ere dawn Democrates has them by the heels."

"Democrates does something to-night," asserted Bias, extending his cup for
wine. "At noon Agis flew up to him, chattered something in his ear,
whereupon Democrates bade me be off and not approach him till to-morrow,
otherwise a cane gets broken on my shoulders."

"It's not painful to have a holiday," laughed Phormio.

"It's most painful to be curious yet unsatisfied."

"But why did not you take the letter to the Babylonian?" observed Phormio,
shrewdly.

"I'm perplexed, indeed. Only one thing is possible."

"And that is--"

"Theon is not known in this street. I am. Perhaps the _kyrios_ didn't care
to have it rumoured he had dealings with that Babylonian."

"Silence, undutiful scoundrel," ordered Lampaxo, from her corner; "what
has so noble a patriot as Democrates to conceal? Ugh! Be off with you!
Phormio, don't dare to fill up the tipsy fox's beaker again. I want to
pull on my nightcap and go to bed."

Bias did not take the hint. Phormio was considering whether it was best to
join combat with his redoubtable spouse, or save his courage for a more
important battle, when a slight noise from the street made all listen.

"Pest light on those bands of young roisterers!" fumed Lampaxo. "They go
around all night, beating on doors and vexing honest folk. Why don't the
constables trot them all to jail?"

"This isn't a drunken band, good wife," remarked Phormio, rising; "some
one is sitting on the stones by the Hermes, near the door, groaning as if
in pain."

"A drunkard? Let him lie then," commanded Lampaxo; "let the coat-thieves
come and filch his chiton."

"He's hardly drunken," observed her husband, peering through the lattice
in the door, "but sick rather. Don't detain me, _philotata_,"--Lampaxo's
skinny hand had tried to restrain. "I'll not let even a dog suffer."

"You'll be ruined by too much charity," bewailed the woman, but Bias
followed the fishmonger into the night. The moon shone down the narrow
street, falling over the stranger who half lay, half squatted by the
Hermes. When the two approached him, he tried to stagger to his feet, then
reeled, and Phormio's strong arms seized him. The man resisted feebly, and
seemed never to hear the fishmonger's friendly questions.

"I am innocent. Do not arrest me. Help me to the temple of Hephaestos,
where there's asylum for fugitives. Ah! Hermione, that I should bring you
this!"

Bias leaped back as the moonlight glanced over the face of the stranger.

"Master Glaucon, half naked and mad! _Ai!_ woe!"

"Glaucon the Alcmaeonid," echoed Phormio, in amazement, and the other still
struggled to escape.

"Do you not hear? I am innocent. I never visited the Persian spy. I never
betrayed the fleet. By what god can I swear it, that you may believe?"

Phormio was a man to recover from surprise quickly, and act swiftly and to
the purpose. He made haste to lead his unfortunate visitor inside and lay
him on his one hard couch. Scarcely was this done, however, when Lampaxo
ran up to Glaucon in mingled rage and exultation.

"Phormio doesn't know what Polus and I told Democrates, or what he told
us! So you thought to escape, you white-skinned traitor? But we've watched
you. We know how you went to the Babylonian. We know your guilt. And now
the good gods have stricken you mad and delivered you to justice." She
waved her bony fists in the prostrate man's face. "Run, Phormio! don't
stand gaping like a magpie. Run, I say--"

"Whither? For a physician?"

"To Areopagus, fool! There's where the constables have their camp. Bring
ten men with fetters. He's strong and desperate. Bias and I will wait and
guard him. If you stir, traitor,--" she was holding a heavy meat-knife at
the fugitive's throat,--"I'll slit your weasand like a chicken."

But for once in his life Phormio defied his tyrant effectively. With one
hand he tore the weapon from her clutch, the other closed her screaming
mouth.

"Are you mad yourself? Will you rouse the neighbourhood? I don't know what
you and Polus tattled about to Democrates. I don't greatly care. As for
going for constables to seize Glaucon the Fortunate--"

"Fortunate!" echoed the miserable youth, rising on one elbow, "say it
never again. The gods have blasted me with one great blow. And you--you are
Phormio, husband and brother-in-law of those who have sworn against
me,--you are the slave of Democrates my destroyer,--and you, woman,--Zeus
soften you!--already clamour for my worthless life, as all Athens does
to-morrow!"

Lampaxo suddenly subsided. Resistance from her spouse was so unexpected
she lost at once arguments and breath. Phormio continued to act promptly;
taking a treasured bottle from a cupboard he filled a mug and pressed it
to the newcomer's lips. The fiery liquor sent the colour back into
Glaucon's face. He raised himself higher--strength and mind in a measure
returned. Bias had whispered to Phormio rapidly. Perhaps he had guessed
more of his master's doings than he had dared to hint before.

"Hark you, Master Glaucon," began Phormio, not unkindly. "You are with
friends, and never heed my wife. She's not so steely hearted as she
seems."

"Seize the traitor," interjected Lampaxo, with a gasp.

"Tell your story. I'm a plain and simple man, who won't believe a
gentleman with your fair looks, fame, and fortune has pawned them all in a
night. Bias has sense. First tell how you came to wander down this way."

Glaucon sat upright, his hands pressing against his forehead.

"How can I tell? I have run to and fro, seeing yet not seeing whither I
went. I know I passed the Acharnican gate, and the watch stared at me.
Doubtless I ran hither because here they said the Babylonian lived, and he
has been ever in my head. I shudder to go over the scene at Colonus. I
wish I were dead. Then I could forget it!"

"Constables--fetters!" howled Lampaxo, as a direful interlude, to be
silenced by an angry gesture from her helpmeet.

"Nevertheless, try to tell what you can," spoke Phormio, mildly, and
Glaucon, with what power he had, complied. Broken, faltering, scarce
coherent often, his story came at last. He sat silent while Phormio
clutched his own head. Then Glaucon darted around wild and hopeless eyes.

"_Ai!_ you believe me guilty. I almost believe so myself. All my best
friends have cast me off. Democrates, my friend from youth, has wrought my
ruin. My wife I shall never see again. I am resolved--" He rose. A
desperate purpose made his feet steady.

"What will you do?" demanded Phormio, perplexed.

"One thing is left. I am sure to be arrested at dawn if not before. I will
go to the 'City-House,' the public prison, and give myself up. The
ignominy will soon end. Then welcome the Styx, Hades, the never ending
night--better than this shame!"

He started forth, but Phormio's hand restrained him. "Not so fast, lad!
Thank Olympus, I'm not Lampaxo. You're too young a turbot for Charon's
fish-net. Let me think a moment."

The fishmonger stood scratching his thin hairs. Another howl from Lampaxo
decided him.

"Are you a traitor, too? Away with the wretch to prison!"

"I'm resolved," cried Phormio, striking his thigh. "Only an honest man
could get such hatred from my wife. If they've not tracked you yet,
they're not likely to find you before morning. My cousin Brasidas is
master of the _Solon_, and owes a good turn--"

Quick strides took him to a chest. He dragged forth a sleeveless sailor's
cloak of hair-cloth. To fling this over Glaucon's rent chiton took an
instant, another instant to clap on the fugitive's head a brimless red
cap.

"_Euge!_--you grow transformed. But that white face of yours is dangerous.
See!" he rubbed over the Alcmaeonid's face two handfuls of black ashes
snatched from the hearth and sprang back with a great laugh, "you're a
sailor unlading charcoal now. Zeus himself would believe it. All is
ready--"

"For prison?" asked Glaucon, clearly understanding little.

"For the sea, my lad. For Athens is no place for you to-morrow, and
Brasidas sails at dawn. Some more wine? It's a long, brisk walk."

"To the havens? You trust me? You doubt the accusation which every friend
save Hermione believes? O pure Athena--and this is possible!" Again
Glaucon's head whirled. It took more of the fiery wine to stay him up.

"Ay, boy," comforted Phormio, very gruff, "you shall walk again around
Athens with a bold, brave face, though not to-morrow, I fear. Polus trusts
his heart and not his head in voting 'guilty,' so I trust it voting
'innocent.' "

"I warn you," Glaucon spoke rapidly, "I've no claim on your friendship. If
your part in this is discovered, you know our juries."

"That I know," laughed Phormio, grimly, "for I know dear Polus. So now my
own cloak and we are off."

But Lampaxo, who had watched everything with accumulating anger, now burst
loose. She bounded to the door.

"Constables! Help! Athens is betrayed!"

She bawled that much through the lattice before her husband and Bias
dragged her back. Fortunately the street was empty.

"That I should see this! My own husband betraying the city! Aiding a
traitor!" Then she began whimpering through her nose. "_Mu! mu!_ leave the
villain to his fate. Think of me if not of your own safety. Woe! when was
a woman more misused?"

But here her lament ended, for Phormio, with the firmness of a man
thoroughly determined, thrust a rag into her mouth and with Bias's help
bound her down upon the couch by means of a convenient fish-cord.

"I am grieved to stop your singing, blessed dear," spoke the fishmonger,
indulging in a rare outburst of sarcasm against his formidable helpmeet,
"but we play a game with Fate to-night a little too even to allow unfair
chances. Bias will watch you until I return, and then I can discover,
_philotata_, whether your love for Athens is so great you must go to the
Archon to denounce your husband."

The Thracian promised to do his part. His affection for Democrates was
clearly not the warmest. Lampaxo's farewell, as Phormio guided his
half-dazed companion into the street, was a futile struggle and a choking.
The ways were empty and silent. Glaucon allowed himself to be led by the
hand and did not speak. He hardly knew how or whither Phormio was taking
him. Their road lay along the southern side of the Acropolis, past the
tall columns of the unfinished Temple of Zeus, which reared to giant
height in the white moonlight. This, as well as the overshadowing Rock
itself, they left behind without incident. Phormio chose devious alleys,
and they met neither Scythian constables nor bands of roisterers. Only
once the two passed a house bright with lamps. Jovial guests celebrated a
late wedding feast. Clearly the two heard the marriage hymn of Sappho.

  "The bridegroom comes tall as Ares,
       Ho, Hymenaeus!
  Taller than a mighty man,
       Ho, Hymenaeus!"

Glaucon stopped like one struck with an arrow.

"They sang that song the night I wedded Hermione. Oh, if I could drink the
Lethe water and forget!"

"Come," commanded Phormio, pulling upon his arm. "The sun will shine again
to-morrow."

Thus the twain went forward, Glaucon saying not a word. He hardly knew how
they passed the Itonian Gate and crossed the long stretch of open country
betwixt the city and its havens. No pursuit as yet--Glaucon was too
perplexed to reason why. At last he knew they entered Phaleron. He heard
the slapping waves, the creaking tackle, the shouting sailors. Torches
gleamed ruddily. A merchantman was loading her cargo of pottery crates and
oil jars,--to sail with the morning breeze. Swarthy shipmen ran up and down
the planks betwixt quay and ship, balancing their heavy jars on their
heads as women bear water-pots. From the tavern by the mooring came
harping and the clatter of cups, while two women--the worse for wine--ran
out to drag the newcomers in to their revel. Phormio slapped the slatterns
aside with his staff. In the same fearful waking dream Glaucon saw Phormio
demanding the shipmaster. He saw Brasidas--a short man with the face of a
hound and arms to hug like a bear--in converse with the fishmonger, saw the
master at first refusing, then gradually giving reluctant assent to some
demand. Next Phormio was half leading, half carrying the fugitive aboard
the ship, guiding him through a labyrinth of bales, jars, and cordage, and
pointing to a hatchway ladder, illumined by a swinging lantern.

"Keep below till the ship sails; don't wipe the charcoal from your face
till clear of Attica. Officers will board the vessel before she puts off;
yet have no alarm, they'll only come to see she doesn't violate the law
against exporting grain." Phormio delivered his admonitions rapidly, at
the same time fumbling in his belt. "Here--here are ten drachmae, all I've
about me, but something for bread and figs till you make new friends,--in
which there'll be no trouble, I warrant. Have a brave heart. Remember that
Helios can shine lustily even if you are not in Athens, and pray the gods
to give a fair return."

Glaucon felt the money pressed within his palm. He saw Phormio turning
away. He caught the fishmonger's hard hand and kissed it twice.

"I can never reward you. Not though I live ten thousand years and have all
the gold of Gyges."

"_Phui!_" answered Phormio, with a shrug; "don't detain me, it's time I
was home and was unlashing my loving wife."

And with that he was gone. Glaucon descended the ladder. The cabin was
low, dark, unfurnished save with rude pallets of straw, but Glaucon heeded
none of these things. Deeper than the accusation by Democrates, than the
belief therein by Themistocles and the others, the friendship of the
fishmonger touched him. A man base-born, ignorant, uncivil, had believed
him, had risked his own life to save him, had given him money out of his
poverty, had spoken words of fair counsel and cheer. On the deck above the
sailors were tumbling the cargo, and singing at their toil, but Glaucon
never heard them. Flinging himself on a straw pallet, for the first time
came the comfort of hot tears.

                              * * * * * * *

Very early the _Solon's_ square mainsail caught the breeze from the warm
southwest. The hill of Munychia and the ports receded. The panorama of
Athens--plain, city, citadel, gray Hymettus, white Pentelicus--spread in a
vista of surpassing beauty--so at least to the eyes of the outlaw when he
clambered to the poop. As the ship ran down the low coast, land and sea
seemed clothed with a robe of rainbow-woven light. Far, near,--islands,
mountains, and deep were burning with saffron, violet, and rose, as the
Sun-God's car climbed higher above the burning path it marked across the
sea. Glaucon saw all in clear relief,--the Acropolis temple where he had
prayed, the Pnyx and Areopagus, the green band of the olive groves, even
the knoll of Colonus,--where he had left his all. Never had he loved Athens
more than now. Never had she seemed fairer to his eyes than now. He was a
Greek, and to a Greek death was only by one stage a greater ill than
exile.

"O Athena Polias," he cried, stretching his hands to the fading beauty,
"goddess who determineth all aright,--bless thou this land, though it wakes
to call me traitor. Teach it to know I am innocent. Comfort Hermione, my
wife. And restore me to Athens, after doing deeds which wipe out all my
unearned shame!"

The _Solon_ rounded the cape. The headland concealed the city. The
Saronian bay opened into the deeper blue of the AEgean and its sprinkling
of brown islands. Glaucon looked eastward and strove to forget Attica.

                              * * * * * * *

Two hours later all Athens seemed reading this placard in the Agora:--


                                  NOTICE


    For the arrest of GLAUCON, SON OF CONON, charged with high
    treason, I will pay one talent.


                                     DEXILEUS, Chairman of the Eleven.


Other such placards were posted in Peiraeus, in Eleusis, in Marathon, in
every Attic village. Men could talk of nothing else.




                               CHAPTER XIV


                          MARDONIUS THE PERSIAN


Off Andros the northern gale smote them. The ship had driven helplessly.

Off Tenos only the skill of Brasidas kept the _Solon_ clear of the rocky
shores.

As they raced past holy Delos the frightened passengers had vowed twelve
oxen to Apollo if he saved them.

Near Naxos, Brasidas, after vainly trying to make a friendly haven, bade
his sailors undergird the ship with heavy cables, for the timbers seemed
starting. Finally he suffered his craft to drive,--hoping at least to find
some islet with a sandy shore where he could beach her with safety.

The _Solon_, however, was near her doom. She was built on the Samian
model, broad, flat, high in poop, low in prow,--excellent for cargo, but
none too seaworthy. The foresail blew in tatters. The closely brailed
mainsail shook the weakened mast. The sailors had dropped their quaint
oaths, and began to pray--sure proof of danger. The dozen passengers seemed
almost too panic-stricken to aid in flinging the cargo overboard. Several
were raving.

"Hearken, Poseidon of Calauria," howled a Peiraeus merchant against the
screeching blasts, "save from this peril and I vow thee and thy temple two
mixing bowls of purest gold!"

"A great vow," suggested a calmer comrade. "All your fortune can hardly
pay it."

"Hush," spoke the other, in undertone, "don't let the god overhear me; let
me get safe to Mother Earth and Poseidon has not one obol. His power is
only over the sea."

A creaking from the mainmast told that it might fall at any moment.
Passengers and crew redoubled their shouts to Poseidon and to Zeus of
AEgina. A fat passenger staggered from his cabin, a huge money-bag bound to
his belt,--as if gold were the safest spar to cling to in that boiling
deep. Others, less frantic, gave commissions one to another, in case one
perished and another escaped.

"You alone have no messages, pray no prayers, show no fear!" spoke a
grave, elderly man to Glaucon, as both clutched the swaying bulwark.

"And wherefore?" came the bitter answer; "what is left me to fear? I
desire no life hereafter. There can be no consciousness without sad
memory."

"You are very young to speak thus."

"But not too young to have suffered."

A wave dashed one of the steering rudders out of the grip of the sailor
guiding it. The rush of water swept him overboard. The _Solon_ lurched.
The wind smote the straining mainsail, and the shivered mainmast tore from
its stays and socket. Above the bawling of wind and water sounded the
crash. The ship, with only a small sail upon the poop, blew about into the
trough of the sea. A mountain of green water thundered over the prow,
bearing away men and wreckage. The "governor," Brasidas's mate, flung away
the last steering tiller.

"The _Solon_ is dying, men," he trumpeted through his hands. "To the boat!
Save who can!"

The pinnace set in the waist was cleared away by frantic hands and axes.
Ominous rumblings from the hold told how the undergirding could not keep
back the water. The pinnace was dragged to the ship's lee and launched in
the comparative calm of the _Solon's_ broadside. Pitifully small was the
boat for five and twenty. The sailors, desperate and selfish, leaped in
first, and watched with jealous eyes the struggles of the passengers to
follow. The noisy merchant slipped in the leap, and they heard him scream
once as the wave swallowed him. Brasidas stood in the bow of the pinnace,
clutching a sword to cut the last rope. The boat filled to the gunwales.
The spray dashed into her. The sailors bailed with their caps. Another
passenger leaped across, whereat the men yelled and drew their dirks.

"Three are left. Room for one more. The rest must swim!"

Glaucon stood on the poop. Was life still such a precious thing to some
that they must clutch for it so desperately? He had even a painful
amusement in watching the others. Of himself he thought little save to
hope that under the boiling sea was rest and no return of memory. Then
Brasidas called him.

"Quick! The others are Barbarians and you a Hellene. Your chance--leap!"

He did not stir. The "others"--two strangers in Oriental dress--were
striving to enter the pinnace. The seamen thrust their dirks out to force
them back.

"Full enough!" bawled the "governor." "That fellow on the poop is mad. Cut
the rope, or we are caught in the swirl."

The elder Barbarian lifted his companion as if to fling him into the boat,
but Brasidas's sword cut the one cable. The wave flung the _Solon_ and the
pinnace asunder. With stolid resignation the Orientals retreated to the
poop. The people in the pinnace rowed desperately to keep her out of the
deadly trough of the billows, but Glaucon stood erect on the drifting
wreck and his voice rang through the tumult of the sea.

"Tell them in Athens, and tell Hermione my wife, that Glaucon the
Alcmaeonid went down into the deep declaring his innocence and denouncing
the vengeance of Athena on whosoever foully destroyed him!--"

Brasidas waved his sword in last farewell. Glaucon turned back to the
wreck. The _Solon_ had settled lower. Every wave washed across the waist.
Nothing seemed to meet his gaze save the leaden sky, the leaden green
water, the foam of the bounding storm-crests. He told himself the gods
were good. Drowning was more merciful death than hemlock. Pelagos, the
untainted sea, was a softer grave than the Barathrum. The memory of the
fearful hour at Colonus, the vision of the face of Hermione, of all things
else that he would fain forget--all these would pass. For what came after
he cared nothing.

So for some moments he stood, clinging upon the poop, awaiting the end.
But the end came slowly. The _Solon_ was a stoutly timbered ship. Much of
her lading had been cast overboard, but more remained and gave buoyancy to
the wreckage. And as the Athenian awaited, almost impatiently, the final
disaster, something called his eye away from the heaving sky-line. Human
life was still about him. Wedged in a refuge, betwixt two capstans, the
Orientals were sitting, awaiting doom like himself. But wonder of
wonders,--he had not relaxed his hold on life too much to marvel,--the
younger Barbarian was beyond all doubt a woman. She sat in her companion's
lap, lifting her white face to his, and Glaucon knew she was of wondrous
beauty. They were talking together in some Eastern speech. Their arms were
closely twined. It was plain they were passing the last love messages
before entering the great mystery together. Of Glaucon they took no heed.
And he at first was almost angered that strangers should intrude upon this
last hour of life. But as he looked, as he saw the beauty of the woman,
the sheen of her golden hair, the interchange of love by touch and
word,--there came across his own spirit a most unlooked-for change.
Suddenly the white-capped billows seemed pitiless and chill. The warm joy
of life returned. Again memory surged back, but without its former pang.
He saw again the vision of Athens, of Colonus, of Eleusis-by-the-Sea. He
saw Hermione running through the throng to meet him the day he returned
from the Isthmia. He heard the sweet wind singing over the old olives
beside the cool Cephissus. Must these all pass forever? forever? Were
life, friends, love, the light of the sun, eternally lost, and nothing
left save the endless sleep in the unsunned caves of Oceanus? With one
surge the desire to live, to bear hard things, to conquer them, returned.
He dashed the water from his eyes. What he did next was more by instinct
than by reason. He staggered across the reeling deck, approached the
Barbarians, and seized the man by the arm.

"Would you live and not die? Up, then,--there is still a chance."

The man gazed up blankly.

"We are in Mazda's hands," he answered in foreign accent. "It is
manifestly his will that we should pass now the Chinvat bridge. We are
helpless. Where is the pinnace?"

Glaucon dragged him roughly to his feet.

"I do not know your gods. Do not speak of their will to destroy us till
the destruction falls. Do you love this woman?"

"Save her, let me twice perish."

"Rouse yourself, then. One hope is left!"

"What hope?"

"A raft. We can cast a spar overboard. It will float us. You look
strong,--aid me."

The man rose and, thoroughly aroused, seconded the Athenian intelligently
and promptly. The lurches of the merchantman told how close she was to her
end. One of the seamen's axes lay on the poop. Glaucon seized it. The
foremast was gone and the mainmast, but the small boat-mast still stood,
though its sail had blown to a thousand flapping streamers. Glaucon laid
his axe at the foot of the spar. Two fierce strokes weakened so that the
next lurch sent it crashing overboard. It swung in the maelstrom by its
stays and the halyards of the sail. Tossing to and fro like a bubble, it
was a fearful hope, but a louder rumbling from the hold warned how other
hope had fled. The Barbarian recoiled as he looked on it.

"It can never float through this storm," Glaucon heard him crying between
the blasts, but the Athenian beckoned him onward.

"Leap!" commanded Glaucon; "spring as the mast rises on the next wave."

"I cannot forsake her," called back the man, pointing to the woman, who
lay with flying hair between the capstans, helpless and piteous now that
her lover was no longer near.

"I will provide for her. Leap!"

Glaucon lifted the woman in his arms. He took a manner of pride in showing
the Barbarian his skill. The man looked at him once, saw he could be
trusted, and took the leap. He landed in the water, but caught the
sail-cloth drifting from the mast, climbed beside it, and sat astride. The
Athenian sprang at the next favoring wave. His burden made the task hard,
but his stadium training never stood in better stead. The cold water
closed around him. The wave dragged down in its black abyss, but he struck
boldly upward, was beside the friendly spar, and the Barbarian aided him
to mount beside him, then cut the lashings to the _Solon_ with the dagger
that still dangled at his belt. The billows swept them away just as the
wreck reared wildly, and bow foremost plunged into the deep. They bound
the woman--she was hardly conscious now--into the little shelter formed by
the junction of the broken sail-yard and the mast. The two men sat beside
her, shielding her with their bodies from the beat of the spray. Speech
was all but impossible. They were fain to close their eyes and pray to be
delivered from the unceasing screaming of the wind, the howling of the
waters. And so for hours....

Glaucon never knew how long they thus drifted. The _Solon_ had been
smitten very early in the morning. She had foundered perhaps at noon. It
may have been shortly before sunset--though Helios never pierced the clouds
that storm-racked day--when Glaucon knew that the Barbarian was speaking to
him.

"Look!" The wind had lulled a little; the man could make himself heard.
"What is it?"

Through the masses of gray spray and driving mist Glaucon gazed when the
next long wave tossed them. A glimpse,--but the joys of Olympus seemed
given with that sight; wind-swept, wave-beaten, rock-bound, that half-seen
ridge of brown was land,--and land meant life, the life he had longed to
fling away in the morning, the life he longed to keep that night. He
shouted the discovery to his companion, who bowed his head, manifestly in
prayer.

The wind bore them rapidly. Glaucon, who knew the isles of the AEgean as
became a Hellene, was certain they drove on Astypalaea, an isle subject to
Persia, though one of the outermost Cyclades. The woman was in no state to
realize their crisis. Only a hand laid on her bosom told that her heart
still fluttered. She could not endure the surge and the suffocating spray
much longer. The two men sat in silence, but their eyes went out hungrily
toward the stretch of brown as it lifted above the wave crests. The last
moments of the desperate voyage crept by like the pangs of Tantalus.
Slowly they saw unfolding the fog-clothed mountains, a forest, scattered
bits of white they knew were stuccoed houses; but while their eyes brought
joy, their ears brought sadness. The booming of the surf upon an outlying
ledge grew ever clearer. Almost ere they knew it the drifting mast was
stayed with a shock. They saw two rocks swathed in dripping weed that
crusted with knife-like barnacles, thrust their black heads out of the
boiling water. And beyond--fifty paces away--the breakers raced up the sandy
shore where waited refuge.

The spar wedged fast in the rocks. The waves beat over it pitilessly. He
who stayed by it long had better have sunk with the _Solon_,--his would
have been an easier death. Glaucon laid his mouth to the man's ear.

"Swim through the surf. I will bear the woman safely."

"Save her, and be you blessed forever. I die happy. I cannot swim."

The moment was too terrible for Glaucon to feel amazed at this confession.
To a Hellene swimming was second nature. He thought and spoke quickly.

"Climb on the higher rock. The wave does not cover it entirely. Dig your
toes in the crevices. Cling to the seaweed. I will return for you."

He never heard what the other cried back to him. He tore the woman clear
of her lashings, threw his left arm about her, and fought his way through
the surf. He could swim like a Delian, the best swimmers in Hellas; but
the task was mighty even for the athlete. Twice the deadly undertow almost
dragged him downward. Then the soft sand was oozing round his feet. He
knew a knot of fisher folk were running to the beach, a dozen hands took
his fainting burden from him. One instant he stood with the water rushing
about his ankles, gasped and drew long breaths, then turned his face
toward the sea.

"Are you crazed?" he heard voices clamouring--they seemed a great way
off,--"a miracle that you lived through the surf once! Leave the other to
fate. Phorcys has doomed him already."

But Glaucon was past acting by reason now. His head seemed a ball of fire.
Only his hands and feet responded mechanically to the dim impulse of his
bewildered brain. Once more the battling through the surf, this time
against it and threefold harder. Only the man whose strength had borne the
giant Spartan down could have breasted the billows that came leaping to
destroy him. He felt his powers were strained to the last notch. A little
more and he knew he might roll helpless, but even so he struggled onward.
Once again the two black rocks were springing out of the swollen water. He
saw the Barbarian clinging desperately to the higher. Why was he risking
his life for a man who was not a Hellene, who might be even a servant of
the dreaded Xerxes? A strange moment for such questionings, and no time to
answer! He clung to the seaweed beside the Barbarian for an instant, then
through the gale cried to the other to place his hands upon his shoulders.
The Oriental complied intelligently. For a third time Glaucon struggled
across the raging flood. The passage seemed endless, and every receding
breaker dragging down to the graves of Oceanus. The Athenian knew his
power was failing, and doled it out as a miser, counting his strokes,
taking deep gulps of air between each wave. Then, even while consciousness
and strength seemed passing together, again beneath his feet were the
shifting sands, again the voices encouraging, the hands outstretched,
strange forms running down into the surf, strange faces all around him.
They were bearing him and the Barbarian high upon the beach. They laid him
on the hard, wet sand--never a bed more welcome. He was naked. His feet and
hands bled from the tearing of stones and barnacles. His head was in fever
glow. Dimly he knew the Barbarian was approaching him.

"Hellene, you have saved us. What is your name?"

The other barely raised his head. "In Athens, Glaucon the Alcmaeonid, but
now I am without name, without country."

The Oriental answered by kneeling on the sands and touching his head upon
them close to Glaucon's feet.

"Henceforth, O Deliverer, you shall be neither nameless nor outcast. For
you have saved me and her I love more than self. You have saved
Artazostra, sister of Xerxes, and Mardonius, son of Gobryas, who is not
the least of the Princes of Persia and Eran."

"Mardonius--arch foe of Hellas!" Glaucon spoke the words in horror. Then
reaction from all he had undergone robbed him of sense. They carried him
to the fisher-village. That night he burned with fever and raved wildly.
It was many days before he knew anything again.

                              * * * * * * *

Six days later a Byzantine corn-ship brought from Amorgos to Peiraeus two
survivors of the _Solon_,--the only ones to escape the swamping of the
pinnace. Their story cleared up the mystery of the fate of "Glaucon the
Traitor." "The gods," said every Agora wiseacre, "had rewarded the villain
with their own hands." The Babylonish carpet-seller and Hiram had
vanished, despite all search, but everybody praised Democrates for saving
the state from a fearful peril. As for Hermione, her father took her to
Eleusis that she might be free from the hoots of the people. Themistocles
went about his business very sorrowful. Cimon lost half his gayety.
Democrates, too, appeared terribly worn. "How he loved his friend!" said
every admirer. Beyond doubt for long Democrates was exceeding thoughtful.
Perhaps a reason for this was that about a month after the going of
Glaucon he learned from Sicinnus that Prince Mardonius was at length in
Sardis,--and possibly Democrates knew on what vessel the carpet-seller had
taken flight.





                                 BOOK II


                        THE COMING OF THE PERSIAN




                                CHAPTER XV


                        THE LOTUS-EATING AT SARDIS


When Glaucon awoke to consciousness, it was with a sense of absolute
weakness, at the same moment with a sense of absolute rest. He knew that
he was lying on pillows "softer than sleep," that the air he breathed was
laden with perfume, that the golden light which came through his
half-closed eyelids was deliciously tempered, that his ears caught a
musical murmur, as of a plashing fountain. So he lay for long, too
impotent, too contented to ask where he lay, or whence he had departed.
Athens, Hermione, all the thousand and one things of his old life, flitted
through his brain, but only as vague, far shapes. He was too weak even to
long for them. Still the fountain plashed on, and mingling with the
tinkling he thought he heard low flutes breathing. Perhaps it was only a
phantasy of his flagging brain. Then his eyes opened wider. He lifted his
hand. It was a task even to do that little thing,--he was so weak. He
looked at the hand! Surely his own, yet how white it was, how thin; the
bones were there, the blue veins, but all the strength gone out of them.
Was this the hand that had flung great Lycon down? It would be mere sport
for a child to master him now. He touched his face. It was covered with a
thick beard, as of a long month's growth. The discovery startled him. He
strove to rise on one elbow. Too weak! He sank back upon the cushions and
let his eyes rove inquiringly. Never had he seen tapestries the like of
those that canopied his bed. Scarlet and purple and embroidered in gold
thread with elaborate hunting scenes,--the dogs, the chariots, the slaying
of the deer, the bearing home of the game. He knew the choicest looms of
Sidon must have wrought them. And the linen, so cool, so grateful,
underneath his head--was it not the almost priceless fabric of Borsippa? He
stirred a little, his eyes rested on the floor. It was covered with a rug
worth an Athenian patrician's ransom,--a lustrous, variegated sheen,
showing a new tint at each change of the light. So much he saw from the
bed, and curiosity was wakened. Again he put forth his hand, and touched
the hanging curtains. The movement set a score of little silver bells that
dangled over the canopy to jingling. As at a signal the flutes grew
louder, mingling with them was the clearer note of lyres. Now the strains
swelled sweetly, now faded away into dreamy sighing, as if bidding the
listener to sink again into the arms of sleep. Another vain effort to rise
on his elbow. Again he was helpless. Giving way to the charm of the music,
he closed his eyes.

"Either I am awaking in Elysium, or the gods send to me pleasant dreams
before I die."

He was feebly wondering which was the alternative when a new sound roused
him, the sweep and rustle of the dresses of two women as they approached
the bed. He gazed forth listlessly, when lo! above his couch stood two
strangers,--strangers, but either as fair as Aphrodite arising from the
sea. Both were tall, and full of queenly grace, both were dressed in gauzy
white, but the hair of the one was of such gold that Glaucon hardly saw
the circlet which pressed over it. Her eyes were blue, the lustre of her
face was like a white rose. The other's hair shone like the wing of a
raven. A wreath of red poppies covered it, but over the softly tinted
forehead there peered forth a golden snake with emerald eyes--the Egyptian
uraeus, the crown of a princess from the Nile. Her eyes were as black as
the other's were blue, her lips as red as the dye of Tyre, her hands--But
before Glaucon looked and wondered more, the first, she of the golden
head, laid her hand upon his face,--a warm, comforting hand that seemed to
speed back strength and gladness with the touch. Then she spoke. Her Greek
was very broken, yet he understood her.

"Are you quite awakened, dear Glaucon?"

He looked up marvelling, not knowing how to answer; but the golden goddess
seemed to expect none from him.

"It is now a month since we brought you from Astypalaea. You have wandered
close to the Portals of the Dead. We feared you were beloved by Mazda too
well, that you would never wake that we might bless you. Night and day
have my husband and I prayed to Mithra the Merciful and Hauratat the
Health-Giver in your behalf; each sunrise, at our command, the Magians
have poured out for you the Haoma, the sacred juice dear to the Beautiful
Immortals, and Amenhat, wisest of the physicians of Memphis, has stood by
your bedside without rest. Now at last our prayers and his skill have
conquered; you awake to life and gladness."

Glaucon lay wondering, not knowing how to reply, and only understanding in
half, when the dark-haired goddess spoke, in purer Greek than her
companion.

"And I, O Glaucon of Athens, would have you suffer me to kiss your feet.
For you have given my brother and my sister back to life." Then drawing
near she took his hand in hers, while the two smiling looked down on him.

Then at last he found tongue to speak. "O gracious Queens, for such you
are, forgive my roving wits. You speak of great service done. But wise
Zeus knoweth we are strangers--"

The golden goddess tossed her shining head and smiled,--still stroking with
her hand.

"Dear Glaucon, do you remember the Eastern lad you saved from the Spartans
at the Isthmus? Behold him! Recall the bracelet of turquoise,--my first
gratitude. Then again you saved me with my husband. For I am the woman you
bore through the surf at the island. I am Artazostra, wife of Mardonius,
and this is Roxana, his half-sister, whose mother was a princess in
Egypt."

Glaucon passed his fingers before his face, beckoning back the past.

"It is all far away and strange: the flight, the storm, the wreck, the
tossing spar, the battling through the surges. My head is weak. I cannot
picture it all."

"Do not try. Lie still. Grow strong and glad, and suffer us to teach you,"
commanded Artazostra.

"Where do I lie? We are not upon the rocky islet still?"

The ladies laughed, not mockingly but so sweetly he wished that they would
never cease.

"This is Sardis," spoke Roxana, bending over him; "you lie in the palace
of the satrap."

"And Athens--" he said, wandering.

"Is far away," said Artazostra, "with all its griefs and false friends and
foul remembrances. The friends about you here will never fail. Therefore
lie still and have peace."

"You know my story," cried he, now truly in amaze.

"Mardonius knows all that passes in Athens, in Sparta, in every city of
Hellas. Do not try to tell more. We weary you already. See--Amenhat comes
to bid us begone."

The curtains parted again. A dark man in a pure white robe, his face and
head smooth-shaven, approached the bed. He held out a broad gold cup, the
rim whereof glinted with agate and sardonyx. He had no Greek, but Roxana
took the cup from him and held it to Glaucon's lips.

"Drink," she commanded, and he was fain to obey. The Athenian felt the
heavily spiced liquor laying hold of him. His eyes closed, despite his
wish to gaze longer on the two beautiful women. He felt their hands
caressing his cheeks. The music grew ever softer. He thought he was
sinking into a kind of euthanasy, that his life was drifting out amid
delightful dreams. But not cold Thanatos, but health-bearing Hypnos was
the god who visited him now. When next he woke, it was with a clearer
vision, a sounder mind.

                              * * * * * * *

Sardis the Golden, once capital of the Lydian kings and now of the Persian
satraps, had recovered from the devastation by the Ionians in their
ill-starred revolt seventeen years preceding. The city spread in the
fertile Sardiene, one of the garden plains of Asia Minor. To the south the
cloud-crowned heights of Tmolus ever were visible. To the north flowed the
noble stream of Hebrus, whilst high above the wealthy town, the busy
agora, the giant temple of Lydian Cybele, rose the citadel of Meles, the
palace fortress of the kings and the satraps. A frowning castle it was
without, within not the golden-tiled palaces of Ecbatana and Susa boasted
greater magnificence and luxury than this one-time dwelling of Croesus. The
ceilings of the wide banqueting halls rose on pillars of emerald Egyptian
malachite. The walls were cased with onyx. Winged bulls that might have
graced Nineveh guarded the portals. The lions upbearing the throne in the
hall of audience were of gold. The mirrors in the "House of the Women"
were not steel but silver. The gorgeous carpets were sprinkled with rose
water. An army of dark Syrian eunuchs and yellow-faced Tartar girls ran at
the beck of the palace guests. Only the stealthy entrance of Sickness and
Death told the dwellers here they were not yet gods.

Artaphernes, satrap of Lydia, had his divan, his viziers, and his
audiences,--a court worthy of a king,--but the real lord of Western Asia was
the prince who was nominally his guest. Mardonius had his own retinue and
wing of the palace. On him fell the enormous task of organizing the masses
of troops already pouring into Sardis, and he discharged his duty
unwearyingly. The completion of the bridges of boats across the
Hellespont, the assembling of the fleet, the collecting of provisions,
fell to his province. Daily a courier pricked into Sardis with despatches
from the Great King to his trusted general. Mardonius left the great
levees and public spectacles to Artaphernes, but his hand was everywhere.
His decisions were prompt. He was in constant communication with the
Medizing party in Hellas. He had no time for the long dicing and drinking
bouts the Persians loved, but he never failed to find each day an hour to
spend with Artazostra his wife, with Roxana his half-sister, and with
Glaucon his preserver.

Slowly through the winter health had returned to the Athenian. For days he
had lain dreaming away the hours to the tune of the flutes and the
fountains. When the warm spring came, the eunuchs carried him in a
sedan-chair through the palace garden, whence he could look forth on the
plain, the city, the snow-clad hills, and think he was on Zeus's Olympian
throne, surveying all the earth. Then it was he learned the Persian
speech, and easily, for were not his teachers Artazostra and Roxana? He
found it no difficult tongue, simple and much akin to Greek, and unlike
most of the uncouth tongues the Oriental traders chattered in Sardis. The
two women were constantly with him. Few men were admitted to a Persian
harem, but Mardonius never grudged the Greek the company of these twain.

"Noble Athenian," said the Prince, the first time he visited Glaucon's
bed, "you are my brother. My house is yours. My friends are yours. Command
us all."

                              * * * * * * *

Every day Glaucon was stronger. He tested himself with dumb-bells. Always
he could lift a heavier weight. When the summer was at hand, he could ride
out with Mardonius to the "Paradise," the satrap's hunting park, and be in
at the death of the deer. Yet he was no more the "Fortunate Youth" of
Athens. Only imperfectly he himself knew how complete was the severance
from his old life. The terrible hour at Colonus had made a mark on his
spirit which not all Zeus's power could take away. No doubt all the
one-time friends believed him dead. Had Hermione's confidence in him
remained true? Would she not say "guilty" at last with all the rest?
Mardonius might have answered, he had constant letters from Greece, but
the Prince was dumb when Glaucon strove to ask of things beyond the AEgean.

Day by day the subtle influence of the Orient--the lotus-eating,--"tasting
the honey-sweet fruit which makes men choose to abide forever, forgetful
of the homeward way"--spread its unseen power over the Alcmaeonid. Athens,
the old pain, even the face of Hermione, would rise before him only dimly.
He fought against this enchantment. But it was easier to renew his vow to
return to Athens, after wiping out his shame, than to break these bands
daily tightening.

He heard little Greek, now that he was learning Persian. Even he himself
was changed. His hair and beard grew long, after the Persian manner. He
wore the loose Median cloak, the tall felt cap of a Persian noble. The
elaborate genuflexions of the Asiatics no longer astonished him. He
learned to admire the valiant, magnanimous lords of the Persians. And
Xerxes, the distant king, the wielder of all this power, was he not truly
a god on earth, vicegerent of Lord Zeus himself?

"Forget you are a Hellene. We will talk of the Nile, not of the
Cephissus," Artazostra said, whenever he spoke of home. Then she would
tell of Babylon and Persepolis, and Mardonius of forays beside the wide
Caspian, and Roxana of her girlhood, while Gobryas was satrap of Egypt,
spent beside the magic river, of the Pharaohs, the great pyramid, of Isis
and Osiris and the world beyond the dead. Before the Athenian was opened
the golden East, its glitter, its wonderment, its fascination. He even was
silent when his hosts talked boldly of the coming war, how soon the
Persian power would rule from the Pillars of Heracles to Ind.

Yet once he stood at bay, showing that he was a Hellene still. They were
in the garden. Mardonius had come to them where under the pomegranate tree
the women spread their green tapestry which their nimble needles covered
with a battle scene in scarlet. The Prince told of the capture and
crucifixion of the chiefs of a futile revolt in Armenia. Then Artazostra
clapped her hands to cry.

"Fools! Fools whom Angra-Mainyu the Evil smites blind that he may destroy
them!"

Glaucon, sitting at her feet, looked up quickly. "Valiant fools, lady;
every man must strike for his own country."

Artazostra shook her shining head.

"Mazda gives victory to the king of Eran alone. Resisting Xerxes is not
rebellion against man, it is rebellion against Heaven."

"Are you sure?" asked the Athenian, his eye lighting ominously. "Are yours
the greatest gods?"

But Roxana in turn cast down the tapestry and opened her arms with a
charming gesture.

"Be not angry, Glaucon, for will you not become one with us? I dare to
prophesy like a seer from old Chaldea. Assur of Nineveh, Marduk of
Babylon, Baal of Tyre, Ammon of Memphis--all have bent the knee to Mazda
the Glorious, to Mithra the Fiend-Smiting, and shall the weak _daevas_, the
puny gods of Greece, save their land, when greater than they bow down in
sore defeat?"

Yet Glaucon still looked on her boldly.

"You have your mighty gods, but we have ours. Pray to your Mazda and
Mithra, but we will still trust Zeus of the Thunders and Athena of the
Gray Eyes, the bulwarks of our fathers. And Fate must answer which can
help the best."

The Persians shook their heads. It was time to return to the palace. All
that Glaucon had seen of the Barbarian's might, since awakening in Sardis,
told him Xerxes was indeed destined to go forth conquering and to conquer.
Then the vision of the Acropolis, the temples, the Guardian Goddess,
returned. He banished all disloyal thoughts for the instant. The Prince
walked with his wife, Glaucon with Roxana. He had always thought her
beautiful; she had never seemed so beautiful as now. Did he imagine
whither Mardonius perhaps was leading him?




                               CHAPTER XVI


                    THE COMING OF XERXES THE GOD-KING


At last the lotus-eating ended. Repeated messengers told how Xerxes was
quitting Babylon, was holding a muster in Cappadocia, and now was crossing
Asia Minor toward Sardis. Mardonius and his companions had returned to
that capital. Daily the soldiery poured into Sardis by tens of thousands.
Glaucon knew now it was not a vain boast that for ten years the East had
been arming against Hellas, that the whole power of the twenty satrapies
would be flung as one thunderbolt upon devoted Greece.

In the plain about Sardis a second city was rising, of wicker booths and
gay pavilions. The host grew hourly. Now a band of ebony archers in
leopard skins entered from far Ethiopia, now Bactrian battle-axemen, now
yellow-faced Tartars from the northeast, now bright-turbaned Arabs upon
their swaying camels,--Syrians, Cilicians, black-bearded Assyrians and
Babylonians, thick-lipped Egyptians, came, and many a strange race more.

But the core of the army were the serried files of Aryan horse and
foot,--blond-headed, blue-eyed men, Persians and Medes, veterans of twenty
victories. Their muscles were tempered steel. Their unwearying feet had
tramped many a long parasang. Some were light infantry with wicker shields
and powerful bows, but as many more horsemen in gold-scaled armour and
with desert steeds that flew like Pegasus.

"The finest cavalry in the world!" Mardonius vaunted, and his guest durst
not answer nay.

Satrap after satrap came. When at last a foaming Arab galloping to the
castle proclaimed, "Next morn the Lord of the World will enter Sardis,"
Glaucon could scarce have looked for a greater, though he had expected
Cronian Zeus himself.

Mardonius, as "bow-bearer to the king," a semi-regal office, rode forth a
stage to meet the sovran. The streets of Sardis were festooned with
flowers. Thousands of spearmen held back the crowds. The Athenian stood
beside Roxana and Artazostra at the upper window of a Lydian merchant
prince, and his eyes missed nothing.

Never had the two women seemed lovelier than when their hearts ran out to
their approaching king. He felt now the power of personal sovranty, how
these children of the East awaited not Xerxes the Master, but Xerxes the
Omnipotent, God-Manifest, whose decrees were as the decrees of Heaven. And
their awe could not fail to awe the Athenian.

At noon the multitude caught the first token of the king. Down the road,
through the gate, walked a man, bare-headed, bare-footed,
alone,--Artaphernes, despot of all Lydia, going to pay his abject homage.
Presently the eunuch priests of Cybele, perched above the gate, clashed
their cymbals and raised their hymn of welcome. To the boom of drums the
thousand chosen cavalry and as many picked footmen of the Life Guard
entered, tall, magnificent soldiers,--caps and spear butts shining with
gold. After these a gilded car drawn by the eight sacred horses, each
milk-white, and on the car an altar bearing the eternal fire of Mazda.
Then, each in his flashing chariot, moved the "Six Princes," the heads of
the great clans of the Achaemenians, then two hundred led desert horses, in
splendid trappings, and then--after a long interval, that the host might
cast no dust upon its lord, rode a single horseman on a jet-black steed,
Artabanus--the king's uncle and vizier. He beckoned to the people.

"Have fear, Lydians, the giver of breath to all the world comes now
beneath your gates!"

The lines of soldiers flung down their spears and dropped upon their
knees. The multitude imitated. A chariot came running behind four of the
sacred steeds of Nisaea,--their coats were like new snow, their manes
braided with gold thread, bridle, bits, pole, baseboard, shone with gems
and the royal metal. The wheel was like the sun. A girl-like youth guided
the crimson reins, a second held the tall green parasol. Its shadow did
not hide the commanding figure upon the car. Glaucon looked hard. No
mistaking--Xerxes was here, the being who could say to millions "Die!" and
they perished like worms; in verity "God-Manifest."

For in looks Xerxes, son of Darius, was surely the Great King. A figure of
august height was set off nobly by the flowing purple caftan and the
purple cap which crowned the curling black hair. The riches of satrapies
were in the rubies and topazes on sword sheath and baldric. The head was
raised. The face was not regular, but of a proud, aquiline beauty. The
skin was olive, the eyes dark, a little pensive. If there were weak lines
about the mouth, the curling beard covered them. The king looked straight
on, unmoved by the kneeling thousands, but as he came abreast of the
balcony, chance made him look upward. Perhaps the sight of the beautiful
Greek caused Xerxes to smile winsomely. The smile of a god can intoxicate.
Caught away from himself, Glaucon the Alcmaeonid joined in the great salvo
of cheering.

"Victory to Xerxes! Let the king of kings reign forever!"

The chariot was gone almost instantly, a vast retinue--cooks, eunuchs,
grooms, hunters, and many closed litters bearing the royal
concubines--followed, but all these passed before Glaucon shook off the
spell the sight of royalty cast on him.

                              * * * * * * *

That night in the palace Xerxes gave a feast in honour of the new
campaign. The splendours of a royal banquet in the East need no retelling.
Silver lamps, carpets of Kerman rugs or of the petals of fresh roses, a
thousand lutes and dulcimers, precious Helbon wine flowing like water,
cups of Phoenician crystal, tables groaning with wild boars roasted whole,
dancing women none too modest,--these were but the incidentals of a
gorgeous confusion. To Glaucon, with the chaste loveliness of the
Panathenaea before his mind, the scene was one of vast wonderment but
scarcely of pleasure. The Persian did nothing by halves. In battle a hero,
at his cups he became a satyr. Many of the scenes before the guests
emptied the last of the tall silver tankards were indescribable.

                              * * * * * * *

On the high dais above the roaring hall sat Xerxes the king,--adored,
envied, pitiable.

When Spitames, the seneschal, brought him the cup, the bearer bowed his
face, not daring to look on his dread lord's eyes.

When Artabanus, the vizier, approached with a message, he first kissed the
carpet below the dais.

When Hydarnes, commander of the Life Guard, drew near to receive the
watchword for the night, he held his mantle before his mouth, lest his
breath pollute the world monarch.

Yet of all forms of seeming prosperity wherewith Fate can curse a man, the
worst was the curse of Xerxes. To be called "god" when one is finite and
mortal; to have no friends, but only a hundred million slaves; to be
denied the joys of honest wish and desire because there were none left
unsatisfied; to have one's hastiest word proclaimed as an edict of deity;
never to be suffered to confess a mistake, cost what the blunder might,
that the "king of kings" might seem lifted above all human error; in
short, to be the bondsman of one's own deification,--this was the hard
captivity of the lord of the twenty satrapies.

For Xerxes the king was a man,--of average instincts, capacities, goodness,
wickedness. A god or a genius could have risen above his fearful
isolation. Xerxes was neither. The iron ceremonial of the Persian court
left him of genuine pleasures almost none. Something novel, a rare
sensation, an opportunity to vary the dreary monotony of splendour by an
astounding act of generosity or an act of frightful cruelty,--it mattered
little which,--was snatched at by the king with childlike eagerness. And
this night Xerxes was in an unwontedly gracious mood. At his elbow, as he
sat on the throne cased with lapis lazuli and onyx, waited the one man who
came nearest to being a friend and not a slave,--Mardonius, son of Gobryas,
the bow-bearer,--and therefore more entitled than any other prince of the
Persians to stand on terms of intimacy with his lord.

While Spitames passed the wine, the king hearkened with condescending and
approving nod to the report of the Prince as to his mad adventure in
Hellas. Xerxes even reproved his brother-in-law mildly for hazarding his
own life and that of his wife among those stiff-necked tribesmen who were
so soon to taste the Aryan might.

"It was in your service, Omnipotence," the Prince was rejoining blandly;
"what if not I alone, but a thousand others of the noblest of the Persians
and the Medes may perish, if only the glory of their king is advanced?"

"Nobly said; you are a faithful slave, Mardonius. I will remember you when
I have burned Athens."

He even reached forth and stroked the bow-bearer's hand, a condescension
which made the footstool-bearer, parasol-bearer, quiver-bearer, and a
dozen great lords more gnaw their lips with envy. Hydarnes, the commander
who had waited an auspicious moment, now thought it safe to kneel on the
lowest step of the throne.

"Omnipotence, I am constrained to tell you that certain miserable Hellenes
have been seized in the camp to-night--spies sent to pry out your power. Do
you deign to have them impaled, crucified, or cast into the adders' cage?"

The king smiled magnanimously.

"They shall not die. Show them the host, and all my power. Then send them
home to their fellow-rebels to tell the madness of dreaming to withstand
my might."

The smile of Xerxes had spread, like the ripple from a pebble splashing in
a pool, over the face of every nobleman in hearing. Now their praises came
as a chant.

"O Ocean of Clemency and Wisdom! Happy Eran in thy sagacious yet merciful
king!"

Xerxes, not heeding, turned to Mardonius.

"Ah! yes,--you were telling how you corrupted one of the chief Athenians,
then had to flee. On the voyage you were shipwrecked?"

"So I wrote to Babylon, to your Eternity."

"And a certain Athenian fugitive saved your lives? And you brought him to
Sardis?"

"I did so, Omnipotence."

"Of course he is at the banquet."

"The king speaks by the promptings of Mazda. I placed him with certain
friends and bade them see he did not lack good cheer."

"Send,--I would talk with him."

"Suffer me to warn your Majesty," ventured Mardonius, "he is an Athenian
and glories in being of a stubborn, Persian-hating stock. I fear he will
not perform due obeisance to the Great King."

"I can endure his rudeness," spoke Xerxes, for once in excellent humour;
"let the 'supreme usher' bring him with full speed."

The functionary thus commanded bowed himself to the ground and hastened on
his errand.

But well that Mardonius had deprecated the wrath of the monarch. Glaucon
came with his head high, his manner almost arrogant. The mere fact that
his boldness might cost him his life made him less bending than ever. He
trod firmly upon the particular square of golden carpet at the foot of the
dais which none, saving the king, the vizier, and the "Six Princes," could
lawfully tread. He held his hands at his sides, firmly refusing to conceal
them in his cloak, as court etiquette demanded. As he stood on the steps
of the throne, he gave the glittering monarch the same familiar bow he
might have awarded a friend he met in the Agora. Mardonius was troubled.
The supreme usher was horrified. The master-of-punishments, ever near his
chief, gazed eagerly to see if Xerxes would not touch the audacious
Hellene's girdle--a sign for prompt decapitation. Only the good nature of
the king prevented a catastrophe, and Xerxes was moved by two motives,
pleasure at meeting a fellow-mortal who could look him in the eye without
servility or fear, delight at the beautiful features and figure of the
Athenian. For an instant monarch and fugitive looked face to face, then
Xerxes stretched out, not his hand, but the gold tip of his ivory baton.
Glaucon had wisdom enough to touch it,--a token that he was admitted to
audience with the king.

"You are from Athens, beautiful Hellene," spoke Xerxes, still admiring the
stranger. "I will question you. Let Mardonius interpret."

"I have learned Persian, great sir," interposed Glaucon, never waiting for
the bow-bearer.

"You have done well," rejoined the smiling monarch; "yet better had you
learned our Aryan manners of courtliness. No matter--you will learn them
likewise in good time. Now tell me your name and parentage."

"I am Glaucon, son of Conon, of the house of the Alcmaeonidae."

"Great nobles, Omnipotence," interposed Mardonius, "so far as nobility can
be reckoned among the Greeks."

"I have yet to learn their genealogies," remarked Xerxes, dryly; then he
turned back to Glaucon. "And do your parents yet live, and have you any
brethren?" The question was a natural one for an Oriental. Glaucon's
answer came with increased pride.

"I am a child of my parent's old age. My mother is dead. My father is
feeble. I have no brethren. Two older brothers I had. One fell here at
Sardis, when we Athenians sacked the city. One fell victorious at
Marathon, while he burned a Persian ship. Therefore I am not ashamed of
their fates."

"Your tongue is bold, Hellene," said the good-natured king; "you are but a
lame courtier. No matter. Tell me, nevertheless, why you churlishly refuse
to do me reverence. Do you set yourself above all these princes of the
Persians who bow before me?"

"Not so, great sir. But I was born at Athens, not at Susa. We Hellenes
pray standing even to Zeus, stretching forth our hands and looking upward.
Can I honour the lord of all the satrapies above the highest god?"

"A nimble tongue you have, Athenian, though an unbending neck." Xerxes sat
and stroked his beard, pleased at the frank reply. "Mardonius has told how
you saved his and my sister's lives, and that you are an outlaw from
Athens."

"The last is all too true, great sir."

"Which means you will not pray your gods too hard for my defeat? ha?"

Glaucon blushed, then looked up boldly.

"A Persian king, I know, loves truth-telling. I still love and pray for
Athens, even if unknown enemies conspired against me."

"Humph! You can learn our other virtues later. Are you blind to my power?
If so, I pity more than I blame you."

"The king is kind," returned Glaucon, putting by a part of his hauteur. "I
would not anger him. I only know he would rather have men say, 'Xerxes
conquered a proud nation, hard to subdue,' than, 'He conquered a feeble
race of whining slaves.' "

"Excellent! In all save your vain confidence of victory, you seem wise
beyond your youth. You are handsome. You are noble--"

"Very noble," interposed Mardonius.

"And you saved the lives of Mardonius and Artazostra. Did you know their
nobility when you rescued them?"

"Not so. I would not let them drown like sheep."

"The better, then. You acted without low motive of reward. Yet let the day
never come when Xerxes is called 'ungrateful' for benefits done his
servants. You shall come to love me by beholding my magnanimity. I will
make you a Persian, despite your will. Have you seen battle?"

"I was too young to bear a spear at Marathon," was the unflinching answer.

"Learn then to wield it in another army. Where is the archsecretary?"

That functionary was present instantly. Mardonius, taking the whispers of
the king, dictated an order which the scribe stamped on his tablet of wet
clay with a rapid stylus.

"Now the chief proclaimer," was the king's order, which brought a tall man
in a bright scarlet caftan salaaming to the dais.

He took the tablet from the secretary and gave a resounding blow upon the
brass gong dangling from his elbow. The clatter of wine cups ceased. The
drinkers were silent on pain of death. The herald sent his proclamation in
stentorian voice down the hall:--

"_In the name of Xerxes the Achaemenian, king of kings, king of Persia,
Media, Babylon, and Lydia; smiter of the Scythians, dominator of the
Indians, terror of the Hellenes; to all peoples of the world his
slaves,--hear ye!_

"Says Xerxes the king, whose word changes not. Forasmuch as Glaucon the
Athenian did save from death my servant and my sister, Mardonius and
Artazostra, I do enroll him among the 'Benefactors of the King,' a sharer
of my bounty forever. Let his name henceforth be not Glaucon, but
Prexaspes. Let my purple cap be touched upon his head. Let him be given
the robe of honour and the girdle of honour. Let the treasurer pay him a
talent of gold. Let my servants honour him. Let those who mock at him be
impaled. And this I proclaim as my decree."

What followed Glaucon was too bewildered to recall clearly. He knew that
the archchamberlain lifted the great jewel-crusted hat from the king's
head and set it on his own for an instant, that they brought him a flowing
purple robe, and clasped about his waist a golden belt, every link set
with a stone of price. The hall arose _en masse_ to drink to the man whom
the sovran delighted to honour.

"Hail! Thrice hail to the Lord Prexaspes! Justly rewarded by our gracious
king!"

No man refused his plaudit, and Glaucon never knew how many envious
courtiers cheered with their lips and in their hearts muttered dark things
against "the manner in which his Majesty loved to play the god and promote
this unknown Hellene above the heads of so many faithful subjects."

Glaucon had made shift to speak some words of deprecation and gratitude to
royalty; his bow was deeper when the supreme usher led him away from the
throne than when he approached it. As he made his way out of the
banqueting hall, a score of noblemen, captains of thousands, over-eunuchs,
and more trailed at his heels, salaaming, fawning, congratulating,
offering all manner of service. Not on the days following his victory at
the Isthmia had his head been in such a whirl. He hardly heard the
well-meant warning which Artabanus, the shrewd old vizier, gave as he
passed the door of the great hall.

"Play the game well, my new Lord Prexaspes. The king can make you satrap
or he can crucify you. Play the game well, the stakes are high."

Neither did he hear the conversation betwixt Xerxes and the bow-bearer
whilst he was being conducted away.

"Have I done well to honour this man, Mardonius?"

"Your Eternity was never more wise. Bear with his uncourtliness now, for
he is truthful, upright, and noble in soul--qualities rare in a Hellene.
Give me but time. I will make him a worthy Persian indeed."

"Do not fail therein," ordered the monarch, "for the youth has such
beauty, both of body and mind, I am grieved he was born in Athens. Yet
there is one short way to wean him from his doomed and miserable country."

"Will Omnipotence but name it?"

"Search out for him a Persian wife, no, three or four wives--although I
have heard the custom of these witless Greeks is to be content with only
one. There is no surer way to turn his heart than that."

"I thank your Eternity for your commandment. It shall not be forgotten."

Mardonius bowed himself. Xerxes called for more wine. The feast lasted
late and ended in an orgy.




                               CHAPTER XVII


                          THE CHARMING BY ROXANA


Glaucon's longing for the old life ebbed and flowed. Sometimes the return
of memory maddened him. Who had done it?--had forged that damning letter
and then hid it with Seuthes? Themistocles? Impossible. Democrates?--"the
friend with the understanding heart no less than a brother dear," as Homer
said? More impossible. An unknown enemy, then, had stolen the fleet order
from Themistocles? But what man had hated Glaucon? One answer
remained,--unwittingly the athlete had offended some god, forgotten some
vow, or by sheer good fortune had awakened divine jealousy. Poseidon had
been implacable toward Odysseus, Athena toward Hector, Artemis toward
Niobe,--Glaucon could only pray that his present welcome amongst the
Persians might not draw down another outburst of Heaven's anger.

More than all else was the keen longing for Hermione. He saw her in the
night. Vainly, amidst the storms of the gathering war, he had sought a
messenger to Athens. In this he dared ask no help from Mardonius. Then
almost from the blue a bolt fell that made him wish to tear Hermione from
his heart.

A Carian slave, a trusted steward at the Athenian silver mines of Laurium,
had loved his liberty and escaped to Sardis. The Persians questioned him
eagerly, for he knew all the gossip of Athens. Glaucon met the runaway,
who did not know then who he was, so many Greek refugees were always
fluttering around the king's court. The Carian told of a new honour for
Democrates.

"He is elected strategus for next year because of his proud patriotism.
There is talk, too, of a more private bit of good fortune."

"What is it?"

"That he has made successful suit to Hermippus of Eleusis for his
daughter,--the widow of Glaucon, the dead outlaw. They say the marriage
follows at the end of the year of mourning--Sir, you are not well!"

"I was never better." But the other had turned ashen. He quitted the
Carian abruptly and shut himself in his chamber. It was good that he wore
no sword. He might have slain himself.

Yet, he communed in his heart, was it not best? Was he not dead to Athens?
Must Hermione mourn him down to old age? And whom better could she take
than Democrates, the man who had sacrificed even friendship for love of
country?

Artabanus, the vizier, gave a great feast that night. They drank the
pledge, "Victory to the king, destruction to his enemies." The lords all
looked on Glaucon to see if he would touch the cup. He drank deeply. They
applauded him. He remained long at the wine, the slaves bore him home
drunken. In the morning Mardonius said Xerxes ordered him to serve in the
cavalry guards, a post full of honour and chance for promotion. Glaucon
did not resist. Mardonius sent him a silvered cuirass and a black horse
from the steppes of Bactria,--fleet as the north wind. In his new armour he
went to the chambers of Artazostra and Roxana. They had never seen him in
panoply before. The brilliant mail became him rarely. The ladies were
delighted.

"You grow Persian apace, my Lord Prexaspes,"--Roxana always called him by
his new name now,--"soon we shall hail you as 'your Magnificence' the
satrap of Parthia or Asia or some other kingly province in the East."

"I do well to become Persian," he answered bitterly, unmoved by the
admiration, "for yesterday I heard that which makes it more than ever
manifest that Glaucon the Athenian is dead. And whether he shall ever rise
to live again, Zeus knoweth; but from me it is hid."

Artazostra did not approach, but Roxana came near, as if to draw the
buckle of the golden girdle--the gift of Xerxes. He saw the turquoise
shining on the tiara that bound her jet-black hair, the fine dark profile
of her face, her delicate nostrils, the sweep of drapery that half
revealed the form so full of grace. Was there more than passing friendship
in the tone with which she spoke to him?

"You have heard from Athens?"

"Yes."

"And the tidings were evil."

"Why call them evil, princess? My friends all believe me dead. Can they
mourn for me forever? They can forget me, alas! more easily than I in my
lonesomeness can forget them."

"You are very lonely?"--the hand that drew the buckle worked slowly. How
soft it was, how delicately the Nile sun had tinted it!

"Do you say you have no friends? None? Not in Sardis? Not among the
Persians?"

"I said not that, dear lady,--but when can a man have more than one native
country?--and mine is Attica, and Attica is far away."

"And you can never have another? Can new friendships never take the place
of those that lie forever dead?"

"I do not know."

"Ah, believe, new home, new friends, new love, are more than possible,
will you but open your heart to suffer them."

The voice both thrilled and trembled now, then suddenly ceased. The colour
sprang into Roxana's forehead. Glaucon bowed and kissed her hand. It
seemed to rise to his lips very willingly.

"I thank you for your fair hopes. Farewell." That was all he said, but as
he went forth from Roxana's presence, the pang of the tidings brought by
the Carian seemed less keen.

                              * * * * * * *

The hosts gathered daily. Xerxes spent his time in dicing, hunting,
drinking, or amusing himself with his favourite by-play, wood-carving. He
held a few solemn state councils, at which he appeared to determine all
things and was actually guided by Artabanus and Mardonius. Now, at last,
all the colossal machinery which was to crush down Hellas was being set in
motion. Glaucon learned how futile was Themistocles's hope of succour to
Athens from the Sicilian Greeks, for,--thanks to Mardonius's indefatigable
diplomacy,--it was arranged that the Phoenicians of Carthage should launch a
powerful armament against the Sicilians, the same moment Xerxes descended
on Sparta and Athens. With calm satisfaction Mardonius watched the
completion of his efforts. All was ready,--the army of hundreds of
thousands, the twelve hundred war-ships, the bridges across the
Hellespont, the canal at Mt. Athos. Glaucon's admiration for the son of
Gobryas grew apace. Xerxes was the outward head of the attack on Hellas.
Mardonius was the soul. He was the idol of the army--its best archer and
rider. Unlike his peers, he maintained no huge harem of jealous concubines
and conspiring eunuchs. Artazostra he worshipped. Roxana he loved. He had
no time for other women. No servant of Xerxes seemed outwardly more
obedient than he. Night and day he wrought for the glory of Persia.
Therefore, Glaucon looked on him with dread. In him Themistocles and
Leonidas would find a worthy foeman.

Daily Glaucon felt the Persian influence stealing upon him. He grew even
accustomed to think of himself under his new name. Greeks were about him:
Demaratus, the outlawed "half-king" of Sparta, and the sons of Hippias,
late tyrant of Athens. He scorned the company of these renegades. Yet
sometimes he would ask himself wherein was he better than they,--had
Democrates's accusation been true, could he have asked a greater reward
from the Barbarian? And what he would do on the day of battle he did not
dare to ask of his own soul.

                              * * * * * * *

Xerxes left Sardis with the host amidst the same splendour with which he
had entered. Glaucon rode in the Life Guard, and saw royalty frequently,
for the king loved to meet handsome men. Once he held the stirrup as
Xerxes dismounted--an honour which provoked much envious grumbling.
Artazostra and Roxana travelled in their closed litters with the train of
women and eunuchs which followed every Persian army. Thus the myriads
rolled onward through Lydia and Mysia, drinking the rivers dry by their
numbers; and across the immortal plains of Troy passed that army which was
destined to do and suffer greater things than were wrought beside the
poet-sung Simois and Scamander, till at last they came to the Hellespont,
the green river seven furlongs wide, that sundered conquered Asia from the
Europe yet to be conquered.

Here were the two bridges of ships, more than three hundred in each, held
by giant cables, and which upbore a firm earthen road, protected by a high
bulwark, that the horses and camels might take no fright at the water.
Here, also, the fleet met them,--the armaments of the East, Phoenicians,
Cilicians, Egyptians, Cyprians,--more triremes and transports than had ever
before ridden upon the seas. And as he saw all this power, all directed by
one will, Glaucon grew even more despondent. How could puny, faction-rent
Hellas bear up against this might? Only when he looked on the myriads
passing, and saw how the captains swung long whips and cracked the lash
across the backs of their spearmen, as over driven cattle, did a little
comfort come. For he knew there was still a fire in Athens and Sparta, a
fire not in Susa nor in Babylon, which kindled free souls and free hands
to dare and do great things. "Whom will the high Zeus prosper when the
_slaves_ of Xerxes stand face to face with _men_?"

A proud thought,--but it ceased to comfort him, as all that afternoon he
stood near the marble throne of the "Lord of the World," whence Xerxes
overlooked his myriads while they filed by, watched the races of swift
triremes, and heard the proud assurances of his officers that "no king
since the beginning of time, not Thothmes of Egypt, not Sennacherib of
Assyria, not Cyrus nor Darius, had arrayed such hosts as his that day."

Then evening came. Glaucon was, after his wont, in the private pavilion of
Mardonius,--itself a palace walled with crimson tapestry in lieu of marble.
He sat silent and moody for long, the bright fence of the ladies or of the
bow-bearer seldom moving him to answer. And at last Artazostra could
endure it no more.

"What has tied your tongue, Prexaspes? Surely my brother in one of his
pleasantries has not ordered that it be cut out? Your skin is too fair to
let you be enrolled amongst his Libyan mutes."

The Hellene answered with a pitiful attempt at laughter.

"Silent, am I? Then silent because I am admiring your noble ladyship's
play of wit."

Artazostra shook her head.

"Impossible. Your eyes were glazed like the blue of Egyptian beads. You
were not listening to me. You were seeing sights and hearkening to voices
far away."

"You press me hard, lady," he confessed; "how can I answer? No man is
master of his roving thoughts,--at least, not I."

"You were seeing Athens. Are you so enamoured of your stony country that
you believe no other land can be so fair?"

"Stony it is, lady,--you have seen it,--but there is no sun like the sun
that gilds the Acropolis; no birds sing like the nightingales from the
grove by the Cephissus; no trees speak with the murmur of the olives at
Colonus, or on the hill slope at Eleusis-by-the-Sea. I can answer you in
the words of Homer, the singer of Hellas, the words he sets on the tongue
of a wanderer and outcast, even as I. 'A rugged land, yet nurse of noble
men, and for myself I can see naught sweeter than a man's own country.' "

The praise of his native land had brought the colour into the cheeks of
the Athenian, his voice rose to enthusiasm. He knew that Roxana was
watching him intently.

"Beautiful it must be, dear Hellene," she spoke, as she sat upon the
footstool below the couch of her brother, "yet you have not seen all the
world. You have not seen the mystic Nile, Memphis, Thebes, and Sais, our
wondrous cities; have not seen how the sun rises over the desert, how it
turns the sand hills to red gold, how at sunset the cliffs glow like walls
of beryl and sard and golden jasper."

"Tell then of Egypt," said Glaucon, clearly taking pleasure in the music
of her voice.

"Not to-night. I have praised it before. Rather I will praise also the
rose valleys of Persia and Bactria, whither Mardonius took me after my
dear father died."

"Are they very beautiful also?"

"Beautiful as the Egyptian's House of the Blessed, for those who have
passed the dread bar of Osiris; beautiful as Airyana-Vaeya, the home land
of the Aryans, whence Ahura-Mazda sent them forth. The winters are short,
the summers bright and long. Neither too much rain nor burning heat. The
Paradise by Sardis is nothing beside them. One breathes in the roses, and
hearkens to the bulbuls--our Aryan nightingales--all day and all night long.
The streams bubble with cool water. At Susa the palace is fairer than word
may tell. Hither the court comes each summer from the tedious glories of
Babylon. The columns of the palace reach up to heaven, but no walls
engirdle them, only curtains green, white, and blue,--whilst the warm sweet
breeze blows always thither from green prairies."

"You draw a picture fair as the plains of Elysium, dear lady," spoke
Glaucon, his own gaze following the light that burned in hers, "and yet I
would not seek refuge even in the king's court with all its beauty. There
are times when I long to pray the god, 'Give to me wings, eagle wings from
Zeus's own bird, and let me go to the ends of the earth, and there in some
charmed valley I may find at last the spring of Lethe water, the water of
forgetfulness that gives peace.' "

Roxana looked on him; pity was in her eyes, and he knew he was taking
pleasure in her pitying.

"The magic water you ask is not to be drunk from goblets," she answered
him, "but the charmed valley lies in the vales of Bactria, the 'Roof of
the World,' high amid mountains crowned with immortal snows. Every good
tree and flower are here, and here winds the mystic Oxus, the great river
sweeping northward. And here, if anywhere, on Mazda's wide, green earth,
can the trouble-tossed have peace."

"Then it is so beautiful?" said the Athenian.

"Beautiful," answered Mardonius and Artazostra together. And Roxana, with
an approving nod from her brother, arose and crossed the tent where hung a
simple harp.

"Will my Lord Prexaspes listen," she asked, "if I sing him one of the
homely songs of the Aryans in praise of the vales by the Oxus? My skill is
small."

"It should suffice to turn the heart of Persephone, even as did Orpheus,"
answered the Athenian, never taking his gaze from her.

The soft light of the swinging lamps, the heavy fragrance of the
frankincense which smouldered on the brazier, the dark lustre of the
singer's eyes--all held Glaucon as by a spell. Roxana struck the harp. Her
voice was sweet, and more than desire to please throbbed through the
strings and song.

  "O far away is gliding
    The pleasant Oxus's stream,
  I see the green glades darkling,
    I see the clear pools gleam.
  I hear the bulbuls calling
    From blooming tree to tree.
  Wave, bird, and tree are singing,
    'Away! ah, come with me!'

  "By Oxus's stream is rising
    Great Cyrus's marble halls;
  Like rain of purest silver,
    His tinkling fountain falls;
  To his cool verdant arbours
    What joy with thee to flee.
  I'll join with bird and river,
    'Away! rest there with me!'

  "Forget, forget old sorrows,
    Forget the dear things lost!
  There comes new peace, new brightness,
    When darksome waves are crossed;
  By Oxus's streams abiding,
    From pang and strife set free,
  I'll teach thee love and gladness,--
    Rest there, for aye, with me!"

The light, the fragrance, the song so pregnant with meaning, all wrought
upon Glaucon of Athens. He felt the warm glow in his cheeks; he felt
subtle hands outstretching as if drawing forth his spirit. Roxana's eyes
were upon him as she ended. Their gaze met. She was very fair, high-born,
sensitive. She was inviting him to put away Glaucon the outcast from
Hellas, to become body and soul Prexaspes the Persian, "Benefactor of the
King," and sharer in all the glories of the conquering race. All the past
seemed slipping away from him as unreal. Roxana stood before him in her
dark Oriental beauty; Hermione was in Athens--and they were giving her in
marriage to Democrates. What wonder he felt no mastery of himself, though
all that day he had kept from wine?

"A simple song," spoke Mardonius, who seemed marvellously pleased at all
his sister did, "yet not lacking its sweetness. We Aryans are without the
elaborate music the Greeks and Babylonians affect."

"Simplicity is the highest beauty," answered the Greek, as if still in his
trance, "and when I hear Euphrosyne, fairest of the Graces, sing with the
voice of Erato, the Song-Queen, I grow afraid. For a mortal may not hear
things too divine and live."

Roxana replaced the harp and made one of her inimitable Oriental
courtesies,--a token at once of gratitude and farewell for the evening.
Glaucon never took his gaze from her, until with a rustle and sweep of her
blue gauze she had glided out of the tent. He did not see the meaning
glances exchanged by Mardonius and Artazostra before the latter left them.

When the two men were alone, the bow-bearer asked a question.

"Dear Prexaspes, do you not think I should bless the twelve archangels I
possess so beautiful a sister?"

"She is so fair, I wonder that Zeus does not haste from Olympus to
enthrone her in place of Hera."

The bow-bearer laughed.

"No, I crave for her only a mortal husband. Though there are few in
Persia, in Media, in the wide East, to whom I dare entrust her.
Perhaps,"--his laugh grew lighter,--"I would do well to turn my eyes
westward."

Glaucon did not see Roxana again the next day nor for several following,
but in those days he thought much less on Hermione and on Athens.




                              CHAPTER XVIII


                       DEMOCRATES'S TROUBLES RETURN


All through that year to its close and again to the verge of springtime
the sun made violet haze upon the hills and pure fire of the bay at
Eleusis-by-the-Sea. Night by night the bird song would be stilled in the
old olives along the dark waters. There Hermione would sit looking off
into the void, as many another in like plight has sat and wearily waited,
asking of the night and the sea the questions that are never answered. As
the bay shimmered under the light of morning, she could gaze toward the
brown crags of Salamis and the open AEgean beyond. The waves kept their
abiding secret. The tall triremes, the red-sailed fishers' boats, came and
went from the havens of Athens, but Hermione never saw the ship that had
borne away her all.

The roar and scandal following the unmasking of Glaucon had long since
abated. Hermippus--himself full five years grayer on account of the
calamity--had taken his daughter again to quiet Eleusis, where there was
less to remind her of that terrible night at Colonus. She spent the autumn
and winter in an unbroken shadow life, with only her mother and old
Cleopis for companions. Reasons not yet told to the world gave her a
little hope and comfort. But in mere desire to make her dark cloud break,
her parents were continually giving Hermione pain. She guessed it long
before her father's wishes passed beyond vaguest hints. She heard him
praising Democrates, his zeal for Athens and Hellas, his fair worldly
prospects, and there needed no diviner to reveal Hermippus's hidden
meaning. Once she overheard Cleopis talking with another maid.

"Her Ladyship has taken on terribly, to be sure, but I told her mother
'when a fire blazes too hot, it burns out simply the faster.' Democrates
is just the man to console in another year."

"Yes," answered the other wiseacre, "she's far too young and pretty to
stay unwedded very long. Aphrodite didn't make her to sit as an old maid
carding wool and munching beans. One can see Hermippus's and Lysistra's
purpose with half an eye."

"Cleopis, Nania, what is this vile tattling that I hear?"

The young mistress's eyes blazed fury. Nania turned pale. Hermione was
quite capable of giving her a sound whipping, but Cleopis mustered a bold
front and a ready lie:

"_Ei!_ dear little lady, don't flash up so! I was only talking with Nania
about how Phryne the scullion maid was making eyes at Scylax the groom."

"I heard you quite otherwise," was the nigh tremulous answer. But Hermione
was not anxious to push matters to an issue. From the moment of Glaucon's
downfall she had believed--what even her own mother had mildly derided--that
Democrates had been the author of her husband's ruin. And now that the
intent of her parents ever more clearly dawned on her, she was close upon
despair. Hermippus, however,--whatever his purpose,--was considerate, nay
kindly. He regarded Hermione's feelings as pardonable, if not laudable. He
would wait for time to soothe her. But the consciousness that her father
purposed such a fate for her, however far postponed, was enough to double
all the unanswered longing, the unstilled pain.

Glaucon was gone. And with him gone, could Hermione's sun ever rise again?
Could she hope, across the end of the aeons, to clasp hands even in the dim
House of Hades with her glorious husband? If there was chance thereof,
dark Hades would grow bright as Olympus. How gladly she would fare out to
the shade land, when Hermes led down his troops of helpless dead.

  "Downward, down the long dark pathway,
    Past Oceanus's great streams,
  Past the White Rock, past the Sun's gates
    Downward to the land of Dreams:
  There they reach the wide dim borders
    Of the fields of asphodel,
  Where the spectres and the spirits
    Of wan, outworn mortals dwell."

But was this the home of Glaucon the Fair; should the young, the strong,
the pure in heart, share one condemnation with the mean and the guilty?
Homer the Wise left all hid. Yet he told of some not doomed to the common
lot. Thus ran the promise to Menelaus, espoused to Helen.

  "Far away the gods shall bear you:
    To the fair Elysian plains,
  Where the time fleets gladly, swiftly,
    Where bright Rhadamanthus reigns:
  Snow is not, nor rain, nor winter,
    But clear zephyrs from the west,
  Singing round the streams of Ocean
    Round the islands of the Blest."

Was the pledge for Menelaus only?

The boats came, the boats went, on the blue bay. But as the spring grew
warm, Hermione thought less of them, less almost of the last dread vision
of Glaucon.

                              * * * * * * *

The cloud of the Persian hung ever darkening over Athens. Continual
rumours made Xerxes's power terrible even beyond fact. It was hard to go
on eating, drinking, frequenting the jury or the gymnasium, when men knew
to a certainty the coming summer would bring Athens face to face with
slavery or destruction. Wise men grew silent. Fools took to carousing to
banish care. But one word not the frailest uttered--"submission." Worldly
prudence forbade that. The women would have stabbed the craven to death
with their bodkins. For the women were braver than the men. They knew the
fate of conquered Ionia: for the men only merciful death, for the women
the living death of the Persian harems and indignities words may not
utter. Whether Hellas forsook her or aided, Athens had chosen her fate.
Xerxes might annihilate her. Conquer her he could not.

Yet the early spring came back sweetly as ever. The warm breeze blew from
Egypt. Philomela sang in the olive groves. The snows on Pentelicus faded.
Around the city ran bands of children singing the "swallow's song," and
beseeching the spring donation of honey cakes:--

  "She is here, she is here, the swallow;
  Fair seasons bringing,--fair seasons to follow."

And many a housewife, as she rewarded the singers, dropped a silent tear,
wondering whether another spring would see the innocents anywhere save in
a Persian slave-pen, or, better fate, in Orchus.

Yet to one woman that spring there came consolation. On Hermippus's door
hung a glad olive wreath. Hermione had borne a son. "The fairest babe she
had ever seen," cried the midwife. "Phoenix," the mother called him, "for
in him shall Glaucon the Beautiful live again." Democrates sent a runner
every day to Eleusis to inquire for Hermione until all danger was passed.
On the "name-day," ten days after the birth, he was absent from the
gathering of friends and kinsmen, but sent a valuable statuette to
Hermione, who left it, however, to her father to thank him.

The day after Phoenix was born old Conon, Glaucon's father, died. The old
man had never recovered from the blow given by the dishonourable death of
the son with whom he had so lately quarrelled. He left a great landed
estate at Marathon to his new-born grandson. The exact value thereof
Democrates inquired into sharply, and when a distant cousin talked of
contesting the will, the orator announced he would defend the infant's
rights. The would-be plaintiff withdrew at once, not anxious to cross
swords with this favourite of the juries, and everybody said that
Democrates was showing a most scrupulous regard for his unfortunate
friend's memory.

Indeed, seemingly, Democrates ought to have been the happiest man in
Athens. He had been elected "strategus," to serve on the board of generals
along with Themistocles. He had plenty of money, and gave great banquets
to this or that group of prominent citizens. During the winter he had
asked Hermippus for his daughter in marriage. The Eumolpid told him that
since Glaucon's fearful end, he was welcome as a son-in-law. Still he
could not conceal that Hermione never spoke of him save in hate, and in
view of her then delicate condition it was well not to press the matter.
The orator had seemed well content. "Woman's fantasies would wear away in
time." But the rumour of this negotiation, outrunning truth, grew into the
lying report of an absolute betrothal,--the report which was to drift to
Asia and turn Glaucon's heart to stone, gossip having always wrought more
harm than malignant lying.

Yet flies were in Democrates's sweet ointment. He knew Themistocles hardly
trusted him as frankly as of yore. Little Simonides, a man of wide
influence and keen insight, treated him very coldly. Cimon had cooled
also. But worse than all was a haunting dread. Democrates knew, if hardly
another in Hellas, that the Cyprian--in other words Mardonius--was safe in
Asia, and likewise that he had fled on the _Solon_. Mardonius, then, had
escaped the storm. What if the same miracle had saved the outlaw? What if
the dead should awake? The chimera haunted Democrates night and day.

Still he was beginning to shake off his terrors. He believed he had washed
his hands fairly clean of his treason, even if the water had cost his
soul. He joined with all his energies in seconding Themistocles. His voice
was loudest at the Pnyx, counselling resistance. He went on successful
embassies to Sicyon and AEgina to get pledges of alliance. In the summer he
did his uttermost to prepare the army which Themistocles and Evaenetus the
Spartan led to defend the pass of Tempe. The expedition sailed amid high
hopes for a noble defence of Hellas. Democrates was proud and sanguine.
Then, like a thunderbolt, there came one night a knock at his door. Bias
led to his master no less a visitor than the sleek and smiling
Phoenician--Hiram.

The orator tried to cover his terrors by windy bluster. He broke in before
the Oriental could finish his elaborate salaam.

"Of all the harpies and gorgons you are the least welcome. Were you not
warned when you fled Athens for Argos never to show your face in Attica
again?"

"Your Excellency said so," was the bland reply.

"Admirably you obey it. It remains for me to reward the obedience. Bias,
go to the street; summon two Scythian watchmen."

The Thracian darted out. Hiram simply stood with hands folded.

"It is well, Excellency, the lad is gone. I have many things to say in
confidence to your Nobility. At Lacedaemon my Lord Lycon was gracious
enough to give certain commands for me to transmit to you."

"Commands? To me? Earth and gods! am I to be commanded by an adder like
you? You shall pay for this on the rack."

"Your slave thinks otherwise," observed Hiram, humbly. "If your Lordship
will deign to read this letter, it will save your slave many words and
your Lordship many cursings."

He knelt again before he offered a papyrus. Democrates would rather have
taken fire, but he could not refuse. And thus he read:--

"Lycon of Lacedaemon to Democrates of Athens, greeting:--Can he who Medizes
in the summer Hellenize in the spring? I know your zeal for Themistocles.
Was it for this we plucked you back from exposure and ruin? Do then as
Hiram bids you, or repay the money you clutched so eagerly. Fail not, or
rest confident all the documents you betrayed shall go to Hypsichides the
First Archon, your enemy. Use then your eloquence on Attic juries! But you
will grow wise; what need of me to threaten? You will hearken to Hiram.

"From Sparta, on the festival of Bellerophon, in the ephorship of
Theudas.--_Chaire!_"

Democrates folded the papyrus and stood long, biting his whitened lips in
silence. Perhaps he had surmised the intent of the letter the instant
Hiram extended it.

"What do you desire?" he said thickly, at last.

"Let my Lord then hearken--" began the Phoenician, to be interrupted by the
sudden advent of Bias.

"The Scythians are at the door, _kyrie_," he was shouting; "shall I order
them in and drag this lizard out by the tail?"

"No, in Zeus's name, no! Bid them keep without. And do you go also. This
honest fellow is on private business which only I must hear."

Bias slammed the door. Perhaps he stood listening. Hiram, at least, glided
nearer to his victim and spoke in a smooth whisper, taking no chances of
an eavesdropper.

"Excellency, the desire of Lycon is this. The army has been sent to Tempe.
At Lacedaemon Lycon used all his power to prevent its despatch, but
Leonidas is omnipotent to-day in Sparta, and besides, since Lycon's
calamity at the Isthmia, his prestige, and therefore his influence, is not
a little abated. Nevertheless, the army must be recalled from Tempe."

"And the means?"

"Yourself, Excellency. It is within your power to find a thousand good
reasons why Themistocles and Evaenetus should retreat. And you will do so
at once, Excellency."

"Do not think you and your accursed masters can drive me from infamy to
infamy. I can be terrible if pushed to bay."

"Your Nobility has read Lycon's letter," observed the Phoenician, with
folded arms.

There was a sword lying on the tripod by which Democrates stood; he
regretted for all the rest of his life that he had not seized it and ended
the snakelike Oriental then and there. The impulse came, and went. The
opportunity never returned. The orator's head dropped down upon his
breast.

"Go back to Sparta, go back instantly," he spoke in a hoarse whisper.
"Tell that Polyphemus you call your master there that I will do his will.
And tell him, too, that if ever the day comes for vengeance on him, on the
Cyprian, on you,--my vengeance will be terrible."

"Your slave's ears hear the first part of your message with joy,"--Hiram's
smile never grew broader,--"the second part, which my Lord speaks in
anger,--I will forget."

"Go! go!" ordered the orator, furiously. He clapped his hands. Bias
reentered.

"Tell the constables I don't need them. Here is an obol apiece for their
trouble. Conduct this man out. If he comes hither again, do you and the
other slaves beat him till there is not a whole spot left on his body."

Hiram's genuflexion was worthy of Xerxes's court.

"My Lord, as always," was his parting compliment, "has shown himself
exceeding wise."

Thus the Oriental went. In what a mood Democrates passed the remaining day
needs only scant wits to guess. Clearer, clearer in his ears was ringing
AEschylus's song of the Furies. He could not silence it.

    "With scourge and with ban
    We prostrate the man
    Who with smooth-woven wile
    And a fair-faced smile
  Hath planted a snare for his friend!
    Though fleet, we shall find him;
    Though strong, we shall bind him,
  Who planted a snare for his friend!"

He had intended to be loyal to Hellas,--to strive valiantly for her
freedom,--and now! Was the Nemesis coming upon him, not in one great clap,
but stealthily, finger by finger, cubit by cubit, until his soul's price
was to be utterly paid? Was this the beginning of the recompense for the
night scene at Colonus?

The next morning he made a formal visit to the shrine of the Furies in the
hill of Areopagus. "An old vow, too long deferred in payment, taken when
he joined in his first contest on the Bema," he explained to friends, when
he visited this uncanny spot.

Few were the Athenians who would pass that cleft in the Areopagus where
the "Avengers" had their grim sanctuary without a quick motion of the
hands to avert the evil eye. Thieves and others of evil conscience would
make a wide circuit rather than pass this abode of Alecto, Megaera, and
Tisiphone, pitiless pursuers of the guilty. The terrible sisters hounded a
man through life, and after death to the judgment bar of Minos. With
reason, therefore, the guilty dreaded them.

Democrates had brought the proper sacrifices--two black rams, which were
duly slaughtered upon the little altar before the shrine and sprinkled
with sweetened water. The priestess, a gray hag herself, asked her visitor
if he would enter the cavern and proffer his petition to the mighty
goddesses. Leaving his friends outside, the orator passed through the door
which the priestess seemed to open in the side of the cave. He saw only a
jagged, unhewn cranny, barely tall enough for a man to stand upright and
reaching far into the sculptured rock. No image: only a few rough votive
tablets set up by a grateful suppliant for some mercy from the awful
goddesses.

"If you would pray here, _kyrie_," said the hag, "it is needful that I go
forth and close the door. The holy Furies love the dark, for is not their
home in Tartarus?"

She went forth. As the light vanished, Democrates seemed buried in the
rock. Out of the blackness spectres were springing against him. From a
cleft he heard a flapping, a bat, an imprisoned bird, or Alecto's direful
wings. He held his hands downward, for he had to address infernal
goddesses, and prayed in haste.

"O ye sisters, terrible yet gracious, give ear. If by my offerings I have
found favour, lift from my heart this crushing load. Deliver me from the
fear of the blood guilty. Are ye not divine? Do not the immortals know all
things? Ye know, then, how I was tempted, how sore was the compulsion, and
how life and love were sweet. Then spare me. Give me back unhaunted
slumber. Deliver me from Lycon. Give my soul peace,--and in reward, I swear
it by the Styx, by Zeus's own oath, I will build in your honour a temple
by your sacred field at Colonus, where men shall gather to reverence you
forever."

But here he ceased. In the darkness moved something white. Again a
flapping. He was sure the white thing was Glaucon's face. Glaucon had
perished at sea. He had never been buried, so his ghost was wandering over
the world, seeking vainly for rest. It all came to Democrates in an
instant. His knees smote together; his teeth chattered. He sprang back
upon the door and forced it open, but never saw the dove that fluttered
forth with him.

"A hideous place!" he cried to his waiting friends. "A man must have a
stronger heart than mine to love to tarry after his prayer is finished."

Only a few days later Hellas was startled to hear that Tempe had been
evacuated without a blow, and the pass left open to Xerxes. It was said
Democrates, in his ever commendable activity, had discovered at the last
moment the mountain wall was not as defensible as hoped, and any
resistance would have been disastrous. Therefore, whilst the retreat was
bewailed, everybody praised the foresight of the orator. Everybody--one
should say, except two, Bias and Phormio. They had many conferences
together, especially after the coming and going of Hiram.

"There is a larger tunny in the sea than yet has entered the meshes,"
confessed the fishmonger, sorely puzzled, after much vain talk.

But Hermione was caring for none of these things. Her hands were busy with
the swaddling clothes. Her thoughts only for that wicker cradle which
swung betwixt the pillars, where Hermippus's house looked toward Salamis.




                               CHAPTER XIX


                        THE COMMANDMENT OF XERXES


It is easy to praise the blessings of peace. Still easier to paint the
horrors of war,--and yet war will remain for all time the greatest game at
which human wits can play. For in it every form of courage, physical and
moral, and every talent are called into being. If war at once develops the
bestial, it also develops as promptly the heroic. Alone of human
activities it demands a brute's strength, an iron will, a serpent's
intellect, a lion's courage--all in one. And of him who has these things in
justest measure, history writes, "He conquered." It was because Mardonius
seemed to possess all these, to foresee everything, to surmount
everything, that Glaucon despaired for the fate of Hellas, even more than
when he beheld the crushing armaments of the Persian.

Yet for long it seemed as if the host would march even to Athens without
battle, without invoking Mardonius's skill. The king crossed Thrace and
Macedonia, meeting only trembling hospitality from the cities along his
route. At Doriscus he had held a review of his army, and smiled when the
fawning scribes told how one million seven hundred thousand foot and
eighty thousand horse followed his banners.(8) Every fugitive and spy from
southern Hellas told how the hearts of the stanchest patriots were
sinking, how everywhere save in Athens and Sparta loud voices urged the
sending of "earth and water,"--tokens of submission to the irresistible
king. At the pass of Tempe covering Thessaly, Glaucon, who knew the hopes
of Themistocles, had been certain the Hellenes would make a stand. Rumour
had it that ten thousand Greek infantry were indeed there, and ready for
battle. But the outlaw's expectations were utterly shattered. To the
disgust of the Persian lords, who dearly loved brisk fighting, it was soon
told how the cowardly Hellenes had fled by ship, leaving the rich plains
of Thessaly bare to the invader.

Thus was blasted Glaucon's last hope. Hellas was doomed. He almost looked
to see Themistocles coming as ambassador to bring the homage of Athens.
Since his old life seemed closed to the outlaw, he allowed Mardonius to
have his will with him,--to teach him to act, speak, think, as an Oriental.
He even bowed himself low before the king, an act rewarded by being
commanded one evening to play at dice with majesty itself. Xerxes was
actually gracious enough to let his new subject win from him three
handsome Syrian slave-boys.

"You Hellenes are becoming wise," announced the monarch one day, when the
Locrian envoys came with their earth and water. "If you can learn to speak
the truth, you will equal even the virtues of the Aryans."

"Your Majesty has not found me a liar," rejoined the Athenian, warmly.

"You gather our virtues apace. I must consider how I can reward you by
promotion."

"The king is overwhelmingly generous. Already I fear many of his servants
mutter that I am promoted beyond all desert."

"Mutter? mutter against you?" The king's eyes flashed ominously. "By
Mazda, it is against me, then, who advanced you! Hearken, Otanes,"--he
addressed the general of the Persian footmen, who stood near by,--"who are
the disobedient slaves who question my advancement of Prexaspes?"

The general--he had been the loudest grumbler--bowed and kissed the carpet.

"None, your Eternity; on the contrary, there is not one Aryan in the host
who does not rejoice the king has found so noble an object for his godlike
bounty."

"You hear, Prexaspes," said Xerxes, mollified. "I am glad, for the man who
questions my wisdom touching your advancement must be impaled. To-morrow
is my birthday, you will not fail to sit with the other great lords at the
banquet."

"The king overpowers me with his goodness."

"Do not fail to deserve it. Mardonius is always praising you. Consider
also how much better it is to depend on a gracious king than on the
clamour of the fickle mob that rules in your helpless cities!"

                              * * * * * * *

The next morning was the royal birthday. The army, pitched in the fertile
plain by Thessalian Larissa, feasted on the abundance at hand. The king
distributed huge largesses of money. All day long he sat in his
palace-like tent, receiving congratulations from even the lowest of his
followers, and bound in turn not to reject any reasonable petition. The
Magi sacrificed blooded stallions and rare spices to Mithra the "Lord of
Wide Pastures," to Vohu-Manu the "Holy Councillor," and all their other
angels, desiring them to bless the arms of the king.

The "Perfect Banquet" of the birthday came in the evening. It hardly
differed from the feast at Sardis. The royal pavilion had its poles plated
with silver, the tapestries were green and purple, the couches were spread
with gorgeous coverlets. Only the drinking was more moderate, the
ceremonial less rigid. The fortunate guests devoured dainties reserved for
the special use of royalty: the flour of the bread was from Assos, the
wine from Helbon, the water to dilute the wine had come in silver flasks
from the Choaspes by Susa. The king even distributed the special unguent
of lion's fat and palm wine which no subject, unpermitted, could use and
shun the death penalty.

Then at the end certain of the fairest of the women came and danced
unveiled before the king--this one night when they might show forth their
beauty. And last of all danced Roxana. She danced alone; a diaphanous
drapery of pink Egyptian cotton blew around her as an evening cloud. From
her black hair shone the diamond coronet. To the sensuous swing of the
music she wound in and out before the king and his admiring lords,
advancing, retreating, rising, swaying, a paragon of agility and grace,
feet, body, hands, weaving their charm together. When at the end she fell
on her knees before the king, demanding whether she had done well, the
applause shook the pavilion. The king looked down on her, smiling.

"Rise, sister of Mardonius. All Eran rejoices in you to-night. And on this
evening whose request can I fail to grant? Whose can I grant more gladly
than yours? Speak; you shall have it, though it be for half my kingdoms."

The dancer arose, but hung down her flashing coronal. Her blush was
enchanting. She stood silent, while the good-humoured king smiled down on
her, till Artazostra came from her seat by Mardonius and whispered in her
ear. Every neck in the crowded pavilion was craned as Artazostra spoke to
Xerxes.

"May it please my royal brother, this is the word of Roxana. 'I love my
brother Mardonius; nevertheless, contrary to the Persian custom, he keeps
me now to my nineteenth year unwedded. If now I have found favour in the
sight of the king, let him command Mardonius to give me to some noble
youth who shall do me honour by the valiant deeds and the true service he
shall render unto my Lord.' "

"A fair petition! Let the king grant it!" shouted twenty; while others
more wise whispered, "This was not done without foreknowledge by
Mardonius."

Xerxes smiled benignantly and rubbed his nose with the lion's fat while
deliberating.

"An evil precedent, lady, an evil precedent when women demand husbands and
do not wait for their fathers' or brothers' good pleasure. But I have
promised. The word of the king is not to be broken. Daughter of Gobryas,
your petition is granted. Come hither, Mardonius,"--the bow-bearer
approached the throne,--"you have heard the bold desire of your sister, and
my answer. I must command you to bestow on her a husband."

The bow-bearer bowed obediently.

"I hear the word of the king, and all his mandates are good. This is no
meet time for marriage festivities, when the Lord of the World and all the
Aryan power goes forth to war. Yet as soon as the impious rebels amongst
the Hellenes shall be subdued, I will rejoice to bestow my sister upon
whatsoever fortunate servant the king may deign to honour."

"You hear him, lady,"--the royal features assumed a grin, which was
reflected throughout the pavilion. "A husband you shall have, but
Mardonius shall be revenged. Your fate is in my hands. And shall not
I,--guardian of the households of my empire,--give a warning to all bold
maidens against lifting their wills too proudly, or presuming upon an
overindulgent king? What then shall be just punishment?" The king bent his
head, still rubbing his nose, and trying to persuade all about that he was
meditating.

"Bardas, satrap of Sogandia, is old; he has but one eye; they say he beats
his eleven wives daily with a whip of rhinoceros hide. It would be just if
I gave him this woman also in marriage. What think you, Hydarnes?"

"If your Eternity bestows this woman on Bardas, every husband and father
in all your kingdoms will applaud your act," smiled the commander.

The threatened lady fell again on her knees, outstretching her hands and
beseeching mercy,--never a more charming picture of misery and contrition.

"You tremble, lady," went on the sovran, "and justly. It were better for
my empire if my heart were less hard. After all, you danced so elegantly
that I must be mollified. There is the young Prince Zophyrus, son of Datis
the general,--he has only five wives already. True, he is usually the worse
for wine, is not handsome, and killed one of his women not long since
because she did not sing to please him. Yes--you shall have Zophyrus--he
will surely rule you--"

"Mercy, not Zophyrus, gracious Lord," pleaded the abject Egyptian.

The king looked down on her, with a broader grin than ever.

"You are very hard to please. I ought to punish your wilfulness by some
dreadful doom. Do not cry out again. I will not hear you. My decision is
fixed. Mardonius shall bestow you in marriage to a man who is not even a
Persian by birth, who one year since was a disobedient rebel against my
power, who even now contemns and despises many of the good customs of the
Aryans. Hark, then, to his name. When Hellas is conquered, I command that
Mardonius wed you to the Lord Prexaspes."

The king broke into an uproarious laugh, a signal for the thousand loyal
subjects within the great pavilion to roar with laughter also. In the
confusion following Artazostra and Roxana disappeared. Fifty hands dragged
the appointed bridegroom to the king, showering on him all manner of
congratulations. Xerxes's act was a plain proof that he was adopting the
beautiful Hellene as one of his personal favourites,--a post of influence
and honour not to be despised by a vizier. What "Prexaspes" said when he
thanked the king was drowned in the tumult of laughing and cheering. The
monarch, delighted to play the gracious god, roared his injunctions to the
Athenian so loud that above the din they heard him.

"You will bridle her well, Prexaspes. I know them--those Egyptian fillies!
They need a hard curb and the lash at times. Beware the tyranny of your
own harem. I would not have the satrapies know how certain bright eyes in
the seraglio can make the son of Darius play the fool. There is nothing
more dangerous than women. It will take all your courage to master them. A
hard task lies before you. I have given you one wife, but you know our
good Persian custom--five, ten, or twenty. Take the score, I order you.
Then in twelve years you'll be receiving the prize a Persian king bestows
every summer on the father of the most children!"

And following this broad hint, the king held his sides with laughter
again, a mirth which it is needless to say was echoed and reechoed till it
seemed it could not cease. Only a few ventured to mutter under breath:
"The Hellene will have a subsatrapy in the East before the season is over
and a treasure of five thousand talents! Mithra wither the upstart!"

                              * * * * * * *

The summer was waning when the host moved southward from Larissa, for mere
numbers had made progress slow, and despite Mardonius's providence the
question of commissariat sometimes became difficult. Now at last, leaving
behind Thrace and Macedonia, the army began to enter Greece itself. As it
fared across the teeming plains of Thessaly, it met only welcome from the
inhabitants and submissions from fresh embassies. Report came from the
fleet--keeping pace with the land army along the coasts--that nowhere had
the weak squadrons of the Greeks adventured a stand. Daily the smile of
the Lord of the World grew more complacent, as his "table-companions" told
him: "The rumour of your Eternity's advent stupefies the miserable
Hellenes. Like Atar, the Angel of Fire, your splendour glitters afar. You
will enter Athens and Sparta, and no sword leave its sheath, no bow its
wrapper."

Every day Mardonius asked of Glaucon, "Will your Hellenes fight?" and the
answer was ever more doubting, "I do not know."

Long since Glaucon had given up hope of the defeat of the Persian. Now he
prayed devoutly there might be no useless shedding of blood. If only he
could turn back and not behold the humiliation of Athens! Of the fate of
the old-time friends--Democrates, Cimon, Hermione--he tried not to think. No
doubt Hermione was the wife of Democrates. More than a year had sped since
the flight from Colonus. Hermione had put off her mourning for the yellow
veil of a bride. Glaucon prayed the war might bring her no new sorrow,
though Democrates, of course, would resist Persia to the end. As for
himself he would never darken their eyes again. He was betrothed to
Roxana. With her he would seek one of those valleys in Bactria which she
had praised, the remoter the better, and there perhaps was peace.

Thus the host wound through Thessaly, till before them rose, peak on peak,
the jagged mountain wall of Othrys and OEta, fading away in violet
distance, the bulwark of central Hellas. Then the king's smile became a
frown, for the Hellenes, undismayed despite his might, were assembling
their fleet at northern Euboea, and at the same time a tempest had
shattered a large part of the royal navy. The Magi offered sacrifice to
appease Tishtrya, the Prince of the Wind-ruling Stars, but the king's
frown grew blacker at each message. Glaucon was near him when at last the
monarch's thunders broke forth.

A hot, sultry day. The king's chariot had just crossed the mountain stream
of the Sphercus, when a captain of a hundred came galloping, dismounted,
and prostrated himself in the dust.

"Your tidings?" demanded Xerxes, sharply.

"Be gracious, Fountain of Mercy,"--the captain evidently disliked his
mission,--"I am sent from the van. We came to a place where the mountains
thrust down upon the sea and leave but a narrow road by the ocean. Your
slaves found certain Hellenes, rebels against your benignant government,
holding a wall and barring all passage to your army."

"And did you not forthwith seize these impudent wretches and drag them
hither to be judged by me?"

"Compassion, Omnipotence,"--the messenger trembled,--"they seemed sturdy,
well-armed rogues, and the way was narrow and steep where a score can face
a thousand. Therefore, your slave came straight with his tidings to the
ever gracious king."

"Dog! Coward!" Xerxes plucked the whip from the charioteer's hand and
lashed it over the wretch's shoulders. "By the _fravashi_, the soul of
Darius my father, no man shall bring so foul a word to me and live!"

"Compassion, Omnipotence, compassion!" groaned the man, writhing like a
worm. Already the master-of-punishments was approaching to cover his face
with a towel, preparatory to the bow-string, but the royal anger spent
itself just enough to avert a tragedy.

"Your life is forfeit, but I am all too merciful! Take then three hundred
stripes on the soles of your feet and live to be braver in the future."

"A thousand blessings on your benignity," cried the captain, as they led
him away, "I congratulate myself that insignificant as I am the king yet
deigns to notice my existence even to recompense my shortcomings."

"Off," ordered the bristling monarch, "or you die the death yet. And do
you, Mardonius, take Prexaspes, who somewhat knows this country, spur
forward, and discover who are the madmen thus earning their destruction."

The command was obeyed. Glaucon galloped beside the Prince, overtaking the
marching army, until as they cantered into the little mud-walled city of
Heraclea a second messenger from the van met them with further details.

"The pass is held by seven thousand Grecian men-at-arms. There are no
Athenians. There are three hundred come from Sparta."

"And their chief?" asked Glaucon, leaning eagerly.

"Is Leonidas of Lacedaemon."

"Then, O Mardonius," spoke the Athenian, with a throb in his voice not
there an hour ago. "There will be battle."

So, whether wise men or mad, the Hellenes were not to lay down their arms
without one struggle, and Glaucon knew not whether to be sorry or to be
proud.




                                CHAPTER XX


                                THERMOPYLAE


A rugged mountain, an inaccessible morass, and beyond that morass the sea:
the mountain thrusting so close upon the morass as barely to leave space
for a narrow wagon road. This was the western gate of Thermopylae. Behind
the narrow defile the mountain and swamp-land drew asunder; in the still
scanty opening hot springs gushed forth, sacred to Heracles, then again on
the eastern side Mt. OEta and the impenetrable swamp drew together, forming
the second of the "Hot Gates,"--the gates which Xerxes must unlock if he
would continue his march to Athens.

The Great King's couriers reported that the stubborn Hellenes had cast a
wall across the entrance, and that so far from showing terror at the
advent of majesty, were carelessly diverting themselves by athletic games,
and by combing and adorning their hair, a fact which the "Lord Prexaspes"
at least comprehended to mean that Leonidas and his Spartans were
preparing for desperate battle. Nevertheless, it was hard to persuade the
king that at last he confronted men who would resist him to his face.
Glaucon said it. Demaratus, the outlawed Spartan, said it. Xerxes,
however, remained angry and incredulous. Four long days he and his army
sat before the pass, "because," announced his couriers, "he wishes in his
benignity to give these madmen a chance to flee away and shun
destruction;" "because," spoke those nearest to Mardonius, the brain of
the army, "there is hot fighting ahead, and the general is resolved to
bring up the picked troops in the rear before risking a battle."

Then on the fifth day either Xerxes's patience was exhausted or Mardonius
felt ready. Strong regiments of Median infantry were ordered to charge
Leonidas's position, Xerxes not failing to command that they slay as few
of the wretches as possible, but drag them prisoners before his outraged
presence.

A noble charge. A terrible repulse. For the first time those Asiatics who
had forgotten Marathon discovered the overwhelming superiority that the
sheathing of heavy armour gave the Greek hoplites over the lighter armed
Median spearmen. The short lances and wooden targets of the attackers were
pitifully futile against the long spears and brazen shields of the
Hellenes. In the narrow pass the vast numbers of Barbarians went for
nothing. They could not use their archers, they could not charge with
their magnificent cavalry. The dead lay in heaps. The Medes attacked again
and again. At last an end came to their courage. The captains laid the
lash over their mutinous troops. The men bore the whips in sullen silence.
They would not charge again upon those devouring spears.

White with anger, Xerxes turned to Hydarnes and his "Immortals," the
infantry of the Life Guard. The general needed no second bidding. The
charge was driven home with magnificent spirit. But what the vassal Medes
could not accomplish, neither could the lordly Persians. The repulse was
bloody. If once Leonidas's line broke and the Persians rushed on with
howls of triumph, it was only to see the Hellenes' files close in a
twinkling and return to the onset with their foes in confusion. Hydarnes
led back his men at last. The king sat on the ivory throne just out of
arrow shot, watching the ebb and flow of the battle. Hydarnes approached
and prostrated himself.

"Omnipotence, I the least of your slaves put my life at your bidding.
Command that I forfeit my head, but my men can do no more. I have lost
hundreds. The pass is not to be stormed."

Only the murmur of assent from all the well-tried generals about the
throne saved Hydarnes from paying the last penalty. The king's rage was
fearful; men trembled to look on him. His words came so thick, the rest
could never follow all his curses and commands. Only Mardonius was bold
enough to stand up before his face.

"Your Eternity, this is an unlucky day. Is it not sacred to Angra-Mainyu
the Evil? The arch-Magian says the holy fire gives forth sparks of
ill-omen. Wait, then, till to-morrow. Verethraghna, the Angel of Victory,
will then return to your servants."

The bow-bearer led his trembling master to the royal tent, and naught more
of Xerxes was seen till the morning. All that night Mardonius never slept,
but went unceasingly the round of the host preparing for battle. Glaucon
saw little of him. The Athenian himself had been posted among the guard of
nobles directly about the person of the king, and he was glad he was set
nowhere else, otherwise he might have been ordered to join in the attack.
Like every other in the host, he slept under arms, and never returned to
Mardonius's pavilion. His heart had been in his eyes all that day. He had
believed Leonidas would be swept from the pass at the first onset. Even he
had underrated the Spartan prowess. The repulse of the Medes had
astonished him. When Hydarnes reeled back, he could hardly conceal his
joy. The Hellenes were fighting! The Hellenes were conquering! He forgot
he stood almost at Xerxes's side when the last charge failed; and barely
in time did he save himself from joining in the shout of triumph raised by
the defenders when the decimated Immortals slunk away. He had grown
intensely proud of his countrymen, and when he heard the startled Persian
lords muttering dark forbodings of the morrow, he all but laughed his
gladness in their faces.

So the night passed for him: the hard earth for a bed, a water cruse
wrapped in a cloak for a pillow. And just as the first red blush stole
over the green Malian bay and the mist-hung hills of Euboea beyond, he woke
with all the army. Mardonius had used the night well. Chosen contingents
from every corps were ready. Cavalrymen had been dismounted. Heavy masses
of Assyrian archers and Arabian slingers were advanced to prepare for the
attack by overwhelming volleys. The Persian noblemen, stung to madness by
their king's reproaches and their own sense of shame, bound themselves by
fearful oaths never to draw from the onset until victorious or dead. The
attack itself was led by princes of the blood, royal half-brothers of the
king. Xerxes sat again on the ivory throne, assured by every obsequious
tongue that the sacred fire gave fair omens, that to-day was the day of
victory.

The attack was magnificent. For an instant its fury seemed to carry the
Hellenes back. Where a Persian fell two stepped over him. The defenders
were swept against their wall. The Barbarians appeared to be storming it.
Then like the tide the battle turned. The hoplites, locking shields,
presented an impenetrable spear hedge. The charge spent itself in empty
promise. Mardonius, who had been in the thickest, nevertheless drew off
his men skilfully and prepared to renew the combat.

In the interval Glaucon, standing by the king, could see a short, firm
figure in black armour going in and out among the Hellenes, ordering their
array--Leonidas--he needed no bird to tell him. And as the Athenian stood
and watched, saw the Persians mass their files for another battering
charge, saw the Great King twist his beard whilst his gleaming eyes
followed the fate of his army, an impulse nigh irresistible came over him
to run one short bow-shot to that opposite array, and cry in his own Greek
tongue:--

"I am a Hellene, too! Look on me come to join you, to live and die with
you, with my face against the Barbarian!"

Cruel the fate that set him here, impotent, when on that band of
countrymen Queen Nike was shedding bright glory!

But he was "Glaucon the Traitor" still, to be awarded the traitor's doom
by Leonidas. Therefore the "Lord Prexaspes" must stand at his post,
guarding the king of the Aryans.

The second charge was as the first, the third was as the second. Mardonius
was full of recourses. By repeated attacks he strove to wear the stubborn
Hellenes down. The Persians proved their courage seven times. Ten of them
died gladly, if their deaths bought that of a single foe. But few as were
Leonidas's numbers, they were not so few as to fail to relieve one another
at the front of the press,--which front was fearfully narrow. And three
times, as his men drifted back in defeat, Xerxes the king "leaped from the
throne whereon he sat, in anguish for his army."

At noon new contingents from the rear took the place of the exhausted
attackers. The sun beat down with unpitying heat. The wounded lay
sweltering in their agony whilst the battle roared over them. Mardonius
never stopped to count his dead. Then at last came nightfall. Man could do
no more. As the shadows from OEta grew long over the close scene of combat,
even the proudest Persians turned away. They had lost thousands. Their
defeat was absolute. Before them and to westward and far away ranged the
jagged mountains, report had it, unthreaded by a single pass. To the
eastward was only the sea,--the sea closed to them by the Greek fleet at
the unseen haven of Artemisium. Was the triumph march of the Lord of the
World to end in this?

Xerxes spoke no word when they took him to his tent that night, a sign of
indescribable anger. Fear, humiliation, rage--all these seemed driving him
mad. His chamberlains and eunuchs feared to approach to take off his
golden armour. Mardonius came to the royal tent; the king, with curses he
had never hurled against the bow-bearer before, refused to see him. The
battle was ended. No one was hardy enough to talk of a fresh attack on the
morrow. Every captain had to report the loss of scores of his best. As
Glaucon rode back to Mardonius's tents, he overheard two infantry
officers:--

"A fearful day--the bow-bearer is likely to pay for it. I hope his Majesty
confines his anger only to him."

"Yes--Mardonius will walk the Chinvat bridge to-morrow. The king is turning
against him. Megabyzus is the bow-bearer's enemy, and already is gone to
his Majesty to say that it is Mardonius's blunders that have brought the
army to such a plight. The king will catch at that readily."

At the tents Glaucon found Artazostra and Roxana. They were both pale. The
news of the great defeat had been brought by a dozen messengers. Mardonius
had not arrived. He was not slain, that was certain, but Artazostra feared
the worst. The proud daughter of Darius found it hard to bear up.

"My husband has many enemies. Hitherto the king's favour has allowed him
to mock them. But if my brother deserts him, his ruin is speedy. Ah!
Ahura-Mazda, why hast Thou suffered us to see this day?"

Glaucon said what he could of comfort, which was little. Roxana wept
piteously; he was fain to soothe her by his caress,--something he had never
ventured before. Artazostra was on the point of calling her eunuchs and
setting forth for Xerxes's tent to plead for the life of her husband, when
suddenly Pharnuches, Mardonius's body-servant, came with news that
dispelled at least the fears of the women.

"I am bidden to tell your Ladyships that my master has silenced the
tongues of his enemies and is restored to the king's good favor. And I am
bidden also to command the Lord Prexaspes to come to the royal tent. His
Majesty has need of him."

Glaucon went, questioning much as to the service to be required. He did
not soon forget the scene that followed. The great pavilion was lit by a
score of resinous flambeaux. The red light shook over the green and purple
hangings, the silver plating of the tent-poles. At one end rose the golden
throne of the king; before it in a semicircle the stools of a dozen or
more princes and commanders. In the centre stood Mardonius questioning a
coarse-featured, ill-favoured fellow, who by his sheepskin dress and
leggings Glaucon instantly recognized as a peasant of this Malian country.
The king beckoned the Athenian into the midst and was clearly too eager to
stand on ceremony.

"Your Greek is better than Mardonius's, good Prexaspes. In a matter like
this we dare not trust too many interpreters. This man speaks the rough
dialect of his country, and few can understand him. Can you interpret?"

"I am passing familiar with the Locrian and Malian dialect, your Majesty."

"Question this man further as to what he will do for us. We have
understood him but lamely."

Glaucon proceeded to comply. The man, who was exceeding awkward and ill at
ease in such august company, spoke an outrageous shepherd's jargon which
even the Athenian understood with effort. But his business came out
speedily. He was Ephialtes, the son of one Eurydemus, a Malian, a
dull-witted grazier of the country, brought to Mardonius by hope of
reward. The general, partly understanding his purpose, had brought him to
the king. In brief, he was prepared, for due compensation, to lead the
Persians by an almost unknown mountain path over the ridge of OEta and to
the rear of Leonidas's position at Thermopylae, where the Hellenes,
assailed front and rear, would inevitably be destroyed.

As Glaucon interpreted, the shout of relieved gladness from the Persian
grandees made the tent-cloths shake. Xerxes's eyes kindled. He clapped his
hands.

"Reward? He shall have ten talents! But where? How?"

The man asserted that the path was easy and practicable for a large body
of troops. He had often been over it with his sheep and goats. If the
Persians would start a force at once--it was already quite dark--they could
fall upon Leonidas at dawn. The Spartan would be completely trapped, or
forced to open the defile without another spear thrust.

"A care, fellow," warned Mardonius, regarding the man sharply; "you speak
glibly, but if this is a trick to lead a band of the king's servants to
destruction, understand you play with deadly dice. If the troops march,
you shall have your hands knotted together and a soldier walking behind to
cut your throat at the first sign of treachery."

Glaucon interpreted the threat. The man did not wince.

"There is no trap. I will guide you."

That was all they could get him to say.

"And do not the Hellenes know of this mountain path and guard it?"
persisted the bow-bearer.

Ephialtes thought not; at least if they had, they had not told off any
efficient detachment to guard it. Hydarnes cut the matter short by rising
from his stool and casting himself before the king.

"A boon, your Eternity, a boon!"

"What is it?" asked the monarch.

"The Immortals have been disgraced. Twice they have been repulsed with
ignominy. The shame burns hot in their breasts. Suffer them to redeem
their honour. Suffer me to take this man and all the infantry of the Life
Guard, and at dawn the Lord of the World shall see his desire over his
miserable enemies."

"The words of Hydarnes are good," added Mardonius, incisively, and Xerxes
beamed and nodded assent.

"Go, scale the mountain with the Immortals and tell this Ephialtes there
await him ten talents and a girdle of honour if the thing goes well; if
ill, let him be flayed alive and his skin be made the head of a
kettledrum."

The stolid peasant did not blench even at this. Glaucon remained in the
tent, translating and hearing all the details: how Hydarnes was to press
the attack from the rear at early dawn, how Mardonius was to conduct
another onset from the front. At last the general of the guard knelt
before the king for the last time.

"Thus I go forth, Omnipotence, and to-morrow, behold your will upon your
enemies, or behold me never more."

"I have faithful slaves," said Xerxes, rising and smiling benignantly upon
the general and the bow-bearer. "Let us disperse, but first let command be
given the Magians to cry all night to Mithra and Tishtrya, and to
sacrifice to them a white horse."

"Your Majesty always enlists the blessings of heaven for your servants,"
bowed Mardonius, as the company broke up and the king went away to his
inner tent and his concubines. Glaucon lingered until most of the grandees
had gone forth, then the bow-bearer went to him.

"Go back to my tents," ordered Mardonius; "tell Artazostra and Roxana that
all is well, that Ahura has delivered me from a great strait and restored
me to the king's favour, and that to-morrow the gate of Hellas will be
opened."

"You are still bloody and dusty. You have watched all last night and been
in the thick all day," expostulated the Athenian; "come to the tents with
me and rest."

The bow-bearer shook his head.

"No rest until to-morrow, and then the rest of victory or a longer one.
Now go; the women are consuming with their care."

Glaucon wandered back through the long avenues of pavilions. The lights of
innumerable camp-fires, the hum of thousands of voices, the snorting of
horses, the grumbling of camels, the groans of men wounded--all these and
all other sights and sounds from the countless host were lost to him. He
walked on by a kind of animal instinct that took him to Mardonius's
encampment through the mazes of the canvas city. It was dawning on him
with a terrible clearness that he was become a traitor to Hellas in very
deed. It was one thing to be a passive onlooker of a battle, another to be
a participant in a plot for the ruin of Leonidas. Unless warned betimes
the Spartan king and all who followed him infallibly would be captured or
slaughtered to a man. And he had heard all--the traitor, the discussion,
the design--had even, if without his choice, been partner and helper in the
same. The blood of Leonidas and his men would be on his head. Every curse
the Athenians had heaped on him once unjustly, he would deserve. Now truly
he would be, even in his own mind's eyes, "Glaucon the Traitor, partner to
the betrayal of Thermopylae." The doltish peasant, lured by the great
reward, he might forgive,--himself, the high-born Alcmaeonid, never.

From this revery he was shaken by finding himself at the entrance to the
tents of Mardonius. Artazostra and Roxana came to meet him. When he told
of the deliverance of the bow-bearer, he had joy by the light in their
eyes. Roxana had never shone in greater beauty. He spoke of the heat of
the sun, of his throbbing head. The women bathed his forehead with
lavender-water, touching him with their own soft hands. Roxana sang again
to him, a low, crooning song of the fragrant Nile, the lotus bells, the
nodding palms, the perfumed breeze from the desert. Whilst he watched her
through half-closed eyes, the visions of that day of battles left him. He
sat wrapped in a dream world, far from stern realities of men and arms. So
for a while, as he lounged on the divans, following the play of the
torch-light on the face of Roxana as her long fingers plied the strings.
What was it to him if Leonidas fought a losing battle? Was not his
happiness secure--be it in Hellas, or Egypt, or Bactria? He tried to
persuade himself thus. At the end, when he and Roxana stood face to face
for the parting, he violated all Oriental custom, yet he knew her brother
would not be angry. He took her in his arms and gave her kiss for kiss.

Then he went to his own tent to seek rest. But Hypnos did not come for a
long time with his poppies. Once out of the Egyptian's presence the
haunting terror had returned, "Glaucon the Traitor!" Those three words
were always uppermost. At last, indeed, sleep came and as he slept he
dreamed.




                               CHAPTER XXI


                        THE THREE HUNDRED--AND ONE


As Glaucon slept he found himself again in Athens. He was on the familiar
way from the cool wrestling ground of the Academy and walking toward the
city through the suburb of Ceramicus. Just as he came to the three tall
pine trees before the gate, after he had passed the tomb of Solon, behold!
a fair woman stood in the path and looked on him. She was beyond mortal
height and of divine beauty, yet a beauty grave and stern. Her gray eyes
cut to his heart like swords. On her right hand hovered a winged Victory,
on her shoulder rested an owl, at her feet twined a wise serpent, in her
left hand she bore the aegis, the shaggy goat-skin engirt with
snakes--emblem of Zeus's lightnings. Glaucon knew that she was Athena
Polias, the Warder of Athens, and lifted his hands to adore her. But she
only looked on him in silent anger. Fire seemed leaping from her eyes. The
more Glaucon besought, the more she turned away. Fear possessed him. "Woe
is me," he trembled, "I have enraged a terrible immortal." Then suddenly
the woman's countenance was changed. The aegis, the serpent, the Victory,
all vanished; he saw Hermione before him, beautiful as on the day she ran
to greet him at Eleusis, yet sad as was his last sight of her the moment
he fled from Colonus. Seized with infinite longing, he sprang to her. But
lo! she drifted back as into the air. It was even as when Odysseus
followed the shade of his mother in the shadowy Land of the Dead.

  "Yearned he sorely then to clasp her,
    Thrice his arms were opened wide:
  From his hands so strong, so loving,
    Like a dream she seemed to glide,
  And away, away she flitted,
    Whilst he grasped the empty space,
  And a pain shot through him, maddening,
    As he strove for her embrace."

He pursued, she drifted farther, farther. Her face was inexpressibly
sorrowful. And Glaucon knew that she spoke to him.

"I have believed you innocent, though all Athens calls you 'traitor.' I
have been true to you, though all men rise up against me. In what manner
have you kept your innocence? Have you had love for another, caresses for
another, kisses for another? How will you prove your loyalty to Athens and
return?"

"Hermione!" Glaucon cried, not in his dream, but quite aloud. He awoke
with a start. Outside the tent sentry was calling to sentry, changing the
watch just before the dawning. It was perfectly plain to him what he must
do. His dream had only given shape to the ferment in his brain, a ferment
never ceasing while his body slept. He must go instantly to the Greek camp
and warn Leonidas. If the Spartan did not trust him, no matter, he had
done his duty. If Leonidas slew him on the spot, again no matter, life
with an eternally gnawing conscience could be bought on too hard terms. He
knew, as though Zeus's messenger Iris had spoken it, that Hermione had
never believed him guilty, that she had been in all things true to him. He
could never betray her trust.

His head now was clear and calm. He arose, threw on his cloak, and buckled
about his waist a short sword. The Nubian boy that Mardonius had given him
for a body-servant awoke on his mat, and asked wonderingly "whither his
Lordship was going?" Glaucon informed him he must be at the front before
daybreak, and bade him remain behind and disturb no one. But the Athenian
was not to execute his design unhindered. As he passed out of the tent and
into the night, where the morning stars were burning, and where the first
red was creeping upward from the sea, two figures glided forth from the
next pavilion. He knew them and shrank from them. They were Artazostra and
Roxana.

"You go forth early, dearest Prexaspes," spoke the Egyptian, throwing back
her veil, and even in the starlight he saw the anxious flash of her eyes,
"does the battle join so soon that you take so little sleep?"

"It joins early, lady," spoke Glaucon, his wits wandering. In the
intensity of his purpose he had not thought of the partings with the
people he must henceforth reckon foes. He was sorely beset, when Roxana
drew near and laid her hand upon his shoulder.

"Your Greeks will resist terribly," she spoke. "We women dread the battle
more than you. Yours is the fierce gladness of the combat, ours only the
waiting, the heavy tidings, the sorrow. Therefore Artazostra and I could
not sleep, but have been watching together. You will of course be near
Mardonius my brother. You will guard him from all danger. Leonidas will
resist fearfully when at bay. Ah! what is this?"

In pressing closer she had discovered the Athenian wore no cuirass.

"You will not risk the battle without armour?" was her cry.

"I shall not need it, lady," answered he, and only half conscious what he
did, stretched forth as if to put her away. Roxana shrank back, grieved
and wondering, but Artazostra seized his arm quickly.

"What is this, Prexaspes? All is not well. Your manner is strange!"

He shook her off, almost savagely.

"Call me not Prexaspes," he cried, not in Persian, but in Greek. "I am
Glaucon of Athens; as Glaucon I must live, as Glaucon die. No man--not
though he desire it--can disown the land that bore him. And if I dreamed I
was a Persian, I wake to find myself a Greek. Therefore forget me forever.
I go to my own!"

"Prexaspes, my lover,"--Roxana, strong in fear and passion, clung about his
girdle, while again Artazostra seized him,--"last night I was in your arms.
Last night you kissed me. Are we not to be happy together? What is this
you say?"

He stood one instant silent, then shook himself and put them both aside
with a marvellous ease.

"Forget my name," he commanded. "If I have given you sorrow, I repent it.
I go to my own. Go you to yours. My place is with Leonidas--to save him, or
more like to die with him! Farewell!"

He sprang away from them. He saw Roxana sink upon the ground. He heard
Artazostra calling to the horse-boys and the eunuchs,--perhaps she bade
them to pursue. Once he looked back, but never twice. He knew the
watchwords, and all the sentries let him pass by freely. With a feverish
stride he traced the avenues of sleeping tents. Soon he was at the
outposts, where strong divisions of Cissian and Babylonian infantrymen
were slumbering under arms, ready for the attack the instant the uproar
from the rear of the pass told how Hydarnes had completed his circuit.
Eos--"Rosy-Fingered Dawn"--was just shimmering above the mist-hung peak of
Mt. Telethrius in Euboea across the bay when Glaucon came to the last
Persian outpost. The pickets saluted with their lances, as he went by
them, taking him for a high officer on a reconnoissance before the onset.
Next he was on the scene of the former battles. He stumbled over riven
shields, shattered spear butts, and many times over ghastlier
objects--objects yielding and still warm--dead men, awaiting the crows of
the morrow. He walked straight on, while the dawn strengthened and the
narrow pass sprang into view, betwixt mountain and morass. Then at last a
challenge, not in Persian, but in round clear Doric.

"Halt! Who passes?"

Glaucon held up his right hand, and advanced cautiously. Two men in heavy
armour approached, and threatened his breast with their lance points.

"Who are you?"

"A friend, a Hellene--my speech tells that. Take me to Leonidas. I've a
story worth telling."

"_Euge!_ Master 'Friend,' our general can't be waked for every deserter.
We'll call our decarch."

A shout brought the subaltern commanding the Greek outposts. He was a
Spartan of less sluggish wits than many of his breed, and presently
believed Glaucon when he declared he had reason in asking for Leonidas.

"But your accent is Athenian?" asked the decarch, with wonderment.

"Ay, Athenian," assented Glaucon.

"Curses on you! I thought no Athenian ever Medized. What business had
_you_ in the Persian camp? Who of your countrymen are there save the sons
of Hippias?"

"Not many," rejoined the fugitive, not anxious to have the questions
pushed home.

"Well, to Leonidas you shall go, sir Athenian, and state your business.
But you are like to get a bearish welcome. Since your pretty Glaucon's
treason, our king has not wasted much love even on repentant traitors."

With a soldier on either side, the deserter was marched within the barrier
wall. Another encampment, vastly smaller and less luxurious than the
Persian, but of martial orderliness, spread out along the pass. The
Hellenes were just waking. Some were breakfasting from helmets full of
cold boiled peas, others buckled on the well-dinted bronze cuirasses and
greaves. Men stared at Glaucon as he was led by them.

"A deserter they take to the chief," ran the whisper, and a little knot of
idle Spartans trailed behind, when at last Glaucon's guides halted him
before a brown tent barely larger than the others.

A man sat on a camp chest by the entrance, and was busy with an iron spoon
eating "black broth"(9) from a huge kettle. In the dim light Glaucon could
just see that he wore a purple cloak flung over his black armour, and that
the helmet resting beside him was girt by a wreath of gold foil.

The two guards dropped their spears in salute. The man looked upward.

"A deserter," reported one of Glaucon's mentors; "he says he has important
news."

"Wait!" ordered the general, making the iron spoon clack steadily.

"The weal of Hellas rests thereon. Listen!" pleaded the nervous Athenian.

"Wait!" was the unruffled answer, and still the iron spoon went on plying.
The Spartan lifted a huge morsel from the pot, chewed it deliberately,
then put the vessel by. Next he inspected the newcomer from head to toe,
then at last gave his permission.

"Well?"

Glaucon's words were like a bursting torrent.

"Fly, your Excellency! I'm from Xerxes's camp. I was at the Persian
council. The mountain path is betrayed. Hydarnes and the guard are almost
over it. They will fall upon your rear. Fly, or you and all your men are
trapped!"

"Well," observed the Spartan, slowly, motioning for the deserter to cease,
but Glaucon's fears made that impossible.

"I say I was in Xerxes's own tent. I was interpreter betwixt the king and
the traitor. I know all whereof I say. If you do not flee instantly, the
blood of these men is on your head."

Leonidas again scanned the deserter with piercing scrutiny, then flung a
question.

"Who are you?"

The blood leaped into the Athenian's cheeks. The tongue that had wagged so
nimbly clove in his mouth. He grew silent.

"Who are you?"

As the question was repeated, the scrutiny grew yet closer. The soldiers
were pressing around, one comrade leaning over another's shoulder. Twenty
saw the fugitive's form straighten as he stood in the morning twilight.

"I am Glaucon of Athens, Isthmionices!"

"Ah!" Leonidas's jaw dropped for an instant. He showed no other
astonishment, but the listening Spartans raised a yell.

"Death! Stone the traitor!"

Leonidas, without a word, smote the man nearest to him with a spear butt.
The soldiers were silent instantly. Then the chief turned back to the
deserter.

"Why here?"

Glaucon had never prayed for the gifts of Peitho, "Our Lady Persuasion,"
more than at that crucial moment. Arguments, supplications, protestations
of innocence, curses upon his unknown enemies, rushed to his lips
together. He hardly realized what he himself said. Only he knew that at
the end the soldiers did not tug at their hilts as before and scowl so
threateningly, and Leonidas at last lifted his hand as if to bid him
cease.

"_Euge!_" grunted the chief. "So you wish me to believe you a victim of
fate, and trust your story? The pass is turned, you say? Masistes the seer
said the libation sputtered on the flame with ill-omen when he sacrificed
this morning. Then you come. The thing shall be looked into. Call the
captains."

                              * * * * * * *

The locharchs and taxiarchs of the Greeks assembled. It was a brief and
gloomy council of war. While Euboulus, commanding the Corinthian
contingent, was still questioning whether the deserter was worthy of
credence, a scout came running down Mt. OEta confirming the worst. The
cowardly Phocians watching the mountain trail had fled at the first arrows
of Hydarnes. It was merely a question of time before the Immortals would
be at Alpeni, the village in Leonidas's rear. There was only one thing to
say, and the Spartan chief said it.

"You must retreat."

The taxiarchs of the allied Hellenes under him were already rushing forth
to their men to bid them fly for dear life. Only one or two stayed by the
tent, marvelling much to observe that Leonidas gave no orders to his
Lacedaemonians to join in the flight. On the contrary, Glaucon, as he stood
near, saw the general lift the discarded pot of broth and explore it again
with the iron spoon.

"O Father Zeus," cried the incredulous Corinthian leader. "Are you turned
mad, Leonidas?"

"Time enough for all things," returned the unmoved Spartan, continuing his
breakfast.

"Time!" shouted Euboulus. "Have we not to flee on wings, or be cut off?"

"Fly, then."

"But you and your Spartans?"

"We will stay."

"Stay? A handful against a million? Do I hear aright? What can you do?"

"Die."

"The gods forbid! Suicide is a fearful end. No man should rush on
destruction. What requires you to perish?"

"Honour."

"Honour! Have you not won glory enough by holding Xerxes's whole power at
bay two days? Is not your life precious to Hellas? What is the gain?"

"Glory to Sparta."

Then in the red morning half-light, folding his big hands across his
mailed chest, Leonidas looked from one to another of the little circle.
His voice was still in unemotional gutturals when he delivered the longest
speech of his life.

"We of Sparta were ordered to defend this pass. The order shall be obeyed.
The rest of you must go away--all save the Thebans, whose loyalty I
distrust. Tell Leotychides, my colleague at Sparta, to care for Gorgo my
wife and Pleistarchus my young son, and to remember that Themistocles the
Athenian loves Hellas and gives sage counsel. Pay Strophius of Epidaurus
the three hundred drachmae I owe him for my horse. Likewise--"

A second breathless scout interrupted with the tidings that Hydarnes was
on the last stretches of his road. The chief arose, drew the helmet down
across his face, and motioned with his spear.

"Go!" he ordered.

The Corinthian would have seized his hand. He shook him off. At Leonidas's
elbow was standing the trumpeter for his three hundred from Lacedaemon.

"Blow!" commanded the chief.

The keen blast cut the air. The chief deliberately wrapped the purple
mantle around himself and adjusted the gold circlet over his helmet, for
on the day of battle a Lacedaemonian was wont to wear his best. And even as
he waited there came to him out of the midst of the panic-stricken,
dissolving camp, one by one, tall men in armour, who took station beside
him--the men of Sparta who had abided steadfast while all others prepared
to flee, waiting for the word of the chief.

Presently they stood, a long black line, motionless, silent, whilst the
other divisions filed in swift fear past. Only the Thespians--let their
names not be forgotten--chose to share the Laconians' glory and their doom
and took their stand behind the line of Leonidas. With them stood also the
Thebans, but compulsion held them, and they tarried merely to desert and
pawn their honour for their lives.

More couriers. Hydarnes's van was in sight of Alpeni now. The retreat of
the Corinthians, Tegeans, and other Hellenes became a run; only once
Euboulus and his fellow-captains turned to the silent warrior that stood
leaning on his spear.

"Are you resolved on madness, Leonidas?"

"_Chaire!_ Farewell!" was the only answer he gave them. Euboulus sought no
more, but faced another figure, hitherto almost forgotten in the confusion
of the retreat.

"Haste, Master Deserter, the Barbarians will give you an overwarm welcome,
and you are no Spartan; save yourself!"

Glaucon did not stir.

"Do you not see that it is impossible?" he answered, then strode across to
Leonidas. "I must stay."

"Are you also mad? You are young--" The good-hearted Corinthian strove to
drag him into the retreating mob.

Glaucon sprang away from him and addressed the silent general.

"Shall not Athens remain by Sparta, if Sparta will accept?"

He could see Leonidas's cold eyes gleam out through the slits in his
helmet. The general reached forth his hand.

"Sparta accepts," called he; "they have lied concerning your Medizing! And
you, Euboulus, do not filch from him his glory."

"Zeus pity you!" cried Euboulus, running at last. One of the Spartans
brought to Glaucon the heavy hoplite's armour and the ponderous spear and
shield. He took his place in the line with the others. Leonidas stalked to
the right wing of his scant array, the post of honour and of danger. The
Thespians closed up behind. Shield was set to shield. Helmets were drawn
low. The lance points projected in a bristling hedge in front. All was
ready.

The general made no speech to fire his men. There was no wailing, no
crying to the gods, no curses upon the tardy ephors at Lacedaemon who had
deferred sending their whole strong levy instead of the pitiful three
hundred. Sparta had sent this band to hold the pass. They had gone,
knowing she might require the supreme sacrifice. Leonidas had spoken for
all his men. "Sparta demanded it." What more was to be said?

As for Glaucon he could think of nothing save--in the language of his
people--"this was a beautiful manner and place in which to die." "Count no
man happy until he meets a happy end," so had said Solon, and of all ends
what could be more fortunate than this? Euboulus would tell in Athens, in
all Hellas, how he had remained with Leonidas and maintained Athenian
honour when Corinthian and Tegean turned away. From "Glaucon the Traitor"
he would be raised to "Glaucon the Hero." Hermione, Democrates, and all
others he loved would flush with pride and no more with shame when men
spoke of him. Could a life of a hundred years add to his glory more than
he could win this day?

"Blow!" commanded Leonidas again, and again pealed the trumpet. The line
moved beyond the wall toward Xerxes's camp in the open beside the Asopus.
Why wait for Hydarnes's coming? They would meet the king of the Aryans
face to face and show him the terrible manner in which the men of
Lacedaemon knew how to die.

As they passed from the shadow of the mountain, the sun sprang over the
hills of Euboea, making fire of the bay and bathing earth and heavens with
glory. In their rear was already shouting. Hydarnes had reached his goal
at Alpeni. All retreat was ended. The thin line swept onward. Before them
spread the whole host of the Barbarian as far as the eye could reach,--a
tossing sea of golden shields, scarlet surcoats, silver
lance-heads,--awaiting with its human billows to engulf them. The Laconians
halted just beyond bow shot. The line locked tighter. Instinctively every
man pressed closer to his comrade. Then before the eyes of Xerxes's host,
which kept silence, marvelling, the handful broke forth with their paean.
They threw their well-loved charging song of Tyrtaeus in the very face of
the king.

  "Press the charge, O sons of Sparta!
  Ye are sons of men born free:
  Press the charge; 'tis where the shields lock,
  That your sires would have you be!
  Honour's cheaply sold for life,
  Press the charge, and join the strife:
  Let the coward cling to breath,
  Let the base shrink back from death,
  _Press the charge, let cravens flee!_"

Leonidas's spear pointed to the ivory throne, around which and him that
sat thereon in blue and scarlet glittered the Persian grandees.

"Onward!"

Immortal ichor seemed in the veins of every Greek. They burst into one
shout.

"The king! The king!"

A roar from countless drums, horns, and atabals answered from the
Barbarians, as across the narrow plain-land charged the three hundred--and
one.




                               CHAPTER XXII


                        MARDONIUS GIVES A PROMISE


"Ugh--the dogs died hard, but they are dead," grunted Xerxes, still
shivering on the ivory throne. The battle had raged disagreeably close to
him.

"They are dead; even so perish all of your Eternity's enemies," rejoined
Mardonius, close by. The bow-bearer himself was covered with blood and
dust. A Spartan sword had grazed his forehead. He had exposed himself
recklessly, as well he might, for it had taken all the efforts of the
Persian captains, as well as the ruthless laying of whips over the backs
of their men, to make the king's battalions face the frenzied Hellenes,
until the closing in of Hydarnes from the rear gave the battle its
inevitable ending.

Xerxes was victorious. The gate of Hellas was unlocked. The mountain wall
of OEta would hinder him no more. But the triumph had been bought with a
price which made Mardonius and every other general in the king's host
shake his head.

"Lord," reported Hystaspes, commander of the Scythians, "one man in every
seven of my band is slain, and those the bravest."

"Lord," spoke Artabazus, who led the Parthians, "my men swear the Hellenes
were possessed by _daevas_. They dare not approach even their dead bodies."

"Lord," asked Hydarnes, "will it please your Eternity to appoint five
other officers in the Life Guard, for of my ten lieutenants over the
Immortals five are slain?"

But the heaviest news no man save Mardonius dared to bring to the king.

"May it please your Omnipotence," spoke the bow-bearer, "to order the
funeral pyres of cedar and precious oils to be prepared for your brothers
Abrocomes and Hyperanthes, and command the Magians to offer prayers for
the repose of their _fravashis_ in Garonmana the Blessed, for it pleased
Mazda the Great they should fall before the Hellenes."

Xerxes waved his hand in assent. It was hard to be the "Lord of the
World," and be troubled by such little things as the deaths of a few
thousand servants, or even of two of his numerous half-brethren, hard at
least on a day like this when he had seen his desire over his enemies.

"They shall be well avenged," he announced with kingly dignity, then
smiled with satisfaction when they brought him the shield and helmet of
Leonidas, the madman, who had dared to contemn his power. But all the
generals who stood by were grim and sad. One more such victory would bring
the army close to destruction.

Xerxes's happiness, however, was not to be clouded. From childish fears he
had passed to childish exultation.

"Have you found the body also of this crazed Spartan?" he inquired of the
cavalry officer who had brought the trophies.

"As you say, Omnipotence," rejoined the captain, bowing in the saddle.

"Good, then. Let the head be struck off and the trunk fastened on a cross
that all may see it. And you, Mardonius," addressing the bow-bearer, "ride
back to the hillock where these madmen made their last stand. If you
discover among the corpses any who yet breathe, bring them hither to me,
that they may learn the futility of resisting my might."

The bow-bearer shrugged his shoulders. He loved a fair battle and fair
treatment of valiant foes. The dishonouring of the corpse of Leonidas was
displeasing to more than one high-minded Aryan nobleman. But the king had
spoken, and was to be obeyed. Mardonius rode back to the hillock at the
mouth of the pass, where the Hellenes had retired--after their spears were
broken and they could resist only with swords, stones, or naked hands--for
the final death grip.

The slain Barbarians lay in heaps. The Greeks had been crushed at the end,
not in close strife, but by showers of arrows. Mardonius dismounted and
went with a few followers among the dead. Plunderers were already at their
harpy work of stripping the slain. The bow-bearer chased them angrily
away. He oversaw the task which his attendants performed as quickly as
possible. Their toil was not quite fruitless. Three or four Thespians were
still breathing, a few more of the helots who had attended Leonidas's
Spartans, but not one of the three hundred but seemed dead, and that too
with many wounds.

Snofru, Mardonius's Egyptian body-servant, rose from the ghastly work and
grinned with his ivories at his master.

"All the rest are slain, Excellency."

"You have not searched that pile yonder."

Snofru and his helpers resumed their toil. Presently the Egyptian dragged
from a bloody heap a body, and raised a yell. "Another one--he breathes!"

"There's life in him. He shall not be left to the crows. Take him forth
and lay him with the others that are living."

It was not easy to roll the three corpses from their feebly stirring
comrade. When this was done, the stricken man was still encased in his
cuirass and helmet. They saw only that his hands were slim and white.

"With care," ordered the humane bow-bearer, "he is a young man. I heard
Leonidas took only older men on his desperate venture. Here, rascals, do
you not see he is smothered in that helmet? Lift him up, unbuckle the
cuirass. By Mithra, he has a strong and noble form! Now the helmet--uncover
the face."

But as the Egyptian did so, his master uttered a shout of mingled
wonderment and terror.

"Glaucon--Prexaspes, and in Spartan armour!"

What had befallen Glaucon was in no wise miraculous. He had borne his part
in the battle until the Hellenes fell back to the fatal hillock. Then in
one of the fierce onsets which the Barbarians attempted before they had
recourse to the simpler and less glorious method of crushing their foes by
arrow fire, a Babylonian's war club had dashed upon his helmet. The stout
bronze had saved him from wound, but under the stroke strength and
consciousness had left him in a flash. The moment after he fell, the
soldier beside him had perished by a javelin, and falling above the
Athenian made his body a ghastly shield against the surge and trampling of
the battle. Glaucon lay scathless but senseless through the final
catastrophe. Now consciousness was returning, but he would have died of
suffocation save for Snofru's timely aid.

It was well for the Athenian that Mardonius was a man of ready devices. He
had not seen Glaucon at his familiar post beside the king, but had
presumed the Hellene had remained at the tents with the women, unwilling
to watch the destruction of his people. In the rush and roar of the battle
the messenger Artazostra had sent her husband telling of "Prexaspes's"
flight had never reached him. But Mardonius could divine what had
happened. The swallow must fly south in the autumn. The Athenian had
returned to his own. The bow-bearer's wrath at his protege's desertion was
overmastered by the consuming fear that tidings of Prexaspes's disloyalty
would get to the king. Xerxes's wrath would be boundless. Had he not
proffered his new subject all the good things of his empire? And to be
rewarded thus! Glaucon's recompense would be to be sawn asunder or flung
into a serpent's cage.

Fortunately Mardonius had only his own personal followers around him. He
could count on their discreet loyalty. Vouchsafing no explanations, but
bidding them say not a word of their discovery on their heads, he ordered
Snofru and his companions to make a litter of cloaks and lances, to throw
away Glaucon's tell-tale Spartan armour, and bear him speedily to
Artazostra's tents. The stricken man was groaning feebly, moving his
limbs, muttering incoherently. The sight of Xerxes driving in person to
inspect the battle-field made Mardonius hasten the litter away, while he
remained to parley with the king.

"So only a few are alive?" asked Xerxes, leaning over the silver rail of
the chariot, and peering on the upturned faces of the dead which were
nearly trampled by his horses. "Are any sound enough to set before me?"

"None, your Eternity; even the handful that live are desperately wounded.
We have laid them yonder."

"Let them wait, then; all around here seem dead. Ugly hounds!" muttered
the monarch, still peering down; "even in death they seem to grit their
teeth and defy me. Faugh! The stench is already terrible. It is just as
well they are dead. Angra-Mainyu surely possessed them to fight so! It
cannot be there are many more who can fight like this left in Hellas,
though Demaratus, the Spartan outlaw, says there are. Drive away,
Pitiramphes--and you, Mardonius, ride beside me. I cannot abide those
corpses. Where is my handkerchief? The one with the Sabaean nard on it. I
will hold it to my nose. Most refreshing! And I had a question to ask--I
have forgotten what."

"Whether news has come from the fleets before Artemisium?" spoke
Mardonius, galloping close to the wheel.

"Not that. Ah! I remember. Where was Prexaspes? I did not see him near me.
Did he stay in the tents while these mad men were destroyed? It was not
loyal, yet I forgive him. After all, he was once a Hellene."

"May it please your Eternity,"--Mardonius chose his words carefully,--a
Persian always loved the truth, and lies to the king were doubly
impious,--"Prexaspes was not in the tents but in the thick of the battle."

"Ah!" Xerxes smiled pleasantly, "it was right loyal of him to show his
devotion to me thus. And he acquitted himself valiantly?"

"Most valiantly, Omnipotence."

"Doubly good. Yet he ought to have stayed near me. If he had been a true
Persian, he would not have withdrawn from the person of the king, even to
display his prowess in combat. Still he did well. Where is he?"

"I regret to tell your Eternity he was desperately wounded, though your
servant hopes not unto death. He is even now being taken to my tents."

"Where that pretty dancer, your sister, will play the surgeon--ha!" cried
the king. "Well, tell him his Lord is grateful. He shall not be forgotten.
If his wounds do not mend, call in my body-physicians. And I will send him
something in gratitude--a golden cimeter, perhaps, or it may be another
cream Nisaean charger."

A general rode up to the chariot with his report, and Mardonius was
suffered to gallop to his own tents, blessing Mazda; he had saved the
Athenian, yet had not told a lie.

                              * * * * * * *

The ever ready eunuchs of Artazostra ran to tell Mardonius of the
Hellene's strange desertion, even before their lord dismounted. Mardonius
was not astonished now, however much the tidings pained him. The Greek had
escaped more than trifling wounds; ten days would see him sound and hale,
but the stunning blow had left his wits still wandering. He had believed
himself dead at first, and demanded why Charon took so long with his
ferry-boat. He had not recognized Roxana, but spoke one name many
times--"Hermione!" And the Egyptian, understanding too well, went to her
own tent weeping bitterly.

"He has forsaken us," spoke Artazostra, harshly, to her husband. "He has
paid kindness with disloyalty. He has chosen the lot of his desperate race
rather than princely state amongst the Aryans. Your sister is in agony."

"And I with her," returned the bow-bearer, gravely, "but let us not forget
one thing--this man has saved our lives. And all else weighs small in the
balance."

When Mardonius went to him, Glaucon was again himself. He lay on bright
pillows, his forehead swathed in linen. His eyes were unnaturally bright.

"You know what has befallen?" asked Mardonius.

"They have told me. I almost alone of all the Hellenes have not been
called to the heroes' Elysium, to the glory of Theseus and Achilles, the
glory that shall not die. Yet I am content. For plainly the Olympians have
destined that I should see and do great things in Hellas, otherwise they
would not have kept me back from Leonidas's glory."

The Athenian's voice rang confidently. None of the halting weakness
remained that had made it falter once when Mardonius asked him, "Will your
Hellenes fight?" He spoke as might one returned crowned with the victor's
laurel.

"And wherefore are you grown so bold?" The bow-bearer was troubled as he
looked on him. "Nobly you and your handful fought. We Persians honour the
brave, and full honour we give to you. But was it not graven upon the
stars what should befall? Were not Leonidas, his men, and you all mad--"

"Ah, yes! divinely mad." Brighter still grew the Athenian's eyes. "For
that moment of exultation when we charged to meet the king I would again
pay a lifetime."

"Yet the gateway of Hellas is unlocked. Your bravest are fallen. Your land
is defenceless. What else can be written hereafter save, 'The Hellenes
strove with fierce courage to fling back Xerxes. Their valour was
foolishness. The god turned against them. The king prevailed.' "

But Glaucon met the Persian's glance with one more bold.

"No, Mardonius, good friend, for do not think that we must be foes one to
another because our people are at war,--I can answer you with ease.
Leonidas you have slain, and his handful, and you have pierced the
mountain wall of OEta, and no doubt your king's host will march even to
Athens. But do not dream Hellas is conquered by striding over her land.
Before you shall possess the land you must first possess the men. And I
say to you, Athens is still left, and Sparta left, free and strong, with
men whose hearts and hands can never fail. I doubted once. But now I doubt
no more. And our gods will fight for us. Your Ahura-Mazda has still to
prevail over Zeus the Thunderer and Athena of the Pure Heart."

"And you?" asked the Persian.

"And as for me, I know I have cast away by my own act all the good things
you and your king would fain bestow upon me. Perhaps I deserve death at
your hands. I will never plead for respite, but this I know, whether I
live or die, it shall be as Glaucon of Athens who owns no king but Zeus,
no loyalty save to the land that bore him."

There was stillness in the tent. The wounded man sank back on the pillows,
breathing deep, closing his eyes, expectant almost of a burst of wrath
from the Persian. But Mardonius answered without trace of anger.

"Friend, your words cut keenly, and your boasts are high. Only the Most
High knoweth whether you boast aright. Yet this I say, that much as I
desire your friendship, would see you my brother, even,--you know that,--I
dare not tell you you do wholly wrong. A man is given one country and one
manner of faith in God. He does not choose them. I was born to serve the
lord of the Aryans, and to spread the triumphs of Mithra the Glorious, and
you were born in Athens. I would it were otherwise. Artazostra and I would
fain have made you Persian like ourselves. My sister loves you. Yet we
cannot strive against fate. Will you go back to your own people and share
their lot, however direful?"

"Since life is given me, I will."

Mardonius stepped to the bedside and gave the Athenian his right hand.

"At the island you saved my life and that of my best beloved. Let it never
be said that Mardonius, son of Gobryas, is ungrateful. To-day, in some
measure, I have repaid the debt I owe. If you will have it so, as speedily
as your strength returns and opportunity offers I will return you to your
people. And amongst them may your own gods show you favour, for you will
have none from ours!"

Glaucon took the proffered hand in silent gratitude. He was still very
weak and rested on the pillows, breathing hard. The bow-bearer went out to
his wife and his sister and told his promise. There was little to be said.
The Athenian must go his path, and they go theirs, unless he were to be
handed over to Xerxes to die a death of torments. And not even Roxana,
keenly as pierced her sorrow, would think of that.




                              CHAPTER XXIII


                             THE DARKEST HOUR


A city of two hundred thousand awaiting a common sentence of death,--such
seemed the doom of Athens.

Every morning the golden majesty of the sun rose above the wall of
Hymettus, but few could lift their hands to Lord Helios and give praise
for another day of light. "Each sunrise brings Xerxes nearer." The bravest
forgot not that.

Yet Athens was never more truly the "Violet-Crowned City" than on these
last days before the fearful advent. The sun at morn on Hymettus, the sun
at night on Daphni, the nightingales and cicadas in the olives by
Cephissus, the hum of bees on the sweet thyme of the mountain, the purple
of the hills, the blue and the fire of the bay, the merry tinkle of the
goat bells upon the rocks, the laugh of little children in the streets--all
these made Athens fair, but could not take the cloud from the hearts of
the people.

Trade was at standstill in the Agora. The most careless frequented the
temples. Old foes composed their cases before the arbitrator. The courts
were closed, but there was meeting after meeting in the Pnyx, with
incessant speeches on one theme--how Athens must resist to the bitter end.

And why should not the end be bitter? Argos and Crete had Medized. Corcyra
promised and did nothing. Thebes was weakening. Thessaly had sent earth
and water. Corinth, AEgina, and a few lesser states were moderately loyal,
but great Sparta only procrastinated and despatched no help to her
Athenian ally. So every day the Persian thunder-cloud was darkening.

But one man never faltered, nor suffered others about him to
falter,--Themistocles. The people heard him gladly--he would never talk of
defeat. He had a thousand reasons why the invader should be baffled, from
a convenient hexameter in old Bacis's oracle book, up to the fact that the
Greeks used the longest spears. If he found it weary work looking the
crowding peril in the face and smiling still, he never confessed it. His
friends would marvel at his serenity. Only when they saw him sit silent,
saw his brows knit, his hand comb at his beard, they knew his
inexhaustible brain was weaving the web which should ensnare the lord of
the Aryans.

Thus day after day--while men thought dark things in their hearts.

                              * * * * * * *

Hermippus had come down to his city house from Eleusis, and with him his
wife and daughter. The Eleusinian was very busy. He was a member of the
Areopagus, the old council of ex-archons, an experienced body that found
much to do. Hermippus had strained his own resources to provide shields
for the hoplites. He was constantly with Themistocles, which implied being
much with Democrates. The more he saw of the young orator, the better the
Eleusinian liked him. True, not every story ran to Democrates's credit,
but Hermippus knew the world, and could forgive a young man if he had
occasionally spent a jolly night. Democrates seemed to have forsworn
Ionian harp-girls now. His patriotism was self-evident. The Eleusinian saw
in him a most desirable protector in the perils of war for Hermione and
her child. Hermione's dislike for her husband's destroyer was
natural,--nay, in bounds, laudable,--but one must not give way too much to
women's phantasies. The lady was making a Cyclops of Democrates by sheer
imagination; an interview would dispel her prejudices. Therefore Hermippus
planned, and his plan was not hard to execute.

On the day the fleet sailed to Artemisium, Hermione went with her mother
to the havens, as all the city went, to wish godspeed to the "wooden wall"
of Hellas.

One hundred and twenty-seven triremes were to go forth, and three and
fifty to follow, bearing the best and bravest of Athens with them.
Themistocles was in absolute command, and perhaps in his heart of hearts
Democrates was not mournful if it lay out of his power to do a second
ill-turn to his country.

It was again summer, and again such a day as when Glaucon with glad
friends had rowed toward Salamis. The Saronian bay flashed fairest azure.
The scattered isles and the headlands of Argolis rose in clear beauty. The
city had emptied itself. Mothers hung on the necks of sons as the latter
strode toward Peiraeus; friends clasped hands for the last time as he who
remained promised him who went that the wife and little ones should never
be forgotten. Only Hermione, as she stood on the hill of Munychia above
the triple havens, shed no tear. The ship bearing her all was gone long
since. Themistocles would never lead it back. Hermippus was at the quay in
Peiraeus, taking leave of the admiral. Old Cleopis held the babe as
Hermione stood by her mother. The younger woman had suffered her gaze to
wander to far AEgina, where a featherlike cloud hung above the topmost
summit of the isle, when her mother's voice called her back.

"They go."

A line of streamers blew from the foremast of the _Nausicaae_ as the piper
on the flag-ship gave the time to the oars. The triple line of blades,
pumiced white, splashed with a steady rhythm. The long black hull glided
away. The trailing line of consorts swiftly followed. From the hill and
the quays a shout uprose from the thousands, to be answered by the
fleet,--a cheer or a prayer to sea-ruling Poseidon those who gave it hardly
knew. The people stood silent till the last dark hull crept around the
southern headland; then, still in silence, the multitudes dissolved. The
young and the strong had gone from them. For Athens this was the beginning
of the war.

Hermione and Lysistra awaited Hermippus before setting homeward, but the
Eleusinian was delayed. The fleet had vanished. The havens were empty. In
Cleopis's arms little Phoenix wept. His mother was anxious to be gone, when
she was surprised to see a figure climbing the almost deserted slope. A
moment more and she was face to face with Democrates, who advanced
outstretching his hand and smiling.

The orator wore the dress of his new office of strategus. The purple-edged
cloak, the light helmet wreathed with myrtle, the short sword at his side,
all became him well. If there were deeper lines about his face than on the
day Hermione last saw him, even an enemy would confess a leader of the
Athenians had cause to be thoughtful. He was cordially greeted by Lysistra
and seemed not at all abashed that Hermione gave only a sullen nod. From
the ladies he turned with laughter to Cleopis and her burden.

"A new Athenian!" spoke he, lightly, "and I fear Xerxes will have been
chased away before he has a chance to prove his valour. But fear not,
there will be more brave days in store."

Hermione shook her head, ill-pleased.

"Blessed be Hera, my babe is too young to know aught of wars. And if we
survive this one, will not just Zeus spare us from further bloodshed?"

Democrates, without answering, approached the nurse, and Phoenix--for
reasons best known to himself--ceased lamenting and smiled up in the
orator's face.

"His mother's features and eyes," cried Democrates. "I swear it--ay, by all
Athena's owls--that young Hermes when he lay in Maia's cave on Mt. Cylene
was not finer or lustier than he. His mother's face and eyes, I say."

"His father's," corrected Hermione. "Is not his name Phoenix? In him will
not Glaucon the Beautiful live again? Will he not grow to man's estate to
avenge his murdered father?" The lady spoke without passion, but with a
cold bitterness that made Democrates cease from smiling. He turned away
from the babe.

"Forgive me, dear lady," he answered her, "I am wiser at ruling the
Athenians than at ruling children, but I see nothing of Glaucon about the
babe, though much of his beautiful mother."

"You had once a better memory, Democrates," said Hermione, reproachfully.

"I do not understand your Ladyship."

"I mean that Glaucon has been dead one brief year. Can you forget _his_
face in so short a while?"

But here Lysistra interposed with all good intent.

"You are fond and foolish, Hermione, and like all young mothers are
enraged if all the world does not see his father's image in their
first-born."

"Democrates knows what I would say," said the younger woman, soberly.

"Since your Ladyship is pleased to speak in riddles and I am no seer nor
oracle-monger, I must confess I cannot follow. But we will contend no more
concerning little Phoenix. Enough that he will grow up fair as the Delian
Apollo and an unspeakable joy to his mother."

"Her only joy," was Hermione's icy answer. "Wrap up the child, Cleopis. My
father is coming. It is a long walk home to the city."

With a rustle of white Hermione went down the slope in advance of her
mother. Hermippus and Lysistra were not pleased. Plainly their daughter
kept all her prejudice against Democrates. Her cold contempt was more
disappointing even than open fury.

Once at home Hermione held little Phoenix long to her heart and wept over
him. For the sake of her dead husband's child, if for naught else, how
could she suffer them to give her to Democrates? That the orator had
destroyed Glaucon in black malice had become a corner-stone in her belief.
She could at first give for it only a woman's reason--blind intuition. She
could not discuss her conviction with her mother or with any save a
strange confidant--Phormio.

She had met the fishmonger in the Agora once when she went with the slaves
to buy a mackerel. The auctioneer had astonished everybody by knocking
down to her a noble fish an obol under price, then under pretext of
showing her a rare Boeotian eel got her aside into his booth and whispered
a few words that made the red and white come and go from her cheeks, after
which the lady's hand went quickly to her purse, and she spoke quick words
about "the evening" and "the garden gate."

Phormio refused the drachma brusquely, but kept the tryst. Cleopis had the
key to the garden, and would contrive anything for her mistress--especially
as all Athens knew Phormio was harmless save with his tongue. That evening
for the first time Hermione heard the true story of Glaucon's escape by
the _Solon_, but when the fishmonger paused she hung down her head closer.

"You saved him, then? I bless you. But was the sea more merciful than the
executioner?"

The fishmonger let his voice fall lower.

"Democrates is unhappy. Something weighs on his mind. He is afraid."

"Of what?"

"Bias his slave came to see me again last night. Many of his master's
doings have been strange to him. Many are riddles still, but one thing at
last is plain. Hiram has been to see Democrates once more, despite the
previous threats. Bias listened. He could not understand everything, but
he heard Lycon's name passed many times, then one thing he caught clearly.
'_The Babylonish carpet-seller was the Prince Mardonius._' 'The Babylonian
fled on the _Solon_.' 'The Prince is safe in Sardis.' If Mardonius could
escape the storm and wreck, why not Glaucon, a king among swimmers?"

Hermione clapped her hands to her head.

"Don't torture me. I've long since trodden out hope. Why has he sent me no
word in all these months of pain?"

"It is not the easiest thing to get a letter across the AEgean in these
days of roaring war."

"I dare not believe it. What else did Bias hear?"

"Very little. Hiram was urging something. Democrates always said,
'Impossible.' Hiram went away with a very sour grin. However, Democrates
caught Bias lurking."

"And flogged him?"

"No, Bias ran into the street and cried out he would flee to the Temple of
Theseus, the slave's sanctuary, and demand that the archon sell him to a
kinder master. Then suddenly Democrates forgave him and gave him five
drachmae to say no more about it."

"And so Bias at once told you?" Hermione could not forbear a smile, but
her gesture was of desperation. "O Father Zeus--only the testimony of a
slave to lean on, I a weak woman and Democrates one of the chief men in
Athens! O for strength to wring out all the bitter truth!"

"Peace, _kyria_," said Phormio, not ungently, "Aletheia, Mistress Truth,
is a patient dame, but she says her word at last. And you see that hope is
not quite dead."

"I dare not cherish it. If I were but a man!" repeated Hermione. But she
thanked Phormio many times, would not let him refuse her money, and bade
him come often again and bring her all the Agora gossip about the war.
"For we are friends," she concluded; "you and I are the only persons who
hold Glaucon innocent in all the world. And is that not tie enough?"

So Phormio came frequently, glad perhaps to escape the discipline of his
spouse. Now he brought a rumour of Xerxes's progress, now a bit of Bias's
tattling about his master. The talebearing counted for little, but went to
make Hermione's conviction like adamant. Every night she would speak over
Phoenix as she held him whilst he slept.

"Grow fast, _makaire_, grow strong, for there is work for you to do! Your
father cries, 'Avenge me well,' even from Hades."

                              * * * * * * *

After the departure of the fleet Athens seemed silent as the grave. On the
streets one met only slaves and graybeards. In the Agora the hucksters'
booths were silent, but little groups of white-headed men sat in the
shaded porticos and watched eagerly for the appearing of the archon before
the government house to read the last despatch of the progress of Xerxes.
The Pnyx was deserted. The gymnasia were closed. The more superstitious
scanned the heavens for a lucky or unlucky flight of hawks. The
priestesses sang litanies all day and all night on the Acropolis where the
great altar to Athena smoked with victims continually. At last, after the
days of uncertainty and wavering rumour, came surer tidings of battles.

"Leonidas is fighting at Thermopylae. The fleets are fighting at
Artemisium, off Euboea. The first onsets of the Barbarians have failed, but
nothing is decided."

This was the substance, and tantalizingly meagre. And the strong army of
Sparta and her allies still tarried at the Isthmus instead of hasting to
aid the pitiful handful at Thermopylae. Therefore the old men wagged their
heads, the altars were loaded with victims, and the women wept over their
children.

So ended the first day after news came of the fighting. The second was
like it--only more tense. Hermione never knew that snail called time to
creep more slowly. Never had she chafed more against the iron custom which
commanded Athenian gentlewomen to keep, tortoise-like, at home in days of
distress and tumult. On the evening of the second day came once more the
dusty courier. Leonidas was holding the gate of Hellas. The Barbarians had
perished by thousands. At Artemisium, Themistocles and the allied Greek
admirals were making head against the Persian armadas. But still nothing
was decided. Still the Spartan host lingered at the Isthmus, and Leonidas
must fight his battle alone. The sun sank that night with tens of
thousands wishing his car might stand fast. At gray dawn Athens was awake
and watching. Men forgot to eat, forgot to drink. One food would have
contented--news!

                              * * * * * * *

It was about noon--"the end of market time," had there been any market then
at Athens--when Hermione knew by instinct that news had come from the
battle and that it was evil. She and her mother had sat since dawn by the
upper window, craning forth their heads up the street toward the Agora,
where they knew all couriers must hasten. Along the street in all the
houses other women were peering forth also. When little Phoenix cried in
his cradle, his mother for the first time in his life almost angrily bade
him be silent. Cleopis, the only one of the fluttering servants who went
placidly about the wonted tasks, vainly coaxed her young mistress with
figs and a little wine. Hermippus was at the council. The street, save for
the leaning heads of the women, was deserted. Then suddenly came a change.

First a man ran toward the Agora, panting,--his himation blew from his
shoulders, he never stopped to recover it. Next shouts, scattered in the
beginning, then louder, and coming not as a roar but as a wailing, rising,
falling like the billows of the howling sea,--as if the thousands in the
market-place groaned in sore agony. Shrill and hideous they rose, and a
hand of ice fell on the hearts of the listening women. Then more runners,
until the street seemed alive by magic, slaves and old men all crowding to
the Agora. And still the shout and ever more dreadful. The women leaned
from the windows and cried vainly to the trampling crowd below.

"Tell us! In the name of Athena, tell us!" No answer for long, till at
last a runner came not toward the Agora but from it. They had hardly need
to hear what he was calling.

"Leonidas is slain. Thermopylae is turned! Xerxes is advancing!"

Hermione staggered back from the lattice. In the cradle Phoenix awoke;
seeing his mother bending over him, he crowed cheerily and flung his
chubby fists in her face. She caught him up and again could not fight the
tears away.

"Glaucon! Glaucon!" she prayed,--for her husband was all but a deity in her
sight,--"hear us wherever you are, even if in the blessed land of
Rhadamanthus. Take us thither, your child and me, for there is no peace or
shelter left on earth!"

Then, seeing her panic-stricken women flying hither and thither like
witless birds, her patrician blood asserted itself. She dashed the drops
from her eyes and joined her mother in quieting the maids. Whatever there
was to hope or fear, their fate would not be lightened by wild moaning.
Soon the direful wailing from the Agora ceased. A blue flag waved over the
Council House, a sign that the "Five Hundred" had been called in hurried
session. Simultaneously a dense column of smoke leaped up from the
market-place. The archons had ordered the hucksters' booths to be burned,
as a signal to all Attica that the worst had befallen.

After inexpressibly long waiting Phormio came, then Hermippus, to tell all
they knew. Leonidas had perished gloriously. His name was with the
immortals, but the mountain wall of Hellas had been unlocked. No Spartan
army was in Boeotia. The bravest of Athens were in the fleet. The easy
Attic passes of Phyle and Decelea could never be defended. Nothing could
save Athens from Xerxes. The calamity had been foreseen, but to foresee is
not to realize. That night in Athens no man slept.




                               CHAPTER XXIV


                         THE EVACUATION OF ATHENS


It had come at last,--the hour wise men had dreaded, fools had scoffed at,
cowards had dared not face. The Barbarian was within five days' march of
Attica. The Athenians must bow the knee to the world monarch or go forth
exiles from their country.

In the morning after the night of terror came another courier, not this
time from Thermopylae. He bore a letter from Themistocles, who was
returning from Euboea with the whole allied Grecian fleet. The reading of
the letter in the Agora was the first rift in the cloud above the city.

"Be strong, prove yourselves sons of Athens. Do what a year ago you so
boldly voted. Prepare to evacuate Attica. All is not lost. In three days I
will be with you."

There was no time for an assembly at the Pnyx, but the Five Hundred and
the Areopagus council acted for the people. It was ordered to remove the
entire population of Attica, with all their movable goods, across the bay
to Salamis or to the friendly Peloponnesus, and that same noon the heralds
went over the land to bear the direful summons.

To Hermione, who in the calm after-years looked back on all this year of
agony and stress as on an unreal thing, one time always was stamped on
memory as no dream, but vivid, unforgetable,--these days of the great
evacuation. Up and down the pleasant plain country of the Mesogia to
southward, to the rolling highlands beyond Pentelicus and Parnes, to the
slumbering villages by Marathon, to the fertile farm-land by Eleusis, went
the proclaimers of ill-tidings.

"Quit your homes, hasten to Athens, take with you what you can, but
hasten, or stay as Xerxes's slaves."

For the next two days a piteous multitude was passing through the city. A
country of four hundred thousand inhabitants was to be swept clean and
left naked and profitless to the invader. Under Hermione's window, as she
gazed up and down the street, jostled the army of fugitives, women old and
young, shrinking from the bustle and uproar, grandsires on their staves,
boys driving the bleating goats or the patient donkeys piled high with
pots and panniers, little girls tearfully hugging a pet puppy or hen. But
few strong men were seen, for the fleet had not yet rounded Sunium to bear
the people away.

The well-loved villas and farmsteads were tenantless. They left the
standing grain, the ripening orchards, the groves of the sacred olives.
Men rushed for the last time to the shrines where their fathers had
prayed,--the temples of Theseus, Olympian Zeus, Dionysus, Aphrodite. The
tombs of the worthies of old, stretching out along the Sacred Way to
Eleusis, where Solon, Clisthenes, Miltiades, and many another bulwark of
Athens slept, had the last votive wreath hung lovingly upon them. And
especially men sought the great temple of the "Rock," to lift their hands
to Athena Polias, and vow awful vows of how harm to the Virgin Goddess
should be wiped away in blood.

So the throng passed through the city and toward the shore, awaiting the
fleet.

It came after eager watching. The whole fighting force of Athens and her
Corinthian, AEginetan, and other allies. Before the rest raced a stately
ship, the _Nausicaae_, her triple-oar bank flying faster than the spray.
The people crowded to the water's edge when the great trireme cast off her
pinnace and a well-known figure stepped therein.

"Themistocles is with us!"

He landed at Phaleron, the thousands greeted him as if he were a god. He
seemed their only hope--the Atlas upbearing all the fates of Athens. With
the glance of his eye, with a few quick words, he chased the terrors from
the strategi and archons that crowded up around him.

"Why distressed? Have we not held the Barbarians back nobly at Artemisium?
Will we not soon sweep his power from the seas in fair battle?"

With almost a conqueror's train he swept up to the city. A last assembly
filled the Pnyx. Themistocles had never been more hopeful, more eloquent.
With one voice men voted never to bend the knee to the king. If the gods
forbade them to win back their own dear country, they would go together to
Italy, to found a new and better Athens far from the Persian's power. And
at Themistocles's motion they voted to recall all the political exiles,
especially Themistocles's own great enemy Aristeides the Just, banished by
the son of Neocles only a few years before. The assembly dispersed--not
weeping but with cheers. Already it was time to be quitting the city.
Couriers told how the Tartar horsemen were burning the villages beyond
Parnes. The magistrates and admirals went to the house of Athena. The last
incense smoked before the image. The bucklers hanging on the temple wall
were taken down by Cimon and the other young patricians. The statue was
reverently lifted, wound in fine linen, and borne swiftly to the fleet.

"Come, _makaira_!" called Hermippus, entering his house to summon his
daughter. Hermione sent a last glance around the disordered aula; her
mother called to the bevy of pallid, whimpering maids. Cleopis was bearing
Phoenix, but Hermione took him from her. Only his own mother should bear
him now. They went through the thinning Agora and took one hard look at
each familiar building and temple. When they should return to them, the
inscrutable god kept hid. So to Peiraeus,--and to the rapid pinnaces which
bore them across the narrow sea to Salamis, where for the moment at least
was peace.

All that day the boats were bearing the people, and late into the night,
until the task was accomplished, the like whereof is not found in history.
No Athenian who willed was left to the power of Xerxes. One brain and
voice planned and directed all. Leonidas, Ajax of the Hellenes, had been
taken. Themistocles, their Odysseus, valiant as Ajax and gifted with the
craft of the immortals, remained. Could that craft and that valour turn
back the might of even the god-king of the Aryans?




                               CHAPTER XXV


                           THE ACROPOLIS FLAMES


A few days only Xerxes and his host rested after the dear-bought triumph
at Thermopylae. An expedition sent to plunder Delphi returned
discomfited--thanks, said common report, to Apollo himself, who broke off
two mountain crags to crush the impious invaders. But no such miracle
halted the march on Athens. Boeotia and her cities welcomed the king;
Thespiae and Plataea, which had stood fast for Hellas, were burned. The
Peloponnesian army lingered at Corinth, busy with a wall across the
Isthmus, instead of risking valorous battle.

"By the soul of my father," the king had sworn, "I believe that after the
lesson at Thermopylae these madmen will not fight again!"

"By land they will not," said Mardonius, always at his lord's elbow, "by
sea--it remains for your Eternity to discover."

"Will they really dare to fight by sea?" asked Xerxes, hardly pleased at
the suggestion.

"Omnipotence, you have slain Leonidas, but a second great enemy remains.
While Themistocles lives, it is likely your slaves will have another
opportunity to prove to you their devotion."

"Ah, yes! A stubborn rogue, I hear. Well--if we must fight by sea, it shall
be under my own eyes. My loyal Phoenician and Egyptian mariners did not do
themselves full justice at Artemisium; they lacked the valour which comes
from being in the presence of their king."

"Which makes a dutiful subject fight as ten," quickly added Pharnaspes the
fan-bearer.

"Of course," smiled the monarch, "and now I must ask again, Mardonius, how
fares it with my handsome Prexaspes?"

"Only indifferently, your Majesty, since you graciously deign to inquire."

"Such a sad wound? That is heavy news. He takes long in recovering. I
trust he wants for nothing."

"Nothing, Omnipotence. He has the best surgeons in the camp."

"To-day I will send him Helbon wine from my own table. I miss his comely
face about me. I want him here to play at dice. Tell him to recover
because his king desires it. If he has become right Persian, that will be
better than any physic."

"I have no doubt he will be deeply moved to learn of your Eternity's
kindness," rejoined the bow-bearer, who was not sorry that further
discussion of this delicate subject was averted by the arch-usher
introducing certain cavalry officers with their report on the most
practicable line of march through Boeotia.

Glaucon, in fact, was long since out of danger, thanks to the sturdy
bronze of his Laconian helmet. He was able to walk, and, if need be, ride,
but Mardonius would not suffer him to go outside his own tents. The
Athenian would be certain to be recognized, and at once Xerxes would send
for him, and how Glaucon, in his new frame of mind, would deport himself
before majesty, whether he would not taunt the irascible monarch to his
face, the bow-bearer did not know. Therefore the Athenian endured a manner
of captivity in the tents with the eunuchs, pages, and women. Artazostra
was often with him, and less frequently Roxana. But the Egyptian had lost
all power over him now. He treated her with a cold courtesy more painful
than contempt. Once or twice Artazostra had tried to turn him back from
his purpose, but her words always broke themselves over one barrier.

"I am born a Hellene, lady. My gods are not yours. I must live and die
after the manner of my people. And that our gods are strong and will give
victory, after that morning with Leonidas I dare not doubt."

When the host advanced south and eastward from Thermopylae, Glaucon went
with it, riding in a closed travelling carriage guarded by Mardonius's
eunuchs. All who saw it said that here went one of the bow-bearer's harem
women, and as for the king, every day he asked for his favourite, and
every day Mardonius told him, "He is even as before," an answer which the
bow-bearer prayed to truth-loving Mithra might not be accounted a lie.

It was while the army lay at Plataea that news came which might have shaken
Glaucon's purpose, had that purpose been shakable. Euboulus the Corinthian
had been slain in a skirmish shortly after the forcing of Thermopylae. The
tidings meant that no one lived who could tell in Athens that on the day
of testing the outlaw had cast in his lot with Hellas. Leonidas was dead.
The Spartan soldiers who had heard Glaucon avow his identity were dead. In
the hurried conference of captains preceding the retreat, Leonidas had
told his informant's precise name only to Euboulus. And now Euboulus was
slain, doubtless before any word from him of Glaucon's deed could spread
abroad. To Athenians Glaucon was still the "Traitor," doubly execrated in
this hour of trial. If he returned to his people, would he not be torn in
pieces by the mob? But the young Alcmaeonid was resolved. Since he had not
died at Thermopylae, no life in the camp of the Barbarian was tolerable. He
would trust sovran Athena who had plucked him out of one death to deliver
from a second. Therefore he nursed his strength--a caged lion waiting for
freedom,--and almost wished the Persian host would advance more swiftly
that he might haste onward to his own.

                              * * * * * * *

Glaucon had cherished a hope to see the whole power of the Peloponnesus in
array in Boeotia, but that hope proved quickly vain. The oracle was truly
to be fulfilled,--the whole of "the land of Cecrops" was to be possessed by
the Barbarian. The mountain passes were open. No arrows greeted the
Persian vanguard as it cantered down the defiles, and once more the king's
courtiers told their smiling master that not another hand would be raised
against him.

The fourth month after quitting the Hellespont Xerxes entered Athens. The
gates stood ajar. The invaders walked in silent streets as of a city of
the dead. A few runaway slaves alone greeted them. Only in the Acropolis a
handful of superstitious old men and temple warders had barricaded
themselves, trusting that Athena would still defend her holy mountain. For
a few days they defended the steep, rolling down huge boulders, but the
end was inevitable. The Persians discovered a secret path upward. The
defenders were surprised and dashed themselves from the crags or were
massacred. A Median spear-man flung a fire-brand. The house of the
guardian goddess went up in flame. The red column leaping to heaven was a
beacon for leagues around that Xerxes held the length and breadth of
Attica.

Glaucon watched the burning temple with grinding teeth. Mardonius's tents
were pitched in the eastern city by the fountain of Callirhoe,--a spot of
fond memories for the Alcmaeonid. Here first he had met Hermione, come with
her maids to draw water, and had gone away dreaming of Aphrodite arising
from the sea. Often here he had sat with Democrates by the little pool,
whilst the cypresses above talked their sweet, monotonous music. Before
him rose the Rock of Athena,--the same, yet not the same. The temple of his
fathers was vanishing in smoke and ashes. What wonder that he turned to
Artazostra at his side with a bitter smile.

"Lady, your people have their will. But do not think Athena Nikephorus,
the Lady of Triumphs, will forget this day when we stand against you in
battle."

She did not answer him. He knew that many noblemen had advised Xerxes
against driving the Greeks to desperation by this sacrilege, but this fact
hardly made him the happier.

At dusk the next evening Mardonius suffered him to go with two faithful
eunuchs and rove through the deserted city. The Persians were mostly
encamped without the walls, and plundering was forbidden. Only Hydarnes
with the Immortals pitched on Areopagus, and the king had taken his abode
by the Agora. It was like walking through the country of the dead.
Everything familiar, everything changed. The eunuchs carried torches. They
wandered down one street after another, where the house doors stood open,
where the aulas were strewn with the debris of household stuff which the
fleeing citizens had abandoned. A deserter had already told Glaucon of his
father's death; he was not amazed therefore to find the house of his birth
empty and desolate. But everywhere else, also, it was to call back
memories of glad days never to return. Here was the school where crusty
Pollicharmes had driven the "reading, writing, and music" into Democrates
and himself between the blows. Here was the corner Hermes, before which he
had sacrificed the day he won his first wreath in the public games. Here
was the house of Cimon, in whose dining room he had enjoyed many a bright
symposium. He trod the Agora and walked under the porticos where he had
lounged in the golden evenings after the brisk stroll from the wrestling
ground at Cynosarges, and had chatted and chaffered with light-hearted
friends about "the war" and "the king," in the days when the Persian
seemed very far away. Last of all an instinct--he could not call it
desire--drove him to seek the house of Hermippus.

They had to force the door open with a stone. The first red torch-light
that glimmered around the aula told that the Eumolpid had awaited the
enemy in Athens, not in Eleusis. The court was littered with all manner of
stuff,--crockery, blankets, tables, stools,--which the late inhabitants had
been forced to forsake. A tame quail hopped from the tripod by the now
cold hearth. Glaucon held out his hand, the bird came quickly, expecting
the bit of grain. Had not Hermione possessed such a quail? The outlaw's
blood ran quicker. He felt the heat glowing in his forehead.

A chest of clothes stood open by the entrance. He dragged forth the
contents--women's dresses and uppermost a white airy gauze of Amorgos that
clung to his hands as if he were lifting clouds. Out of its folds fell a
pair of white shoes with clasps of gold. Then he recognized this dress
Hermione had worn in the Panathenaea and on the night of his ruin. He threw
it down, next stood staring over it like a man possessed. The friendly
eunuchs watched his strange movements. He could not endure to have them
follow him.

"Give me a torch. I return in a moment."

He went up the stair alone to the upper story, to the chambers of the
women. Confusion here also,--the more valuable possessions gone, but much
remaining. In one corner stood the loom and stretched upon it the
half-made web of a shawl. He could trace the pattern clearly wrought in
bright wools,--Ariadne sitting desolate awaiting the returning of Theseus.
Would the wife or the betrothed of Democrates busy herself with _that_,
whatever the griefs in her heart? Glaucon's temples now were throbbing as
if to burst.

A second room, and more littered confusion, but in one corner stood a
bronze statue,--Apollo bending his bow against the Achaeans,--which Glaucon
had given to Hermione. At the foot of the statue hung a wreath of purple
asters, dead and dry, but he plucked it asunder and set many blossoms in
his breast.

A third room, and almost empty. He was moving back in disappointment, when
the torch-light shook over something that swung betwixt two beams,--a
wicker cradle. The woollen swaddling bands were still in it. One could see
the spot on the little pillow with the impress of the tiny head. Glaucon
almost dropped the torch. He pressed his hand to his brow.

"Zeus pity me!" he groaned, "preserve my reason. How can I serve Hellas
and those I love if thou strikest me mad?"

With feverish anxiety he sent his eyes around that chamber. His search was
not in vain. He almost trampled upon the thing that lay at his feet,--a
wooden rattle, the toy older than the Egyptian pyramids. He seized it,
shook it as a warrior his sword. He scanned it eagerly. Upon the handle
were letters carved, but there was a mist before his eyes which took long
to pass away. Then he read the rude inscription: "{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER PHI~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER XI~} : {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER SIGMA~} :
{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER GAMMA~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER LAMDA~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER SIGMA~}." "Phoenix the son of Glaucon." _His_ child. He was the father
of a fair son. His wife, he was sure thereof, had not yet been given to
Democrates.

Overcome by a thousand emotions, he flung himself upon a chest and pressed
the homely toy many times to his lips.

                              * * * * * * *

After a long interval he recovered himself enough to go down to the
eunuchs, who were misdoubting his long absence.

"Persian," he said to Mardonius, when he was again at the bow-bearer's
tents, "either suffer me to go back to my people right soon or put me to
death. My wife has borne me a son. My place is where I can defend him."

Mardonius frowned, but nodded his head.

"You know I desire it otherwise. But my word is given. And the word of a
prince of the Aryans is not to be recalled. You know what to expect among
your people--perhaps a foul death for a deed of another."

"I know it. I also know that Hellas needs me."

"To fight against us?" asked the bow-bearer, with a sigh. "Yet you shall
go. Eran is not so weak that adding one more to her enemies will halt her
triumph. To-morrow night a boat shall be ready on the strand. Take it. And
after that may your gods guard you, for I can do no more."

All the next day Glaucon sat in the tents and watched the smoke cloud
above the Acropolis and the soldiers in the plain hewing down the sacred
olives, Athena's trees, which no Athenian might injure and thereafter
live. But Glaucon was past cursing now,--endure a little longer and after
that, what vengeance!

The gossiping eunuchs told readily what the king had determined. Xerxes
was at Phaleron reviewing his fleet. The Hellenes' ships confronted him at
Salamis. The Persians had met in council, deliberating one night over
their wine, reconsidering the next morning when sober. Their wisdom each
time had been to force a battle. Let the king destroy the enemy at
Salamis, and he could land troops at ease at the very doors of Sparta,
defying the vain wall across the Isthmus. Was not victory certain? Had he
not two ships to the Hellenes' one? So the Phoenician vassal kings and all
his admirals assured him. Only Artemisia, the martial queen of
Halicarnassus, spoke otherwise, but none would hear her.

"To-morrow the war is ended," a cup-bearer had told a butler in Glaucon's
hearing, and never noticed how the Athenian took a horseshoe in his slim
fingers and straightened it, whilst looking on the scorched columns of the
Acropolis.

At length the sun spread his last gold of the evening. The eunuchs called
Glaucon to the pavilion of Artazostra, who came forth with Roxana for
their farewell. They were in royal purple. The amethysts in their hair
were worth a month's revenues of Corinth. Roxana had never been lovelier.
Glaucon was again in the simple Greek dress, but he knelt and kissed the
robes of both the women. Then rising he spoke to them.

"To you, O princess, my benefactress, I wish all manner of blessing. May
you be crowned with happy age, may your fame surpass Semiramis, the
conqueror queen of the fables, let the gods refuse only one prayer--the
conquest of Hellas. The rest of the world is yours, leave then to us our
own."

"And you, sister of Mardonius," he turned to Roxana now, "do not think I
despise your love or your beauty. That I have given you pain, is double
pain to me. But I loved you only in a dream. My life is not for the rose
valleys of Bactria, but for the stony hills by Athens. May Aphrodite give
you another love, a brighter fortune than might ever come by linking your
fate to mine."

They held out their hands. He kissed them. He saw tears on the long lashes
of Roxana.

"Farewell," spoke the women, simply.

"Farewell," he answered. He turned from them. He knew they were
re-entering the tent. He never saw the women again.

Mardonius accompanied him all the long way from the fount of Callirhoe to
the sea-shore. Glaucon protested, but the bow-bearer would not hearken.

"You have saved my life, Athenian," was his answer, "when you leave me
now, it is forever."

The moon was lifting above the gloomy mass of Hymettus and scattering all
the Attic plain with her pale gold. The Acropolis Rock loomed high above
them. Glaucon, looking upward, saw the moonlight flash on the spear point
and shield of a soldier,--a Barbarian standing sentry on the ruined shrine
of the Virgin Goddess. Once more the Alcmaeonid was leaving Athens, but
with very different thoughts than on that other night when he had fled at
Phormio's side. They quitted the desolate city and the sleeping camp. The
last bars of day had long since dimmed in the west when before them loomed
the hill of Munychia clustered also with tents, and beyond it the
violet-black vista of the sea. A forest of masts crowded the havens, the
fleet of the "Lord of the World" that was to complete his mastery with the
returning sun. Mardonius did not lead Glaucon to the ports, but southward,
where beyond the little point of Colias spread an open sandy beach. The
night waves lapped softly. The wind had sunk to warm puffs from the
southward. They heard the rattle of anchor-chains and tackle-blocks, but
from far away. Beyond the vague promontory of Peiraeus rose dark mountains
and headlands, at their foot lay a sprinkling of lights.

"Salamis!" cried Glaucon, pointing. "Yonder are the ships of Hellas."

Mardonius walked with him upon the shelving shore. A skiff, small but
stanch, was ready with oars.

"What else will you?" asked the bow-bearer. "Gold?"

"Nothing. Yet take this." Glaucon unclasped from his waist the golden belt
Xerxes had bestowed at Sardis. "A Hellene I went forth, a Hellene I
return."

He made to kiss the Persian's dress, but Mardonius would not suffer it.

"Did I not desire you for my brother?" he said, and they embraced. As
their arms parted, the bow-bearer spoke three words in earnest whisper:--

"Beware of Democrates."

"What do you mean?"

"I can say no more. Yet be wise. Beware of Democrates."

The attendants, faithful body-servants of Mardonius, and mute witnesses of
all that passed, were thrusting the skiff into the water. There were no
long farewells. Both knew that the parting was absolute, that Glaucon
might be dead on the morrow. A last clasping of the hands and quickly the
boat was drifting out upon the heaving waters. Glaucon stood one moment
watching the figures on the beach and pondering on Mardonius's strange
warning. Then he set himself to the oars, rowing westward, skirting the
Barbarian fleet as it rode at anchor, observing its numbers and array and
how it was aligned for battle. After that, with more rapid stroke, he sent
the skiff across the dark ribbon toward Salamis.




                               CHAPTER XXVI


                         THEMISTOCLES IS THINKING


Leonidas was taken. Themistocles was left,--left to bear as crushing a load
as ever weighed on man,--to fight two battles, one with the Persian, one
with his own unheroic allies, and the last was the harder. Three hundred
and seventy Greek triremes rode off Salamis, half from Athens, but the
commander-in-chief was Eurybiades of Sparta, the sluggard state that sent
only sixteen ships, yet the only state the bickering Peloponnesians would
obey. Hence Themistocles's sore problems.

Different from the man of unruffled brow who ruled from the bema was he
who paced the state cabin of the _Nausicaae_ a few nights after the
evacuation. For _he_ at least knew the morn would bring Hellas her doom.
There had been a gloomy council that afternoon. They had seen the
Acropolis flame two days before. The great fleet of Xerxes rode off the
Attic havens. At the gathering of the Greek chiefs in Eurybiades's cabin
Themistocles had spoken one word many times,--"Fight!"

To which Adeimantus, the craven admiral of Corinth, and many another had
answered:--

"Delay! Back to the Isthmus! Risk nothing!"

Then at last the son of Neocles silenced them, not with arguments but
threats. "Either here in the narrow straits we can fight the king or not
at all. In the open seas his numbers can crush us. Either vote to fight
here or we Athenians sail for Italy and leave you to stem Xerxes as you
can."

There had been sullen silence after that, the admirals misliking the
furrow drawn above Themistocles's eyes. Then Eurybiades had haltingly
given orders for battle.

That had been the command, but as the Athenian left the Spartan flag-ship
in his pinnace he heard Globryas, the admiral of Sicyon, muttering,
"Headstrong fool--he shall not destroy us!" and saw Adeimantus turn back
for a word in Eurybiades's ear. The Spartan had shaken his head, but
Themistocles did not deceive himself. In the battle at morn half of the
Hellenes would go to battle asking more "how escape?" than "how conquer?"
and that was no question to ask before a victory.

The cabin was empty now save for the admiral. On the deck above the hearty
shouts of Ameinias the trierarch, and chanting of the seamen told that on
the _Nausicaae_ at least there would be no slackness in the fight. The ship
was being stripped for action, needless spars and sails sent ashore, extra
oars made ready, and grappling-irons placed. "Battle" was what every
Athenian prayed for, but amongst the allies Themistocles knew it was
otherwise. The crucial hour of his life found him nervous, moody, silent.
He repelled the zealous subalterns who came for orders.

"My directions have been given. Execute them. Has Aristeides come yet?"
The last question was to Simonides, who had been half-companion,
half-counsellor, in all these days of storm.

"He is not yet come from AEgina."

"Leave me, then."

Themistocles's frown deepened. The others went out.

The state cabin was elegant, considering its place. Themistocles had
furnished it according to his luxurious taste,--stanchions cased in bronze
hammered work, heavy rugs from Carthage, lamps swinging from chains of
precious Corinthian brass. Behind a tripod stood an image of Aphrodite of
Fair Counsel, the admiral's favourite deity. By force of habit now he
crossed the cabin, took the golden box, and shook a few grains of
frankincense upon the tripod.

"Attend, O queen," he said mechanically, "and be thou propitious to all my
prayers."

He knew the words meant nothing. The puff of night air from the port-hole
carried the fragrance from the room. The image wore its unchanging,
meaningless smile, and Themistocles smiled too, albeit bitterly.

"So this is the end. A losing fight, cowardice, slavery--no, I shall not
live to see that last."

He looked from the port-hole. He could see the lights of the Barbarian
fleet clearly. He took long breaths of the clear brine.

"So the tragedy ends--worse than Phrynicus's poorest, when they pelted his
chorus from the orchestra with date-stones. And yet--and yet--"

He never formulated what came next even in his own mind.

"_Eu!_" he cried, springing back with part of his old lightness, "I have
borne a brave front before it all. I have looked the Cyclops in the face,
even when he glowered the fiercest. But it all will pass. I presume
Thersytes the caitiff and Agamemnon the king have the same sleep and the
same dreams in Orchus. And a few years more or a few less in a man's life
make little matter. But it would be sweeter to go out thinking 'I have
triumphed' than 'I have failed, and all the things I loved fail with me.'
And Athens--"

Again he stopped. When he resumed his monologue, it was in a different
key.

"There are many things I cannot understand. They cannot unlock the riddles
at Delphi, no seer can read them in the omens of birds. Why was Glaucon
blasted? Was he a traitor? What was the truth concerning his treason?
Since his going I have lost half my faith in mortal men."

Once more his thoughts wandered.

"How they trust me, my followers of Athens! Is it not better to be a
leader of one city of freemen than a Xerxes, master of a hundred million
slaves? How they greeted me, as if I were Apollo the Saviour, when I
returned to Peiraeus! And must it be written by the chroniclers thereafter,
'About this time Themistocles, son of Neocles, aroused the Athenians to
hopeless resistance and drew on them utter destruction'? O Father Zeus,
must men say _that_? Am I a fool or crazed for wishing to save my land
from the fate of Media, Lydia, Babylonia, Egypt, Ionia? Has dark Atropos
decreed that the Persians should conquer forever? Then, O Zeus, or
whatever be thy name, O Power of Powers, look to thine empire! Xerxes is
not a king, but a god; he will besiege Olympus, even thy throne."

He crossed the cabin with hard strides.

"How can I?" he cried half-aloud, beating his forehead. "How can I make
these Hellenes fight?"

His hand tightened over his sword-hilt.

"This is the only place where we can fight to advantage. Here in the
strait betwixt Salamis and Attica we have space to deploy all our ships,
while the Barbarians will be crowded by numbers. And if we once
retreat?--Let Adeimantus and the rest prate about--'The wall, the wall
across the Isthmus! The king can never storm it.' Nor will he try to,
unless his councillors are turned stark mad. Will he not have command of
the sea? can he not land his army behind the wall, wherever he wills? Have
I not dinned that argument in those doltish Peloponnesians' ears until I
have grown hoarse? Earth and gods! suffer me rather to convince a stone
statue than a Dorian. The task is less hard. Yet they call themselves
reasoning beings."

A knock upon the cabin door. Simonides reentered.

"You do not come on deck, Themistocles? The men ask for you. Ameinias's
cook has prepared a noble supper--anchovies and tunny--will you not join the
other officers and drink a cup to Tyche, Lady Fortune, that she prosper us
in the morning?"

"I am at odds with Tyche, Simonides. I cannot come with you."

"The case is bad, then?"

"Ay, bad. But keep a brave face before the men. There's no call to pawn
our last chance."

"Has it come to that?" quoth the little poet, in curiosity and concern.

"Leave me!" ordered Themistocles, with a sweep of the hand, and Simonides
was wise enough to obey.

Themistocles took a pen from the table, but instead of writing on the
outspread sheet of papyrus, thrust the reed between his teeth and bit it
fiercely.

"How can I? How can I make these Hellenes fight? Tell that, King Zeus,
tell that!"

Then quickly his eager brain ran from expedient to expedient.

"Another oracle, some lucky prediction that we shall conquer? But I have
shaken the oracle books till there is only chaff in them. Or a bribe to
Adeimantus and his fellows? But gold can buy only souls, not courage. Or
another brave speech and convincing argument? Had I the tongue of Nestor
and the wisdom of Thales, would those doltish Dorians listen?"

Again the knock, still again Simonides. The dapper poet's face was a cubit
long.

"Oh, grief to report it! Cimon sends a boat from his ship the _Perseus_.
He says the _Dike_, the Sicyonian ship beside him, is not stripping for
battle, but rigging sail on her spars as if to flee away."

"Is that all?" asked Themistocles, calmly.

"And there is also a message that Adeimantus and many other admirals who
are minded like him have gone again to Eurybiades to urge him not to
fight."

"I expected it."

"Will the Spartan yield?" The little poet was whitening.

"Very likely. Eurybiades would be a coward if he were not too much of a
fool."

"And you are not going to him instantly, to confound the faint hearts and
urge them to quit themselves like Hellenes?"

"Not yet."

"By the dog of Egypt, man," cried Simonides, seizing his friend's arm,
"don't you know that if nothing's done, we'll all walk the asphodel
to-morrow?"

"Of course. I am doing all I can."

"All? You stand with folded hands!"

"All--for I am thinking."

"Thinking--oh, make actions of your thoughts!"

"I will."

"When?"

"When the god opens the way. Just now the way is fast closed."

"_Ai!_ woe--and it is already far into the evening, and Hellas is lost."

Themistocles laughed almost lightly.

"No, my friend. Hellas will not be lost until to-morrow morning, and much
can happen in a night. Now go, and let me think yet more."

Simonides lingered. He was not sure Themistocles was master of himself.
But the admiral beckoned peremptorily, the poet's hand was on the cabin
door, when a loud knock sounded on the other side. The _proreus_,
commander of the fore-deck and Ameinas's chief lieutenant, entered and
saluted swiftly.

"Your business?" questioned the admiral, sharply.

"May it please your Excellency, a deserter."

"A deserter, and how and why here?"

"He came to the _Nausicaae_ in a skiff. He swears he has just come from the
Barbarians at Phaleron. He demands to see the admiral."

"He is a Barbarian?"

"No, a Greek. He affects to speak a kind of Doric dialect."

Themistocles laughed again, and even more lightly.

"A deserter, you say. Then why, by Athena's owls, has he left 'the Land of
Roast Hare' among the Persians, whither so many are betaking themselves?
We've not so many deserters to our cause that to-night we can ignore one.
Fetch him in."

"But the council with Eurybiades?" implored Simonides, almost on his
knees.

"To the harpies with it! I asked Zeus for an omen. It comes--a fair one.
There is time to hear this deserter, to confound Adeimantus, and to save
Hellas too!"

Themistocles tossed his head. The wavering, the doubting frown was gone.
He was himself again. What he hoped for, what device lay in that
inexhaustible brain of his, Simonides did not know. But the sight itself
of this strong, smiling man gave courage. The officer reentered, with him
a young man, his face in part concealed by a thick beard and a peaked cap
drawn low upon his forehead. The stranger came boldly across to
Themistocles, spoke a few words, whereat the admiral instantly bade the
officer to quit the cabin.




                              CHAPTER XXVII


                          THE CRAFT OF ODYSSEUS


The stranger drew back the shaggy cap. Simonides and Themistocles saw a
young, well-formed man. With his thick beard and the flickering cabin
lamps it was impossible to discover more. The newcomer stood silent as if
awaiting remark from the others, and they in turn looked on him.

"Well," spoke the admiral, at length, "who are you? Why are you here?"

"You do not know me?"

"Not in the least, and my memory is good. But your speech now is Attic,
not Doric as they told me."

"It may well be Attic, I am Athenian born."

"Athenian? And still to me a stranger? Ah! an instant. Your voice is
familiar. Where have I heard it before?"

"The last time," rejoined the stranger, his tones rising, "it was a
certain night at Colonus. Democrates and Hermippus were with
you--likewise--"

Themistocles leaped back three steps.

"The sea gives up its dead. You are Glaucon son of--"

"Conon," completed the fugitive, folding his arms calmly, but the admiral
was not so calm.

"Miserable youth! What harpy, what evil god has brought you hither? What
prevents that I give you over to the crew to crucify at the foremast?"

"Nothing hinders! nothing"--Glaucon's voice mounted to shrillness--"save
that Athens and Hellas need all their sons this night."

"A loyal son you have been!" darted Themistocles, his lips curling. "Where
did you escape the sea?"

"I was washed on Astypalaea."

"Where have you been since?"

"In Sardis."

"Who protected you there?"

"Mardonius."

"Did the Persians treat you so shabbily that you were glad to desert
them?"

"They loaded me with riches and honour. Xerxes showered me with benefits."

"And you accompanied their army to Hellas? You went with the other Greek
renegades--the sons of Hippias and the rest?"

Glaucon's brow grew very red, but he met Themistocles's arrowlike gaze.

"I did--and yet--"

"Ah, yes--the 'yet,' " observed Themistocles, sarcastically. "I had
expected it. Well, I can imagine many motives for coming,--to betray our
hopes to the Persians, or even because Athena has put some contrite
manhood in your heart. You know, of course, that the resolution we passed
recalling the exiles did not extend pardon to traitors."

"I know it."

Themistocles flung himself into a chair. The admiral was in a rare
condition for him,--truly at a loss to divine the best word and question.

"Sit also, Simonides," his order, "and you, once Alcmaeonid and now outlaw,
tell why, after these confessions, I should believe any other part of your
story?"

"I do not ask you to believe,"--Glaucon stood like a statue,--"I shall not
blame you if you do the worst,--yet you shall hear--"

The admiral made an impatient gesture, commanding "Begin," and the
fugitive poured out his tale. All the voyage from Phaleron he had been
nerving himself for this ordeal; his composure did not desert now. He
related lucidly, briefly, how the fates had dealt with him since he fled
Colonus. Only when he told of his abiding with Leonidas Themistocles's
gaze grew sharper.

"Tell that again. Be careful. I am very good at detecting lies."

Glaucon repeated unfalteringly.

"What proof that you were with Leonidas?"

"None but my word. Euboulus of Corinth and the Spartans alone knew my
name. They are dead."

"Humph! And you expect me to accept the boast of a traitor with a price
upon his head?"

"You said you were good at detecting lies."

Themistocles's head went down between his hands; at last he lifted it and
gazed the deserter in the face.

"Now, son of Conon, do you still persist that you are innocent? Do you
repeat those oaths you swore at Colonus?"

"All. I did not write that letter."

"Who did, then?"

"A malignant god, I said. I will say it again."

Themistocles shook his head.

"Gods take human agencies to ruin a man in these days, even Hermes the
Trickster. Again I say, who wrote that letter?"

"Athena knows."

"And unfortunately her Ladyship the Goddess will not tell," cried the
admiral, blasphemously. "Let us fall back on easier questions. Did I write
it?"

"Absurd."

"Did Democrates?"

"Absurd again, still--"

"Do you not see, dearest outlaw," said Themistocles, mildly, "until you
can lay that letter on some other man's shoulders, I cannot answer, 'I
believe you'?"

"I did not ask that. I have a simpler request. Will you let me serve
Hellas?"

"How do I know you are not a spy sent from Mardonius?"

"Because too many deserters and talebearers are flying to Xerxes now to
require that I thrust my head in the Hydra's jaws. You know surely that."

Themistocles raised his eyebrows.

"There's truth said there, Simonides. What do you think?" The last
question was to the poet.

"That this Glaucon, whatever his guilt a year ago, comes to-night in good
faith."

"_Euge!_ that's easily said. But what if he betrays us again?"

"If I understand aright," spoke Simonides, shrewdly, "our case is such
there's little left worth betraying."

"Not badly put,"--again Themistocles pressed his forehead, while Glaucon
stood as passive as hard marble. Then the admiral suddenly began to rain
questions like an arrow volley.

"You come from the king's camp?"

"Yes."

"And have heard the plans of battle?"

"I was not at the council, but nothing is concealed. The Persians are too
confident."

"Of course. How do their ships lie?"

"Crowded around the havens of Athens. The vassal Ionians have their ships
on the left. The Phoenicians, Xerxes's chief hope, lie on the right, but on
the extreme right anchor the Egyptians."

"How do you know this?"

"From the camp-followers' talk. Then, too, I rowed by the whole armada
while on my way to Salamis. I have eyes. The moon was shining. I was not
mistaken."

"Do you know where rides the trireme of Ariabignes, Xerxes's
admiral-in-chief?"

"Off the entrance to Peiraeus. It is easy to find her. She is covered with
lights."

"Ah! and the Egyptian squadron is on the extreme right and closest to
Salamis?"

"Very close."

"If they went up the coast as far as the promontory on Mt. AEgaleos, the
strait toward Eleusis would be closed?"

"Certainly."

"And on the south the way is already blocked by the Ionians."

"I had trouble in passing even in my skiff."

More questions, Glaucon not knowing whither they all were drifting.
Without warning Themistocles uprose and smote his thigh.

"So you are anxious to serve Hellas?"

"Have I not said it?"

"Dare you die for her?"

"I made the choice once with Leonidas."

"Dare you do a thing which, if it slip, may give you into the hands of the
Barbarians to be torn by wild horses or of the Greeks to be crucified?"

"But it shall not slip!"

"_Euge!_ that is a noble answer. Now let us come."

"Whither?"

"To Eurybiades's flag-ship. Then I can know whether you must risk the
deed."

Themistocles touched a bronze gong; a marine adjutant entered.

"My pinnace," ordered the admiral. As the man went out, Themistocles took
a long himation from the locker and wrapped it around the newcomer.

"Since even Simonides and I did not recognize you in your long beard, I
doubt if you are in danger of detection to-night. But remember your name
is Critias. You can dye your hair if you come safe back from this
adventure. Have you eaten?"

"Who has hunger now?"

Themistocles laughed.

"So say all of us. But if the gifts of Demeter cannot strengthen, it is
not so with those of Dionysus. Drink."

He took from a hook a leathern bottle and poured out a hornful of hot
Chian. Glaucon did not refuse. After he had finished the admiral did
likewise. Then Glaucon in turn asked questions.

"Where is my wife?"

"In the town of Salamis, with her father; do you know she has borne--"

"A son. Are both well?"

"Well. The child is fair as the son of Leto."

They could see the light flash out of the eyes of the outlaw. He turned
toward the statue and stretched out his hand.

"O Aphrodite, I bless thee!" Then again to the admiral, "And Hermione is
not yet given to Democrates in marriage?" The words came swiftly.

"Not yet. Hermippus desires it. Hermione resists. She calls Democrates
your destroyer."

Glaucon turned away his face that they might not behold it.

"The god has not yet forgotten mercy," Simonides thought he heard him say.

"The pinnace is waiting, _kyrie_," announced the orderly from the
companionway.

"Let the deserter's skiff be towed behind," ordered Themistocles, once on
deck, "and let Sicinnus also go with me."

The keen-eyed Asiatic took his place with Themistocles and Glaucon in the
stern. The sturdy boatmen sent the pinnace dancing. All through the brief
voyage the admiral was at whispers with Sicinnus. As they reached the
Spartan flag-ship, half a score of pinnaces trailing behind told how the
Peloponnesian admirals were already aboard clamouring at Eurybiades for
orders to fly. From the ports of the stern-cabin the glare of many lamps
spread wavering bars of light across the water. Voices came, upraised in
jarring debate. The marine guard saluted with his spear as Themistocles
went up the ladder. Leaving his companions on deck, the admiral hastened
below. An instant later he was back and beckoned the Asiatic and the
outlaw to the ship's rail.

"Take Sicinnus to the Persian high admiral," was his ominous whisper, "and
fail not,--fail not, for I say to you except the god prosper you now, not
all Olympus can save our Hellas to-morrow."

Not another word as he turned again to the cabin. The pinnace crew had
brought the skiff alongside, Sicinnus entered it, Glaucon took the oars,
pulled out a little, as if back to the _Nausicaae_, then sent the head of
the skiff around, pointing across the strait, toward the havens of Athens.
Sicinnus sat in silence, but Glaucon guessed the errand. The wind was
rising and bringing clouds. This would hide the moon and lessen the
danger. But above all things speed was needful. The athlete put his
strength upon the oars till the heavy skiff shot across the black void of
the water.

                              * * * * * * *

It was little short of midnight when Glaucon swung the skiff away from the
tall trireme of Ariabignes, the Barbarian's admiral. The deed was done. He
had sat in the bobbing boat while Sicinnus had been above with the Persian
chiefs. Officers who had exchanged the wine-cup with Glaucon in the days
when he stood at Xerxes's side passed through the glare of the battle
lanterns swaying above the rail. The Athenian had gripped at the dagger in
his belt as he watched them. Better in the instant of discovery to slay
one's self than die a few hours afterward by slow tortures! But discovery
had not come. Sicinnus had come down the ladder, smiling, jesting, a dozen
subalterns salaaming as he went, and offering all manner of service, for
had he not been a bearer of great good tidings to the king?

"Till to-morrow," an olive-skinned Cilician navarch had spoken.

"Till to-morrow," waved the messenger, lightly. He did all things coolly,
as if he had been bearing an invitation to a feast, took his post in the
stern of the skiff deliberately, then turned to the silent man with him.

"Pull."

"Whither?" Glaucon was already tugging the oars.

"To Eurybiades's ship. Themistocles is waiting. And again all speed."

The line of twinkling water betwixt the skiff and the Persian widened. For
a few moments Glaucon bent himself silently to his task, then for the
first time questioned.

"What have you done?"

Even in the darkness he knew Sicinnus grinned and showed his teeth.

"In the name of Themistocles I have told the Barbarian chiefs that the
Hellenes are at strife one with another, that they are meditating a hasty
flight, that if the king's captains will but move their ships so as to
enclose them, it is likely there will be no battle in the morning, but the
Hellenes will fall into the hands of Xerxes unresisting."

"And the Persian answered?"

"That I and my master would not fail of reward for this service to the
king. That the Egyptian ships would be swung at once across the strait to
cut off all flight by the Hellenes."

The outlaw made no answer, but pulled at the oars. The reaction from the
day and evening of strain and peril was upon him. He was unutterably
weary, though more in mind than in body. The clumsy skiff seemed only to
crawl. Trusting the orders of Sicinnus to steer him aright, he closed his
eyes. One picture after another of his old life came up before him now he
was in the stadium at Corinth and facing the giant Spartan, now he stood
by Hermione on the sacred Rock at Athens, now he was at Xerxes's side with
the fleets and the myriads passing before them at the Hellespont, he saw
his wife, he saw Roxana, and all other things fair and lovely that had
crossed his life. Had he made the best choice? Were the desperate fates of
Hellas better than the flower-banked streams of Bactria, whose delights he
had forever thrust by? Would his Fortune, guider of every human destiny,
bring him at last to a calm haven, or would his life go out amid the
crashing ships to-morrow? The oars bumped on the thole-pins. He pulled
mechanically, the revery ever deepening, then a sharp hail awoke him.

"O-op! What do you here?"

The call was in Phoenician. Glaucon scarce knew the harsh Semitic speech,
but the _lembos_, a many-oared patrol cutter, was nearly on them. A moment
more, and seizure would be followed by identification. Life, death,
Hellas, Hermione, all flashed before his eyes as he sat numbed, but
Sicinnus saved them both.

"The password to-night? You know it," he demanded in quick whisper.

" 'Hystaspes,' " muttered Glaucon, still wool-gathering.

"Who are you? Why here?" An officer in the cutter was rising and upholding
an unmasked lantern. "We've been ordered to cruise in the channel and snap
up deserters, and by Baal, here are twain! The crows will pick at your
eyes to-morrow."

Sicinnus stood upright in the skiff.

"Fool," he answered in good Sidonian, "dare you halt the king's privy
messenger? It is not _our_ heads that the crows will find the soonest."

The cutter was close beside them, but the officer dropped his lantern.

"Good, then. Give the password."

" 'Hystaspes.' "

They could see the Phoenician's hand rise to his head in salute.

"Forgive my rudeness, worthy sir. It's truly needless to seek deserters
to-night with the Hellenes' affairs so desperate, yet we must obey his
Eternity's orders."

"I pardon you," quoth the emissary, loftily, "I will commend your
vigilance to the admiral."

"May Moloch give your Lordship ten thousand children," called back the
mollified Semite.

The crew of the cutter dropped their blades into the water. The boats
glided apart. Not till there was a safe stretch betwixt them did Glaucon
begin to grow hot, then cold, then hot again. Chill Thanatos had passed
and missed by a hair's breadth. Again the bumping of the oars and the
slow, slow creeping over the water. The night was darkening. The clouds
had hid the moon and all her stars. Sicinnus, shrewd and weatherwise,
remarked, "There will be a stiff wind in the morning," and lapsed into
silence. Glaucon toiled on resolutely. A fixed conviction was taking
possession of his mind,--one that had come on the day he had been preserved
at Thermopylae, now deepened by the event just passed,--that he was being
reserved by the god for some crowning service to Hellas, after which
should come peace, whether the peace of a warrior who dies in the arms of
victory, whether the peace of a life spent after a deed well done, he
scarcely knew, and in the meantime, if the storms must beat and the waves
rise up against him, he would bear them still. Like the hero of his race,
he could say, "Already have I suffered much and much have I toiled in
perils of waves and war, let this be added to the tale of those."

Bump--bump, the oars played their monotonous music on the thole-pins.
Sicinnus stirred on his seat. He was peering northward anxiously, and
Glaucon knew what he was seeking. Through the void of the night their
straining eyes saw masses gliding across the face of the water. Ariabignes
was making his promise good. Yonder the Egyptian fleet were swinging forth
to close the last retreat of the Hellenes. Thus on the north, and
southward, too, other triremes were thrusting out, bearing--both watchers
wisely guessed--a force to disembark on Psyttaleia, the islet betwixt
Salamis and the main, a vantage-point in the coming battle.

The coming battle? It was so silent, ghostlike, far away, imagination
scarce could picture it. Was this black slumberous water to be the scene
at dawn of a combat beside which that of Hector and Achilles under Troy
would be only as a tale that is told? And was he, Glaucon, son of Conon
the Alcmaeonid, sitting there in the skiff alone with Sicinnus, to have a
part therein, in a battle the fame whereof should ring through the ages?
Bump, bump--still the monologue of the oars. A fish near by leaped from the
water, splashing loudly. Then for an instant the clouds broke. Selene
uncovered her face. The silvery flash quickly come, more quickly flying,
showed him the headlands of that Attica now in Xerxes's hands. He saw
Pentelicus and Hymettus, Parnes and Cithaeron, the hills he had wandered
over in glad boyhood, the hills where rested his ancestors' dust. It was
no dream. He felt his warm blood quicken. He felt the round-bowed skiff
spring over the waves, as with unwearied hands he tugged at the oar. There
are moments when the dullest mind grows prophetic, and the mind of the
Athenian was not dull. The moonlight had vanished. In its place through
the magic darkness seemed gathering all the heroes of his people beckoning
him and his compeers onward. Perseus was there, and Theseus and
Erechtheus, Heracles the Mighty, and Odysseus the Patient, whose intellect
Themistocles possessed, Solon the Wise, Periander the Crafty, Diomedes the
Undaunted, men of reality, men of fable, sages, warriors, demigods,
crowding together, speaking one message: "Be strong, for the heritage of
what you do this coming day shall be passed beyond children's children,
shall be passed down to peoples to whom the tongue, the gods, yea, the
name of Hellas, are but as a dream."

Glaucon felt the weariness fly from him. He was refreshed as never by
wine. Then through the void in place of the band of heroes slowly
outspread the tracery of a vessel at anchor,--the outermost guardship of
the fleet of the Hellenes. They were again amongst friends. The watcher on
the trireme was keeping himself awake after the manner of sentries by
singing. In the night-stillness the catch from Archilochus rang lustily.

  "By my spear I have won my bread,
  By spear won my clear, red wine,
  On my spear I will lean and drink,--
  Show me a merrier life than is mine!"

The trolling called Glaucon back to reality. Guided by Sicinnus, who knew
the stations of the Greek fleet better than he, a second time they came
beside the Spartan admiral. The lamps were still burning in the
stern-cabin. Even before they were alongside, they caught the clamours of
fierce debate.

"Still arguing?" quoth Sicinnus to the yawning marine officer who advanced
to greet them as they reached the top of the ladder.

"Still arguing," grunted the Spartan. "I think your master has dragged
forth all his old arguments and invented a thousand new ones. He talks
continuously, as if battling for time, though only Castor knows wherefore.
There's surely a majority against him."

The emissary descended the companionway, Themistocles leaped up from his
seat in the crowded council. A few whispers, the Asiatic returned to
Glaucon on the deck. The two gazed down the companionway, observing
everything. They had not long to wait.




                              CHAPTER XXVIII


                         BEFORE THE DEATH GRAPPLE


For the fourth time the subaltern who stood at Eurybiades's elbow turned
the water-glass that marked the passing of the hours. The lamps in the
low-ceiled cabin were flickering dimly. Men glared on one another across
the narrow table with drawn and heated faces. Adeimantus of Corinth was
rising to reply to the last appeal of the Athenian.

"We have had enough, Eurybiades, of Themistocles's wordy folly. Because
the Athenian admiral is resolved to lead all Hellas to destruction, is no
reason that we should follow. As for his threat that he will desert us
with his ships if we refuse to fight, I fling it in his face that he dare
not make it good. Why go all over the well-threshed straw again? Is not
the fleet of the king overwhelming? Were we not saved by a miracle from
overthrow at Artemisium? Do not the scouts tell us the Persians are
advancing beyond Eleusis toward Megara and the Isthmus? Is not our best
fighting blood here in the fleet? Then if the Isthmus is threatened, our
business is to defend it and save the Peloponnesus, the last remnant of
Hellas unconquered. Now then, headstrong son of Neocles, answer that!"

The Corinthian, a tall domineering man, threw back his shoulders like a
boxer awaiting battle. Themistocles did not answer, but only smiled up at
him from his seat opposite.

"I have silenced you, grinning babbler, at last," thundered Adeimantus,
"and I demand of you, O Eurybiades, that we end this tedious debate. If we
are to retreat, let us retreat. A vote, I say, a vote!"

Eurybiades rose at the head of the table. He was a heavy, florid
individual with more than the average Spartan's slowness of tongue and
intellect. Physically he was no coward, but he dreaded responsibility.

"Much has been said," he announced ponderously, "many opinions offered. It
would seem the majority of the council favour the decision to retire
forthwith. Has Themistocles anything more to say why the vote should not
be taken?"

"Nothing," rejoined the Athenian, with an equanimity that made Adeimantus
snap his teeth.

"We will therefore take the vote city by city," went on Eurybiades. "Do
you, Phlegon of Seriphos, give your vote."

Seriphos--wretched islet--sent only one ship, but thanks to the Greek mania
for "equality" Phlegon's vote had equal weight with that of Themistocles.

"Salamis is not defensible," announced the Seriphian, shortly. "Retreat."

"And you, Charmides of Melos?"

"Retreat."

"And you, Phoibodas of Troezene?"

"Retreat, by all the gods."

"And you, Hippocrates of AEgina?"

"Stay and fight. If you go back to the Isthmus, AEgina must be abandoned to
the Barbarians. I am with Themistocles."

"Record his vote," shouted Adeimantus, ill-naturedly, "he is but one
against twenty. But I warn you, Eurybiades, do not call for Themistocles's
vote, or the rest of us will be angry. The man whose city is under the
power of the Barbarian has no vote in this council, however much we
condescend to listen to his chatterings."

The Athenian sprang from his seat, his aspect as threatening as Apollo
descending Olympus in wrath.

"Where is my country, Adeimantus? Yonder!" he pointed out the open
port-hole, "there rides the array of our Athenian ships. What other state
in Hellas sends so many and sets better men within them? Athens still
lives, though her Acropolis be wrapped in flames. 'Strong-hearted men and
naught else are warp and woof of a city.' Do you forget Alcaeus's word so
soon, O Boaster from Corinth? Yes, by Athena Promachos, Mistress of
Battles, while those nine score ships ride on the deep, I have a city
fairer, braver, than yours. And will you still deny me equal voice and
vote with this noble trierarch from Siphinos with his one, or with his
comrade from Melos with his twain?"

Themistocles's voice rang like a trumpet. Adeimantus winced. Eurybiades
broke in with soothing tones.

"No one intends to deny your right to vote, Themistocles. The excellent
Corinthian did but jest."

"A fitting hour for jesting!" muttered the Athenian, sinking back into his
seat.

"The vote, the vote!" urged the Sicyonian chief, from Adeimantus's elbow,
and the voting went on. Of more than twenty voices only
three--Themistocles's and those of the AEginetan and Megarian admirals--were
in favour of abiding the onset. Yet even when Eurybiades arose to announce
the decision, the son of Neocles sat with his hands sprawling on the
table, his face set in an inscrutable smile as he looked on Adeimantus.

"It is the plain opinion,"--Eurybiades hemmed and hawed with his
words,--"the plain opinion, I say, of this council that the allied fleet
retire at once to the Isthmus. Therefore, I, as admiral-in-chief, do order
each commander to proceed to his own flag-ship and prepare his triremes to
retire at dawn."

"Well said," shouted Adeimantus, already on his feet; "now to obey."

But with him rose Themistocles. He stood tall and calm, his thumbs thrust
in his girdle. His smile was a little broader, his head held a little
higher, than of wont.

"Good Eurybiades, I grieve to blast the wisdom of all these valiant
gentlemen, but they cannot retire if they wish."

"Explain!" a dozen shouted.

"Very simply. I have had good reason to know that the king has moved
forward the western horn of his fleet, so as to enclose our anchorage at
Salamis. It is impossible to retire save through the Persian line of
battle."

Perseus upholding the Gorgon's head before Polydectes's guests and turning
them to stone wrought hardly more of a miracle than this calm announcement
of Themistocles. Men stared at him vacantly, stunned by the tidings, then
Adeimantus's frightened wrath broke loose.

"Fox!(10) Was this your doing?"

"I did not ask you to thank me, _philotate_," was the easy answer. "It is,
however, urgent to consider whether you wish to be taken unresisting in
the morning."

The Corinthian shook his fist across the table.

"Liar, as a last device to ruin us, you invent this folly."

"It is easy to see if I lie," rejoined Themistocles; "send out a pinnace
and note where the Persians anchor. It will not take long."

For an instant swords seemed about to leap from their scabbards, and the
enraged Peloponnesians to sheathe them in the Athenian's breast. He stood
unflinching, smiling, while a volley of curses flew over him. Then an
orderly summoned him on deck, while Adeimantus and his fellows foamed and
contended below. Under the battle lantern Themistocles saw a man who was
his elder in years, rugged in feature, with massive forehead and wise gray
eyes. This was Aristeides the Just, the admiral's enemy, but their feud
had died when Xerxes drew near to Athens.

Hands clasped heartily as the twain stood face to face.

"Our rivalry forever more shall be a rivalry which of us can do most to
profit Athens," spoke the returning exile; then Aristeides told how he had
even now come from AEgina, how he had heard of the clamours to retreat, how
retreat was impossible, for the Persians were pressing in. A laugh from
Themistocles interrupted.

"My handiwork! Come to the council. They will not believe me, no, not my
oath."

Aristeides told his story, and how his vessel to Salamis had scarce
escaped the Egyptian triremes, and how by this time all entrance and exit
was surely closed. But even now many an angry captain called him "liar."
The strife of words was at white heat when Eurybiades himself silenced the
fiercest doubter.

"Captains of Hellas, a trireme of Teos has deserted from the Barbarian to
us. Her navarch sends word that all is even as Themistocles and Aristeides
tell. The Egyptians hold the passage to Eleusis. Infantry are disembarked
on Psyttaleia. The Phoenicians and Ionians enclose us on the eastern
strait. We are hemmed in."

                              * * * * * * *

Once more the orderly turned the water-clock. It was past midnight. The
clouds had blown apart before the rising wind. The debate must end.
Eurybiades stood again to take the votes of the wearied, tense-strung men.

"In view of the report of the Teans, what is your voice and vote?"

Before all the rest up leaped Adeimantus. He was no craven at heart,
though an evil genius had possessed him.

"You have your will, Themistocles," he made the concession sullenly yet
firmly, "you have your will. May Poseidon prove you in the right. If it is
battle or slavery at dawn, the choice is quick. Battle!"

"Battle!" shouted the twenty, arising together, and Eurybiades had no need
to declare the vote. The commanders scattered to their flag-ships, to give
orders to be ready to fight at dawn. Themistocles went to his pinnace
last. He walked proudly. He knew that whatever glory he might gain on the
morrow, he could never win a fairer victory than he had won that night.
When his barge came alongside, his boat crew knew that his eyes were
dancing, that his whole mien was of a man in love with his fortune. Many
times, as Glaucon sat beside him, he heard the son of Neocles repeating as
in ecstasy:--

"They must fight. They must fight."

                              * * * * * * *

Glaucon sat mutely in the pinnace which had headed not for the _Nausicaae_,
but toward the shore, where a few faint beacons were burning.

"I must confer with the strategi as to the morning," Themistocles declared
after a long interval, at which Sicinnus broke in anxiously:--

"You will not sleep, _kyrie_?"

"Sleep?" laughed the admiral, as at an excellent jest, "I have forgotten
there was such a god as Hypnos." Then, ignoring Sicinnus, he addressed the
outlaw.

"I am grateful to you, my friend," he did not call Glaucon by name before
the others, "you have saved me, and I have saved Hellas. You brought me a
new plan when I seemed at the last resource. How can the son of Neocles
reward you?"

"Give me a part to play to-morrow."

"Thermopylae was not brisk enough fighting, ha? Can you still fling a
javelin?"

"I can try."

"_Euge!_ Try you shall." He let his voice drop. "Do not forget your name
henceforth is Critias. The _Nausicaae's_ crew are mostly from Sunium and
the Mesogia. They'd hardly recognize you under that beard; still Sicinnus
must alter you."

"Command me, _kyrie_," said the Asiatic.

"A strange time and place, but you must do it. Find some dark dye for this
man's hair to-night, and at dawn have him aboard the flag-ship."

"The thing can be done, _kyrie_."

"After that, lie down and sleep. Because Themistocles is awake, is no
cause for others' star-gazing. Sleep sound. Pray Apollo and Hephaestus to
make your eye sure, your hand strong. Then awake to see the glory of
Hellas."

Confidence, yes, power came through the tones of the admiral's voice.
Themistocles went away to the belated council. Sicinnus led his charge
through the crooked streets of the town of Salamis. Sailors were sleeping
in the open night, and they stumbled over them. At last they found a small
tavern where a dozen shipmen sprawled on the earthen floor, and a gaping
host was just quenching his last lamp. Sicinnus, however, seemed to know
him. There was much protesting and headshaking, at last ended by the glint
of a daric. The man grumbled, departed, returned after a tedious interval
with a pot of ointment, found Hermes knew where. By a rush-candle's
flicker Sicinnus applied the dark dye with a practised hand.

"You know the art well," observed the outlaw.

"Assuredly; the agent of Themistocles must be a Proteus with his
disguises."

Sicinnus laid down his pot and brushes. They had no mirror, but Glaucon
knew that he was transformed. The host got his daric. Again they went out
into the night and forsaking the crowded town sought the seaside. The
strand was broad, the sand soft and cool, the circling stars gave three
hours yet of night, and they lay down to rest. The sea and the shore
stretched away, a magic vista with a thousand mystic shapes springing out
of the charmed darkness, made and unmade as overwrought fancy summoned
them. As from an unreal world Glaucon--whilst he lay--saw the lights of the
scattered ships, heard the clank of chains, the rattling of tacklings.
Nature slept. Only man was waking.

  "The mountain brows, the rocks, the peaks are sleeping,
        Uplands and gorges hush!
  The thousand moorland things are silence keeping,
        The beasts under each bush
         Crouch, and the hived bees
         Rest in their honeyed ease;
     In the purple sea fish lie as they were dead,
     And each bird folds his wing over his head."

The school-learned lines of Alcman, with a thousand other trivial things,
swarmed back through the head of Glaucon the Alcmaeonid. How much he had
lived through that night, how much he would live through,--if indeed he was
to live,--upon the morrow! The thought was benumbing in its greatness. His
head swam with confused memories. Then at last all things dimmed. Once
more he dreamed. He was with Hermione gathering red poppies on the hill
above Eleusis. She had filled her basket full. He called to her to wait
for him. She ran away. He chased, she fled with laughter and sparkling
eyes. He could hear the wavings of her dress, the little cries she flung
back over her shoulder. Then by the sacred well near the temple he caught
her. He felt her struggling gayly. He felt her warm breath upon his face,
her hair was touching his forehead. Rejoicing in his strength, he was
bending her head toward his--but here he wakened. Sicinnus had disappeared.
A bar of gray gold hung over the water in the east.

"This was the day. _This was the day!_"

Some moments he lay trying to realize the fact in its full moment. A thin
mist rested on the black water waiting to be dispelled by the sun. From
afar came sounds not of seamen's trumpets, but horns, harps, kettledrums,
from the hidden mainland across the strait, as of a host advancing along
the shore. "Xerxes goes down to the marge with his myriads," Glaucon told
himself. "Have not all his captains bowed and smiled, 'Your Eternity's
victory is certain. Come and behold.' " But here the Athenian shut his
teeth.

People at length were passing up and down the strand. The coast was
waking. The gray bar was becoming silver. Friends passed, deep in
talk,--perchance for the last time. Glaucon lay still a moment longer, and
as he rested caught a voice so familiar he felt all the blood surge to his
forehead,--Democrates's voice.

"I tell you, Hiram,--I told you before,--I have no part in the ordering of
the fleet. Were I to interfere with ever so good a heart, it would only
breed trouble for us all."

So close were the twain, the orator's trailing chiton almost fell on
Glaucon's face. The latter marvelled that his own heart did not spring
from its prison in his breast, so fierce were its beatings.

"If my Lord would go to Adeimantus and suggest,"--the other's Greek came
with a marked Oriental accent.

"Harpy! Adeimantus is no Medizer. He is pushed to bay now, and is sure to
fight. Have you Barbarians no confidence? Has not the king two triremes to
our one? Only fools can demand more. Tell Lycon, your master, I have long
since done my uttermost to serve him."

"Yet remember, Excellency."

"Begone, scoundrel. Don't threaten again. If I know your power over me, I
can also promise you not to go down to Orchus alone, but take excellent
pains to have fair company."

"I am sorry to bear such tidings to Lycon, Excellency."

"Away with you!"

"Do not raise your voice, _kyrie_," spoke Hiram, never more blandly, "here
is a man asleep."

The hint sent Democrates from the spot almost on a run. Hiram disappeared
in the opposite direction. Glaucon rose, shook the sand from his cloak,
and stood an instant with his head whirling. The voice of his boyhood
friend, of the man who had ruined him because of a suspicion of
treason--and now deep in compromising talk with the agent of the chief of
the peace party at Sparta! And wherefore had Mardonius spoken those
mysterious words at their parting, "Beware of Democrates"? For an instant
the problems evoked made him forget even the coming battle.

A clear trumpet-blast down the strand gave a truce to questioning.
Sicinnus reappeared, and led Glaucon to one of the great fires roaring on
the beach, where the provident Greek sailors were breakfasting on barley
porridge and meat broth before dining on spears and arrow-heads. A silent
company, no laughter, no jesting. All knew another sun for them might
never rise. Glaucon ate not because he hungered, but because duty ordered
it. As the light strengthened, the strand grew alive with thousands of men
at toil. The triremes drawn on shore went down into the sea on their
rollers. More trumpet-blasts sent the rowers aboard their ships. But last
of all, before thrusting out to do or die, the Greeks must feast their
ears as well as their stomachs. On the sloping beach gathered the officers
and the armoured marines,--eighteen from each trireme,--and heard one
stirring harangue after another. The old feuds were forgotten. Adeimantus
and Eurybiades both spoke bravely. The seers announced that every bird and
cloud gave good omen. Prayer was offered to Ajax of Salamis that the hero
should fight for his people. Last of all Themistocles spoke, and never to
fairer purpose. No boasts, no lip courage, a painting of the noble and the
base, the glory of dying as freemen, the infamy of existing as slaves. He
told of Marathon, of Thermopylae, and asked if Leonidas had died as died a
fool. He drew tears. He drew vows of vengeance. He never drew applause.
Men were too strained for that. At last he sent the thousands forth.

"Go, then. Quit yourselves as Hellenes. That is all the task. And I say to
you, in the after days this shall be your joy, to hear the greatest
declare of you, 'Reverence this man, for he saved us all at Salamis.' "

The company dispersed, each man to his ship. Themistocles went to his
pinnace, and a cheer uprose from sea and land as the boat shot out to the
_Nausicaae_. Eurybiades might be chief in name; who did not know that
Themistocles was the surest bulwark of Hellas?

The son of Neocles, standing in the boat, uplifted his face to the now
golden east.

"Be witness, Helios," he cried aloud, "be witness when thou comest, I have
done all things possible. And do thou and thy fellow-gods on bright
Olympus rule our battle now; the lot is in your hands!"




                               CHAPTER XXIX


                                 SALAMIS


Sunrise. The _Nausicaae_ was ready. Ameinias the navarch walked the deck
above the stern-cabin with nervous strides. All that human forethought
could do to prepare the ship had long been done. The slim hull one hundred
and fifty feet long had been stripped of every superfluous rope and spar.
The masts had been lowered. On the cat-heads hung the anchors weighted
with stone to fend off an enemy, astern towed the pinnace ready to drag
alongside and break the force of the hostile ram. The heavy-armed marines
stood with their long boarding spears, to lead an attack or cast off
grappling-irons. But the true weapon of the _Nausicaae_ was herself. To
send the three-toothed beak through a foeman's side was the end of her
being. To meet the shock of collision two heavy cables had been bound
horizontally around the hull from stem to stern. The oarsmen,--the
_thranites_ of the upper tier, the _zygites_ of the middle, the
_thalamites_ of the lower,--one hundred and seventy swart, nervous-eyed
men, sat on their benches, and let their hands close tight upon those oars
which trailed now in the drifting water, but which soon and eagerly should
spring to life. At the belt of every oarsman dangled a sword, for
boarders' work was more than likely. Thirty spare rowers rested
impatiently on the centre deck, ready to leap wherever needed. On the
forecastle commanded the _proreus_, Ameinias's lieutenant, and with him
the _keleustes_, the oar master who must give time on his sounding-board
for the rowing, and never fail,--not though the ships around reeled down to
watery grave. And finally on the poop by the captain stood the
"governor,"--knotted, grizzled, and keen,--the man whose touch upon the
heavy steering oars might give the _Nausicaae_ life or destruction when the
ships charged beak to beak.

"The trireme is ready, admiral," reported Ameinias, as Themistocles came
up leisurely from the stern-cabin.

The son of Neocles threw back his helmet, that all might see his calm,
untroubled face. He wore a cuirass of silvered scale-armour over his
purple chiton. At his side walked a young man, whom the ship's people
imagined the deserter of the preceding night, but he had drawn his helmet
close.

"This is Critias," said Themistocles, briefly, to the navarch; "he is a
good caster. See that he has plenty of darts."

"One of Themistocles's secret agents," muttered the captain to the
governor, "we should have guessed it." And they all had other things to
think of than the whence and wherefore of this stranger.

It was a weary, nervous interval. Men had said everything, done
everything, hoped and feared everything. They were in no mood even to
invoke the gods. In desperation some jested riotously as they gripped the
oars on the benches,--demonstrations which the _proreus_ quelled with a
loud "Silence in the ship." The morning mist was breaking. A brisk wind
was coming with the sun. Clear and strong sang the Notus, the breeze of
the kindly south. It covered the blue bay with crisping whitecaps, it sent
the surf foaming up along the Attic shore across the strait. Themistocles
watched it all with silent eyes, but eyes that spoke of gladness. He knew
the waves would beat with full force on the Persian prows, and make their
swift movement difficult while the Greeks, taking the galloping surf
astern, would suffer little.

"AEolus fights for us. The first omen and a fair one." The word ran in
whispers down the benches, and every soul on the trireme rejoiced.

How long did they sit thus? An aeon? Would Eurybiades never draw out his
line of battle? Would Adeimantus prove craven at the end? Would treachery
undo Hellas to-day, as once before at Lade when the Ionian Greeks had
faced the Persian fleet in vain? Now as the vapour broke, men began to be
able to look about them, and be delivered from their own thoughts. The
shores of Salamis were alive,--old men, women, little children,--the
fugitives from Attica were crowding to the marge in thousands to watch the
deed that should decide their all. And many a bronze-cheeked oarsman arose
from his bench to wave farewell to the wife or father or mother, and sank
back again,--a clutching in his throat, a mist before his eyes, while his
grip upon the oar grew like to steel.

As the _Nausicaae_ rode at her place in the long line of ships spread up
and down the shore of Salamis, it was easy to detect forms if not faces on
the strand. And Glaucon, peering out from his helmet bars, saw Democrates
himself standing on the sands and beckoning to Themistocles. Then other
figures became clear to him out of the many, this one or that whom he had
loved and clasped hands with in the sunlit days gone by. And last of all
he saw those his gaze hungered for the most, Hermippus, Lysistra, and
another standing at their side all in white, and in her arms she bore
something he knew must be her child,--Hermione's son, his son, born to the
lot of a free man of Athens or a slave of Xerxes according as his elders
played their part this day. Only a glimpse,--the throng of strangers opened
to disclose them closed again; Glaucon leaned on a capstan. All the
strength for the moment was gone out of him.

"You rowed and wrought too much last night, Critias," spoke Themistocles,
who had eyes for everything. "To the cabin, Sicinnus, bring a cup of
Chian."

"No wine, for Athena's sake!" cried the outlaw, drawing himself together,
"it is passed. I am strong again."

A great shout from the shores and the waiting fleet made him forget even
the sight of Hermione.

"They come! The Persians! The Persians!"

The fleet of the Barbarians was advancing from the havens of Athens.

                              * * * * * * *

The sun rose higher. He was far above Hymettus now, and shooting his
bright javelins over mainland, islands, and waters. With his rising the
southern breeze sang ever clearer, making the narrow channel betwixt
Salamis and Attica white, and tossing each trireme merrily. Not a cloud
hung upon Pentelicus, Hymettus, or the purple northern range of Parnes.
Over the desolate Acropolis hovered a thin mist,--smoke from the
smouldering temple, the sight of which made every Attic sailor blink hard
and think of the vengeance.

Yonder on the shore of the mainland the host of the Persian was moving:
horsemen in gilded panoply, Hydarnes's spearmen in armour like suns. They
stood by myriads in glittering masses about a little spur of Mt. AEgaleos,
where a holy close of Heracles looked out upon the sea. To them were
coming more horsemen, chariots, litters, and across the strait drifted the
thunderous acclamation, "Victory to the king!" For here on the ivory
throne, with his mighty men, his captains, his harem, about him, the "Lord
of the World" would look down on the battle and see how his slaves could
fight.

Now the Barbarians began to move forth by sea. From the havens of Peiraeus
and their anchorages along the shore swept their galleys,--Phoenician,
Cilician, Egyptian, and, sorrow of sorrows, Ionian--Greek arrayed against
Greek! Six hundred triremes and more they were, taller in poop and prow
than the Hellenes, and braver to look upon.

Each vied with each in the splendour of the scarlet, purple, and gold upon
stern and foreship. Their thousands of white oars moved like the onward
march of an army as they trampled down the foam. From the masts of their
many admirals flew innumerable gay signal-flags. The commands shouted
through trumpets in a dozen strange tongues--the shrill pipings of the oar
masters, the hoarse shouts of the rowers--went up to heaven in a clamorous
babel. "Swallows' chatter," cried the deriding Hellenes, but hearts were
beating quicker, breath was coming faster in many a breast by Salamis
then,--and no shame. For now was the hour of trial, the wrestle of Olympian
Zeus with Ahura-Mazda. Now would a mighty one speak from the heavens to
Hellas, and say to her "Die!" or "Be!"

The Barbarians' armadas were forming. Their black beaks, all pointing
toward Salamis, stretched in two bristling lines from the islet of
Psyttaleia--whence the shields of the landing force glittered--to that
brighter glitter on the promontory by AEgaleos where sat the king. To
charge their array seemed charging a moving hedge of spears, impenetrable
in defence, invincible in attack. Slowly, rocked by the sea and rowing in
steady order, the armament approached Salamis. And still the Greek ships
lay spread out along the shore, each trireme swinging at the end of the
cable which moored her to the land, each mariner listening to the beatings
of his own heart and straining his eyes on one ship now--Eurybiades's--which
rode at the centre of their line and far ahead.

All could read the order of battle at last as squadron lay against
squadron. On the west, under Xerxes's own eye, the Athenians must charge
the serried Phoenicians, at the centre the AEginetans must face the
Cilicians, on the east Adeimantus and his fellows from Peloponnese must
make good against the vassal Ionians. But would the signal to row and
strike never come? Had some god numbed Eurybiades's will? Was treachery
doing its darkest work? With men so highly wrought moments were precious.
The bow strung too long will lose power. And wherefore did Eurybiades
tarry?

Every soul in the _Nausicaae_ kept his curses soft, and waited--waited till
that trailing monster, the Persian fleet, had crept halfway from
Psyttaleia toward them, then up the shrouds of the Spartan admiral leaped
a flag. Eager hands drew it, yet it seemed mounting as a snail, till at
the masthead the clear wind blew it wide,--a plain red banner, but as it
spread hundreds of axes were hewing the cables that bound the triremes to
the shore, every Greek oar was biting the sea, the ships were leaping away
from Salamis. From the strand a shout went up, a prayer more than a cheer,
mothers, wives, little ones, calling it together:--

"Zeus prosper you!"

A roar from the fleet, the tearing of countless blades on the thole-pins
answered them. Eurybiades had spoken. There was no treason. All now was in
the hand of the god.

                              * * * * * * *

Across the strait they went, and the Barbarians seemed springing to meet
them. From the mainland a tumult of voices was rising, the myriads around
Xerxes encouraging their comrades by sea to play the man. No indecisive,
half-hearted battle should this be, as at Artemisium. Persian and Hellene
knew that. The keen Phoenicians, who had chafed at being kept from action
so long, sent their line of ships sweeping over the waves with furious
strokes. The grudges, the commercial rivalries between Greek and Sidonian,
were old. No Persian was hotter for Xerxes's cause than his Phoenician
vassals that day.

And as they charged, the foemen's lines seemed so dense, their ships so
tall, their power so vast, that involuntarily hesitancy came over the
Greeks. Their strokes slowed. The whole line lagged. Here an AEginetan
galley dropped behind, yonder a Corinthian navarch suffered his men to
back water. Even the _keleustes_ of the _Nausicaae_ slackened his beating
on the sounding-board. Eurybiades's ship had drifted behind to the line of
her sisters, as in defiance a towering Sidonian sprang ahead of the
Barbarian line of battle, twenty trumpets from her poop and foreship
asking, "Dare you meet me?" The Greek line became almost stationary. Some
ships were backing water. It was a moment which, suffered to slip
unchecked, leads to irreparable disaster. Then like a god sprang
Themistocles upon the capstan on his poop. He had torn off his helmet. The
crews of scores of triremes saw him. His voice was like Stentor's, the
herald whose call was strong as fifty common men.

In a lull amidst the howls of the Barbarians his call rang up and down the
flagging ships:--

    "_O Sons of Hellas! save your land,_
  _Your children save, your altars and your wives!_
  _Now dare and do, for ye have staked your all!_"

"Now dare and do, for ye have staked your all!"

Navarch shouted it to navarch. The cry went up and down the line of the
Hellenes, "loud as when billows lash the beetling crags." The trailing
oars beat again into the water, and even as the ships once more gained
way, Themistocles nodded to Ameinias, and he to the _keleustes_. The
master oarsman leaped from his seat and crashed his gavel down upon the
sounding-board.

"_Aru! Aru! Aru!_ Put it on, my men!"

The _Nausicaae_ answered with a leap. Men wrought at the oar butts, tugging
like mad, their backs toward the foe, conscious only that duty bade them
send the trireme across the waves as a stone whirls from the sling. Thus
the men, but Themistocles, on the poop, standing at the captain's and
governor's side, never took his gaze from the great Barbarian that leaped
defiantly to meet them.

"Can we risk the trick?" his swift question to Ameinias.

The captain nodded. "With this crew--yes."

Two stadia, one stadium, half a stadium, a ship's length, the triremes
were charging prow to prow, rushing on a common death, when Ameinias
clapped a whistle to his lips and blew shrilly. As one man every rower on
the port-side leaped to his feet and dragged his oar inward through its
row-hole. The deed was barely done ere the Sidonian was on them. They
heard the roaring water round her prow, the cracking of the whips as the
petty officers ran up and down the gangways urging on the panting cattle
at the oars. Then almost at the shock the governor touched his steering
oar. The _Nausicaae_ swerved. The prow of the Sidonian rushed past them. A
shower of darts pattered down on the deck of the Hellene, but a twinkling
later from the Barbarians arose a frightful cry. Right across her triple
oar bank, still in full speed, ploughed the Athenian. The Sidonian's oars
were snapping like faggots. The luckless rowers were flung from their
benches in heaps. In less time than the telling every oar on the
Barbarian's port-side had been put out of play. The _diekplous_, favourite
trick of the Grecian seamen, had never been done more fairly.

Now was Themistocles's chance. He used it. There was no need for him to
give orders to the oar master. Automatically every rower on the port-tiers
of the _Nausicaae_ had run out his blade again. The governor sent the head
of the trireme around with a grim smile locked about his grizzled lips. It
was no woman's task which lay before them. Exposing her whole broadside
lay the long Sidonian; she was helpless, striving vainly to crawl away
with her remaining oar banks. Her people were running to and fro, howling
to Baal, Astarte, Moloch, and all their other foul gods, and stretching
their hands for help to consorts too far away.

"_Aru! Aru! Aru!_" was the shout of the oar master; again the _Nausicaae_
answered with her leap. Straight across the narrow water she shot, the
firm hand of the governor never veering now. The stroke grew faster,
faster. Then with one instinct men dropped the oars, to trail in the
rushing water, and seized stanchions, beams, anything to brace themselves
for the shock. The crash which followed was heard on the mainland and on
Salamis. The side of the Phoenician was beaten in like an egg-shell. From
the _Nausicaae's_ poop they saw her open hull reel over, saw the hundreds
of upturned, frantic faces, heard the howls of agony, saw the waves leap
into the gaping void.--

"Back water," thundered Ameinias, "clear the vortex, she is going down!"

The _Nausicaae's_ people staggered to the oars. So busy were they in
righting their own ship few saw the crowning horror. A moment more and a
few drifting spars, a few bobbing heads, were all that was left of the
Phoenician. The AEgean had swallowed her.

A shout was pealing from the ships of the Hellenes. "Zeus is with us!
Athena is with us!"

At the outset of the battle, when advantage tells the most, advantage had
been won. Themistocles's deed had fused all the Greeks with hopeful
courage. Eurybiades was charging. Adeimantus was charging. Their ships and
all the rest went racing to meet the foe.

                              * * * * * * *

But the _Nausicaae_ had paid for her victory. In the shock of ramming the
triple-toothed beak on her prow had been wrenched away. In the _melee_ of
ships which had just begun, she must play her part robbed of her keenest
weapon. The sinking of the Barbarian had been met with cheers by the
Hellenes, by howls of revengeful rage by the host against them. Not
lightly were the Asiatics who fought beneath the eyes of the king to be
daunted. They came crowding up the strait in such masses that sheer
numbers hindered them, leaving no space for the play of the oars, much
less for fine manoeuvre. Yet for an instant it seemed as if mere weight
would sweep the Hellenes back to Salamis. Then the lines of battle
dissolved into confused fragments. Captains singled out an opponent and
charged home desperately, unmindful how it fared elsewhere in the battle.
Here an Egyptian ran down a Euboean, there a Sicyonian grappled a Cilician
and flung her boarders on to the foeman's decks. To the onlookers the
scene could have meant naught save confusion. A hundred duels, a hundred
varying victories, but to which side the final glory would fall, who
knew?--perchance not even Zeus.

In the roaring _melee_ the _Nausicaae_ had for some moments moved almost
aimlessly, her men gathering breath and letting their unscathed comrades
pass. Then gradually the battle drifted round them also. A Cyprian, noting
they had lost their ram, strove to charge them bow to bow. The skill of
the governor avoided that disaster. They ran under the stem of a Tyrian,
and Glaucon proved he had not forgotten his skill when he sent his
javelins among the officers upon the poop. A second Sidonian swept down on
them, but grown wise by her consort's destruction turned aside to lock
with an AEginetan galley. How the fight at large was going, who was
winning, who losing, Glaucon saw no more than any one else. An arrow
grazed his arm. He first learned it when he found his armour bloody. A
sling-stone smote the marine next to him on the forehead. The man dropped
without a groan. Glaucon flung the body overboard, almost by instinct.
Themistocles was everywhere, on the poop, on the foreship, among the
rowers' benches, shouting, laughing, cheering, ordering, standing up
boldly where the arrows flew thickest, yet never hit. So for a while, till
out of the confusion of ships and wrecks came darting a trireme, loftier
than her peers. The railing on poop and prow was silver. The shields of
the javelin-men that crowded her high fighting decks were gilded. Ten
pennons whipped from her masts, and the cry of horns, tambours, and
kettledrums blended with the shoutings of her crew. A partially disabled
Hellene drifted across her path. She ran the luckless ship down in a
twinkling. Then her bow swung. She headed toward the _Nausicaae_.

"Do you know this ship?" asked Themistocles, at Glaucon's side on the
poop.

"A Tyrian, the newest in their fleet, but her captain is the admiral
Ariamenes, Xerxes's brother."

"She is attacking us, Excellency," called Ameinias, in his chief's ear.
The din which covered the sea was beyond telling.

Themistocles measured the water with his eye.

"She will be alongside then in a moment," was his answer, "and the beak is
gone?"

"Gone, and ten of our best rowers are dead."

Themistocles drew down the helmet, covering his face.

"_Euge!_ Since the choice is to grapple or fly, we had better grapple."

The governor shifted again the steering paddles. The head of the
_Nausicaae_ fell away toward her attacker, but no signal was given to
quicken the oars. The Barbarian, noting what her opponent did, but justly
fearing the handiness of the Greeks, slackened also. The two ships drifted
slowly together. Long before they closed in unfriendly contact the arrows
of the Phoenician pelted over the _Nausicaae_ like hail. Rowers fell as they
sat on the upper benches; on the poop the _proreus_ lay with half his men.
Glaucon never counted how many missiles dinted his helmet and buckler. The
next instant the two ships were drifting without steerage-way. The
grappling-irons dashed down upon the Athenian, and simultaneously the
brown Phoenician boarders were scrambling like cats upon her decks.

"Swords, men!" called Themistocles, never less daunted than at the pinch,
"up and feed them with iron!"

Three times the Phoenicians poured as a flood over the _Nausicaae_. Three
times they were flung back with loss, but only to rage, call on their
gods, and return with tenfold fury. Glaucon had hurled one sheaf of
javelins, and tore loose another, eye and arm aiming, casting
mechanically. In the lulls he saw how wind and sea were sweeping the two
ships landward, until almost in arrow-shot of the rocky point where sat
Xerxes and his lords. He saw the king upon his ivory throne and all his
mighty men around him. He saw the scribes standing near with parchment and
papyrus, inscribing the names of this or that ship which did well or ill
in behalf of the lord of the Aryans. He saw the gaudy dresses of the
eunuchs, the litters, and from them peering forth the veiled women. Did
Artazostra think _now_ the Hellenes were mad fools to look her brother's
power in the face? From the shores of Attica and of Salamis, where the
myriads rejoiced or wept as the scattered battle changed, the cries were
rising, falling, like the throb of a tragic chorus,--a chorus of Titans,
with the actors gods.

"Another charge!" shouted Ameinias, through the din, "meet them briskly,
lads!"

Once more the hoarse Semitic war-shout, the dark-faced Asiatics dropping
upon the decks, the whir of javelins, the scream of dying men, the clash
of steel on steel. A frantic charge, but stoutly met. Themistocles was in
the thickest _melee_. With his own spear he dashed two Tyrians overboard,
as they sprang upon the poop. The band that had leaped down among the oar
benches were hewn in pieces by the seamen. The remnant of the attackers
recoiled in howls of despair. On the Phoenician's decks the Greeks saw the
officers laying the lash mercilessly across their men, but the
disheartened creatures did not stir. Now could be seen Ariamenes, the high
admiral himself, a giant warrior in his purple and gilded armour, going up
and down the poop, cursing, praying, threatening,--all in vain. The
_Nausicaae's_ people rose and cheered madly.

"Enough! They have enough! Glory to Athens!"

But here Ameinias gripped Themistocles's arm. The chief turned, and all
the Hellenes with him. The cheer died on their lips. A tall trireme was
bearing down on them in full charge even while the _Nausicaae_ drifted.
They were as helpless as the Sidonian they had sent to death. One groan
broke from the Athenians.

"Save, Athena! Save! It is Artemisia! The queen of Halicarnassus!"

The heavy trireme of the amazon princess was a magnificent sight as they
looked on her. Her oars flew in a flashing rhythm. The foam leaped in a
cataract over her ram. The sun made fire of the tossing weapons on her
prow. A yell of triumph rose from the Phoenicians. On the _Nausicaae_ men
dropped sword and spear, moaned, raved, and gazed wildly on Themistocles
as if he were a god possessing power to dash the death aside.

"To your places, men!" rang his shout, as he faced the foe unmoved, "and
die as Athenians!"

Then even while men glanced up at the sun to greet Helios for the last
time, there was a marvel. The threatening beak shot around. The trireme
flew past them, her oars leaping madly, her people too intent on escape
even to give a flight of javelins. And again the Athenians cheered.

"The _Perseus_! Cimon has saved us."

Not three ships' lengths behind the Halicarnassian raced the ship of the
son of Miltiades. They knew now why Artemisia had veered. Well she might;
had she struck the _Nausicaae_ down, her own broadside would have swung
defenceless to the fleet pursuer. The _Perseus_ sped past her consort at
full speed, Athenian cheering Athenian as she went.

"Need you help?" called Cimon, from his poop, as Themistocles waved his
sword.

"None, press on, smite the Barbarian! Athena is with us!"

"Athena is with us! Zeus is with us!"

The _Nausicaae's_ crew were lifted from panic to mad enthusiasm. Still
above them towered the tall Phoenician, but they could have scaled Mt.
Caucasus at that instant.

"Onward! Up and after them," rang Ameinias's blast, "she is our own, we
will take her under the king's own eye."

The javelins and arrows were pelting from the Barbarian. The Athenians
mocked the shower as they leaped the void from bulwark to bulwark. Vainly
the Phoenicians strove to clear the grapples. Too firm! Their foes came on
to their decks with long leaps, or here and there ran deftly on projecting
spars, for what athlete of Hellas could not run the tight rope? In an
instant the long rowers' deck of the Tyrian was won, and the attackers
cheered and blessed Athena. But this was only storming the first outpost.
Like castles forward and aft reared the prow and poop, whither the sullen
defenders retreated. Turning at bay, the Phoenicians swarmed back into the
waist, waiting no scourging from their officers. Now their proud admiral
himself plunged into the _melee_, laying about with a mighty sword worthy
of Ajax at Troy, showing he was a prince of the Aryans indeed. It took all
the steadiness of Ameinias and his stoutest men to stop the rush, and save
the Athenians in turn from being driven overboard. The rush was halted
finally, though this was mere respite before a fiercer breaking of the
storm. The two ships were drifting yet closer to the strand. Only the fear
of striking their own men kept the Persians around the king from clouding
the air with arrows. Glaucon saw the grandees near Xerxes's throne
brandishing their swords. In imagination he saw the monarch leaping from
his throne in agony as at Thermopylae.

"Back to the charge," pealed Ariamenes's summons to the Tyrians; "will you
be cowards and dogs beneath the very eyes of the king?"

The defenders answered with a second rush. Others again hurled darts from
the stern and foreship. Then out of the maelstrom of men and weapons came a
truce. Athenian and Tyrian drew back, whilst Themistocles and Ariamenes
were fighting blade to blade. Twice the giant Persian almost dashed the
Hellene down. Twice Themistocles recovered poise, and paid back stroke for
stroke. He had smitten the helmet from Ariamenes's head and was swinging
for a master-blow when his foot slipped on the bloody plank. He staggered.
Before he could recover, the Persian had brought his own weapon up, and
flung his might into the downward stroke.

"The admiral--lost!" Athenians shuddered together, but with the groan shot
a javelin. Clear through the scales of the cuirass it tore, and into the
Persian's shoulder,--Glaucon's cast, never at the Isthmus truer with hand
or eye. The ponderous blade turned, grazed the Athenian's corselet,
clattered on the deck. The Persian sprang back disarmed and powerless. At
sight thereof the Phoenicians flung down their swords. True Orientals, in
the fate of their chief they saw decreeing Destiny,--what use to resist it?

"Yield, my Lord, yield," called Glaucon, in Persian, "the battle is
against you, and no fault of yours. Save the lives of your men."

Ariamenes gave a toss of his princely head, and with his left hand plucked
the javelin from his shoulder.

"A prince of the Aryans knows how to die, but not how to yield," he cast
back, and before the Athenians guessed his intent he sprang upon the
bulwark. There in the sight of his king he stood and bowed his head and
with his left arm made the sign of adoration.

"Seize him!" shouted Ameinias, divining his intent, but too late. The
Persian leaped into the water. In his heavy mail he sank like lead. The
wave closed over him, as he passed forever from the sight of man.

There was stillness on the Tyrian for a moment. A groan of helpless horror
was rising from the Barbarians on the shore. Then the Phoenicians fell upon
their knees, crying in their harsh tongue, "Quarter! Quarter!" and
embracing and kissing the feet of the victors. Thanks to the moment of
quietness given them, the Athenians' blood had cooled a little; they
gathered up the weapons cast upon the deck; there was no massacre.

Themistocles mounted the poop of the captured flag-ship, and Glaucon with
him. The wind was wafting them again into the centre of the channel. For
the first time for many moments they were able to look about them, to ask,
"How goes the battle?" Not the petty duel they had fought, but the great
battle of battles which was the life-struggle of Hellas. And behold, as
they gazed they pressed their hands upon their eyes and looked and looked
again, for the thing they saw seemed overgood for truth. Where the great
Barbarian line had been pushing up the strait, were only bands of
scattered ships, and most of these turning their beaks from Salamis. The
waves were strewn with wrecks, and nigh every one a Persian. And right,
left, and centre the triumphant Hellenes were pressing home, ramming,
grappling, capturing. Even whilst the fight raged, pinnaces were thrusting
out from Salamis--Aristeides's deed, they later heard--crowded with martial
graybeards who could not look idly on while their sons fought on the
ships, and who speedily landed on Psyttaleia to massacre the luckless
Persians there stationed. The cheers of the Barbarians were ended now;
from the shores came only a beastlike howling which drowned the paeans of
the victors. As the _Nausicaae's_ people looked, they could see the once
haughty Phoenicians and Cilicians thrusting back against the land, and the
thousands of footmen running down upon the shore to drag the shattered
triremes up and away from the triumphant Hellenes.

The _Nausicaae's_ people in wondering gaze stood there for a long time as
if transfixed, forgetful how their ship and its prize drifted, forgetful
of weariness, forgetful of wounds. Then as one man they turned to the poop
of the captured Tyrian, and to Themistocles. _He_ had done it--their
admiral. He had saved Hellas under the eyes of the vaunting demigod who
thought to be her destroyer. They called to Themistocles, they worshipped
as if he were the Olympian himself.




                               CHAPTER XXX


                       THEMISTOCLES GIVES A PROMISE


After the _Nausicaae_ had returned that night to Salamis, after the old men
and the women had laughed and wept over the living,--they were too proud to
weep over the dead,--after the prudent admirals had set the fleet again in
order, for Xerxes might tempt fate again in the morning with his remaining
ships, Themistocles found himself once more in his cabin. With him was
only Glaucon the Alcmaeonid. The admiral's words were few and pointed.

"Son of Conon, last night you gave me the thought whereby I could save
Hellas. To-day your javelin saved me from death. I owe you much. I will
repay in true coin. To-morrow I can give you back to your wife and all
your friends if you will but suffer me."

The younger man flushed a little, but his eyes did not brighten. He felt
Themistocles's reservation.

"On what terms?"

"You shall be presented to the Athenians as one who, yielding for a moment
to overmastering temptation, has atoned for one error by rendering
infinite service."

"Then I am to be 'Glaucon the Traitor' still, even if 'Glaucon the
Repentant Traitor'?"

"Your words are hard, son of Conon; what may I say? Have you any new
explanation for the letter to Argos?"

"The old one--I did not write it."

"Let us not bandy useless arguments. Do you not see I shall be doing all
that is possible?"

"Let me think a little."

The younger Athenian held down his head, and Themistocles saw his brows
knitting.

"Son of Neocles," said Glaucon, at length, "I thank you. You are a just
man. Whatever of sorrow has or will be mine, you have no part therein, but
I cannot return--not to Hermione and my child--on any terms you name."

"Your purpose, then?"

"To-day the gods show mercy to Hellas, later they may show justice to me.
The war is far from ended. Can you not let me serve on some ship of the
allies where none can recognize me? Thus let me wait a year, and trust
that in that year the sphinx will find her riddle answered."

"To wait thus long is hard," spoke the other, kindly.

"I have done many hard things, Themistocles."

"And your wife?"

"Hera pity her! She bade me return when Athens knew me innocent. Better
that she wait a little longer, though in sorrow, when I can return to her
even as she bade me. Nevertheless, promise one thing."

"Name it."

"That if her parents are about to give her to Democrates or any other, you
will prevent."

Themistocles's face lightened. He laid a friendly hand on the young man's
shoulder.

"I do not know how to answer your cry of innocency, _philotate_, but this
I know, in all Hellas I think none is fairer in body or soul than you.
Have no fear for Hermione, and in the year to come may Revealer Apollo
make all of your dark things bright."

Glaucon bowed his head. Themistocles had given everything the outlaw could
ask, and the latter went out of the cabin.





                                 BOOK III


                        THE PASSING OF THE PERSIAN




                               CHAPTER XXXI


                          DEMOCRATES SURRENDERS


Hellas was saved. But whether forever or only for a year the gods kept
hid. Panic-stricken, the "Lord of the World" had fled to Asia after the
great disaster. The eunuchs, the harem women, the soft-handed pages, had
escaped with their master to luxurious Sardis, the remnant of the fleet
fled back across the AEgean. But the brain and right arm of the Persians,
Mardonius the Valiant, remained in Hellas. With him were still the Median
infantry, the Tartar horse-archers, the matchless Persian lancers,--the
backbone of the undefeated army. Hellas was not yet safe.

Democrates had prospered. He had been reelected strategus. If Themistocles
no longer trusted him quite so freely as once, Aristeides, restored now to
much of his former power, gave him full confidence. Democrates found
constant and honourable employment through the winter in the endless
negotiations at Sparta, at Corinth, and elsewhere, while the jealous Greek
states wrangled and intrigued, more to humiliate some rival than to
advance the safety of Hellas. But amongst all the patriot chiefs none
seemed more devoted to the common weal of Hellas than the Athenian orator.

Hermippus at least was convinced of this. The Eleusinian had settled at
Troezene on the Argive coast, a hospitable city that received many an
outcast Athenian. He found his daughter's resistance to another marriage
increasingly unreasonable. Was not Glaucon dead for more than a year?
Ought not any woman to bless Hera who gave her so noble, so eloquent, a
husband as Democrates--pious, rich, trusted by the greatest, and with the
best of worldly prospects?

"If you truly desire any other worthy man, _makaira_," said Hermippus,
once, "you shall not find me obstinate. Can a loving father say more? But
if you are simply resolved never to marry, I will give you to him despite
your will. A senseless whim must not blast your highest happiness."

"He ruined Glaucon," said Hermione, tearfully.

"At least," returned Lysistra, who like many good women could say
exceeding cruel things, "_he_ has never been a traitor to his country."

Hermione's answer was to fly to her chamber, and to weep--as many a time
before--over Phoenix in the cradle. Here old Cleopis found her, took her in
her arms, and sang her the old song about Alphaeus chasing Arethusa--a song
more fit for Phoenix than his mother, but most comforting. So the contest
for the moment passed, but after a conference with Hermippus, Democrates
went away on public business to Corinth unusually well pleased with the
world and himself.

It was a tedious, jangling conference held at the Isthmus city. Mardonius
had tempted the Athenians sorely. In the spring had come his envoys
proffering reparation for all injuries in the wars, enlarged territory,
and not slavery, but free alliance with the Great King, if they would but
join against their fellow-Hellenes. The Athenians had met the tempter as
became Athenians. Aristeides had given the envoys the answer of the whole
people.

"We know your power. Yet tell it to Mardonius, that so long as Helios
moves in the heavens we will not make alliance with Xerxes, but rather
trust to the gods whose temples he has burned."

Bravely said, but when the Athenians looked to Sparta for the great army
to hasten north and give Mardonius his death-stroke, it was the old
wearisome tale of excuses and delay. At the conference in Corinth
Aristeides and Democrates had passed from arguments to all but threats,
even such as Themistocles had used at Salamis. It was after one of these
fruitless debates that Democrates passed out of the gathering at the
Corinthian prytaneum, with his colleagues all breathing forth their wrath
against Dorian stupidity and evasiveness.

Democrates himself crossed the city Agora, seeking the house of the
friendly merchant where he was to sup. He walked briskly, his thoughts
more perhaps on the waiting betrothal feast at Troezene, than on the
discussion behind him. The Agora scene had little to interest, the same
buyers, booths, and babel as in Athens, only the citadel above was the
mount of Acro-Corinthus, not the tawny rock of Athena. And in late months
he had begun to find his old fears and terrors flee away. Every day he was
growing more certain that his former "missteps"--that was his own name for
certain occurrences--could have no malign influence. "After all," he was
reflecting, "Nemesis is a very capricious goddess. Often she forgets for a
lifetime, and after death--who knows what is beyond the Styx?"

He was on such noble terms with all about him that he could even give ear
to the whine of a beggar. The man was sitting on the steps between the
pillars of a colonnade, with a tame crow perched upon his fist, and as
Democrates passed he began his doggerel prayer:--

  "Good master, a handful of barley bestow
  On the child of Apollo, the sage, sable crow."

The Athenian began to fumble in his belt for an obol, when he was rudely
distracted by a twitch upon his chiton. Turning, he was little pleased to
come face to face with no less a giant than Lycon.

"There was an hour, _philotate_," spoke the Spartan, with ill-concealed
sneer, "when you did not have so much silver to scatter out to beggars."

Time had not mended Lycon's aspect, nor taken from his eye that sinister
twinkle which was so marked a foil to his brutishness.

"I did not invite you, dear fellow," rejoined the Athenian, "to remind me
of the fact."

"Yet you should have gratitude, and you have lacked that virtue of late.
It was a sorry plight Mardonius's money saved you from two years since,
and nobly have you remembered his good service."

"Worthy Lacedaemonian," said Democrates, with what patience he could
command, "if you desire to go over all that little business which
concerned us then, at least I would suggest not in the open Agora." He
started to walk swiftly away. The Spartan's ponderous strides easily kept
beside him. Democrates looked vainly for an associate whom he could
approach and on some pretext could accompany. None in sight. Lycon kept
fast hold of his cloak. For practical purposes Democrates was prisoner.

"Why in Corinth?" he threw out sullenly.

"For three reasons, _philotate_," Lycon grinned over his shoulder, "first,
the women at the Grove of Aphrodite here are handsome; second, I am weary
of Sparta and its black broth and iron money; third, and here is the rose
for my garland, I had need to confer with your noble self."

"Would not Hiram be your dutiful messenger again?" queried the other,
vainly watching for escape.

"Hiram is worth twenty talents as a helper;"--Lycon gave a hound-like
chuckle,--"still he is not Apollo, and there are too many strings on this
lyre for him to play them all. Besides, he failed at Salamis."

"He did! Zeus blast his importunity and yours likewise. Where are you
taking me? I warn you in advance, you are 'shearing an ass,'--attempting
the impossible,--if you deceive yourself as to my power. I can do nothing
more to prevent the war from being pressed against Mardonius. It is only
your Laconian ephors that are hindering."

"We shall see, _philotate_, we shall see," grunted the Spartan,
exasperatingly cool. "Here is Poseidon's Temple. Let us sit in the shaded
portico."

Democrates resigned himself to be led to a stone seat against the wall.
The gray old "dog-watcher" by the gate glanced up to see that no dogs were
straying into the holy house, noted only two gentlemen come for a chat,
and resumed his siesta. Lycon took a long time in opening his business.

"The world has used you well of late, dear fellow."

"Passing well, by Athena's favour."

"You should say by Hermes's favour, but I would trust you Athenians to
grow fat on successful villany and then bless the righteous gods."

"I hope you haven't left Sparta just to revile me!" cried Democrates,
leaping up, to be thrust back by Lycon's giant paw.

"_Ai!_ mix a little honey with your speech, it costs nothing. Well, the
length and breadth of my errand is this, Mardonius must fight soon, and
must be victorious."

"That is for your brave ephors to say," darted Democrates. "According to
their valiant proposals they desire this war to imitate that with Troy,--to
last ten years."

"Indeed--but I always held my people surpassed in procrastination, as yours
in deceiving. However, their minds will change."

"Aristeides and Themistocles will bless you for that."

Lycon shrugged his great shoulders.

"Then I'll surpass the gods, who can seldom please all men. Still it is
quite true."

"I'm glad to hear it."

"Dear Democrates, you know what's befallen in Sparta. Since Leonidas died,
his rivals from my own side of the royal house have gathered a great deal
more of power. My uncle Nicander is at present head of the board of
ephors, and gladly takes my advice."

"Ha!" Democrates began to divine the drift.

"It seemed best to me after the affair at Salamis to give the lie to my
calumniators, who hinted that I desired to 'Medize,' and that it was by my
intriguing that the late king took so small a force to Thermopylae."

"All Hellas knows _your_ patriotism!" cried Democrates, satirically.

"Even so. I have silenced my fiercest abusers. If I have not yet urged in
our assembly that we should fight Mardonius, it is merely because--it is
not yet prudent."

"Excellent scoundrel," declared the other, writhing on his seat, "you are
no Spartan, but long-winded as a Sicilian."

"Patience, _philotate_, a Spartan must either speak in apothegms or take
all day. I have not advised a battle yet because I was not certain of your
aid."

"Ay, by Zeus," broke out Democrates, "that ointment I sniffed a long way
off. I can give you quick answer. Fly back to Sparta, swift as Boreas;
plot, conspire, earn Tartarus, to your heart's content--you'll get no more
help from me."

"I expected that speech." Lycon's coolness drove his victim almost
frantic.

"In the affair of Tempe I bent to you for the last time," Democrates
charged desperately. "I have counted the cost. Perhaps you can use against
me certain documents, but I am on a surer footing than once. In the last
year I have done such service to Hellas I can even hope to be forgiven,
should these old mistakes be proved. And if you drive me to bay, be sure
of this, I will see to it that all the dealings betwixt the Barbarian and
your noble self are expounded to your admiring countrymen."

"You show truly excellent courage, dear Democrates," cried Lycon, in
pseudo-admiration. "That speech was quite worthy of a tragic actor."

"If we're in the theatre, let the chorus sing its last strophe and have
done. You disgust me."

"Peace, peace," ordered Lycon, his hand still on the Athenian's shoulder,
"I will make all the haste I can, but obstinacy is disagreeable. I repeat,
you are needed, sorely needed, by Mardonius to enable him to complete the
conquest of Hellas. You shall not call the Persians ungrateful--the tyranny
of Athens under the easy suzerainty of the king, is that no dish to whet
your appetite?"

"I knew of the offer before."

"A great pity you are not more eager. Hermes seldom sends such chances
twice. I hoped to have you for 'my royal brother' when they gave me the
like lordship of Lacedaemon. However, the matter does not end with your
refusal."

"I have said, 'Do your worst.' "

"And my worst is--Agis."

For an instant Lycon was dismayed. He thought he had slain his victim with
one word. Democrates dropped from his clutch and upon the pavement as
though stricken through the heart by an arrow. He was pallid as a corpse,
at first he only groaned.

"_Eu! eu!_ good comrade," cried the Spartan, dragging him up, half
triumphant, half sympathetic, "I did not know I was throwing Zeus's
thunderbolts."

The Athenian sat with his head on his hands. In all his dealings with the
Spartan he had believed he had covered the details of the fate of Glaucon.
Lycon could surmise what he liked, but the proof to make the damning
charges good Democrates believed he had safe in his own keeping. Only one
man could have unlocked the casket of infamy--Agis--and the mention of his
name was as a bolt from the blue.

"Where is he? I heard he was killed at Artemisium." Lycon hardly
understood his victim's thick whispers.

"Wounded indeed, _philotate_, taken prisoner, and sent to Thebes. There
friends of mine found he had a story to tell--greatly to my advantage. It
is only a little time since he came to Sparta."

"What lies has he told?"

"Several, dear fellow, although if they are lies, then Aletheia, Lady
Truth, must almost own them for her children. At least they are
interesting lies; as, for example, how you advised the Cyprian to escape
from Athens, how you gave Agis a letter to hide in the boots of Glaucon's
messenger, of your interviews with Lampaxo and Archias, of the charming
art you possess of imitating handwritings and seals."

"Base-born swine! who will believe him?"

"Base born, Democrates, but hardly swinish. He can tell a very clear
story. Likewise, Lampaxo and Archias must testify at the trial, also your
slave Bias can tell many interesting things."

"Only if I consent to produce him."

"When did a master ever refuse to let his slave testify, if demanded,
unless he wished to blast his own cause with the jury? No, _makaire_, you
will not enjoy the day when Themistocles arrays the testimony against
you."

Democrates shivered. The late spring sun was warm. He felt no heat. A mere
charge of treason he was almost prepared now to endure. If Mistress
Fortune helped him, he might refute it, but to be branded before Hellas as
the destroyer of his bosom friend, and that by guile the like whereof
Tantalus, Sisyphus, and Ixion conjoined had never wrought--what wonder his
knees smote together? Why had he not foreseen that Agis would fall into
Lycon's hands? Why had he trusted that lying tale from Artemisium? And
worst of all, worse than the howls of the people who would tear his body
asunder like dogs, not waiting the work of the hemlock, was the thought of
Hermione. She hated him now. How she would love him, though he sat on
Xerxes's throne, if once her suspicion rose to certainty! He saw himself
ruined in life and in love, and blazoned as infamous forever.

Lycon was wise enough to sit some moments, letting his utterance do its
work. He was confident, and rightly. Democrates looked on him at last. The
workings of the Athenian's face were terrible.

"I am your slave, Spartan. Had you bought me for ten minae and held the
bill of sale, I were not yours more utterly. Your wish?"

Lycon chose his words and answered slowly.

"You must serve Persia. Not for a moment, but for all time. You must place
that dreadful gift of yours at our disposal. And in return take what is
promised,--the lordship of Athens."

"No word of that," groaned the wretched man, "what will you do?"

"Aristeides is soon going to Sparta to press home his demands that the
Lacedaemonians march in full force against Mardonius. I can see to it that
his mission succeeds. A great battle will be fought in Boeotia. _We_ can
see to it that Mardonius is so victorious that all further resistance
becomes a dream."

"And my part in this monster's work?"

The demands and propositions with which Lycon answered this despairing
question will unfold themselves in due place and time. Suffice it here,
that when he let the Athenian go his way Lycon was convinced that
Democrates had bound himself heart and soul to forward his enterprise. The
orator was no merry guest for his Corinthian hosts that night. He returned
to his old manner of drinking unmixed wine. "Thirsty as a Macedonian!"
cried his companions, in vain endeavour to drive him into a laugh. They
did not know that once more the chorus of the Furies was singing about his
ears, and he could not still it by the deepest wine-cup. They did not know
that every time he closed his eyes he was seeing the face of Glaucon. That
morning he had mocked at Nemesis. That night he heard the beating of her
brazen wings.




                              CHAPTER XXXII


                         THE STRANGER IN TROEZENE


Despite exile, life had moved pleasantly for Hermippus's household that
spring. The Troezenians had surpassed all duties to Zeus Xenios--the
stranger's god--in entertaining the outcast Athenians. The fugitives had
received two obols per day to keep them in figs and porridge. Their
children had been suffered to roam and plunder the orchards. But Hermippus
had not needed such generosity. He had placed several talents at interest
in Corinth; likewise bonds of "guest-friendship" with prominent Troezenians
made his residence very agreeable. He had hired a comfortable house, and
could enjoy even luxury with his wife, daughter, young sons, and score of
slaves.

Little Phoenix grew marvellously day by day, as if obeying his mother's
command to wax strong and avenge his father. Old Cleopis vowed he was the
healthiest, least tearful babe, as well as the handsomest, she had ever
known,--and she spoke from wide experience. When he was one year old, he
was so active they had to tie him in the cradle. When the golden spring
days came, he would ride forth upon his nurse's back, surveying the Hellas
he was born to inherit, and seeming to find it exceeding good.

But as spring verged on summer, Hermione demanded so much of Cleopis's
care that even Phoenix ceased to be the focus of attention. The lordly
Alcmaeonid fell into the custody of one Niobe, a dark-haired lass of the
islands, who treated him well, but cared too much for certain young
"serving-gentlemen" to waste on her charge any unreciprocated adoration.
So on one day, just as the dying grass told the full reign of the Sun
King, she went forth with her precious bundle wriggling in her arms, but
her thoughts hardly on Master Phoenix. Procles the steward had been cold of
late, he had even cast sly glances at Jocasta, Lysistra's tiring-woman.
Mistress Niobe was ready--since fair means of recalling the fickle Apollo
failed--to resort to foul. Instead, therefore, of going to the promenade
over the sea, she went--burden and all--to the Agora, where she was sure old
Dion, who kept a soothsayer's shop, would give due assistance in return
for half a drachma.

The market was just thinning. Niobe picked her way amongst the vegetable
women, fought off a boy who thrust on her a pair of geese, and found in a
quiet corner by a temple porch the booth of Dion, who grinned with his
toothless gums in way of greeting. He listened with paternal interest to
her story, soothed her when she sniffled at Procles's name, and made her
show her silver, then began pulling over his bags and vials of strange
powders and liquids.

"Ah, kind Master Dion," began Niobe, for the sixth time, "if only some
philtre could make Procles loath that abominable Jocasta!"

"_Eu! eu!_" muttered the old sinner, "it's hard to say what's best,--powder
of toad's bone or the mixture of wormwood and adder's fat. The safest
thing is to consult the god--"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, my holy cock here, hatched at Delphi with Apollo's blessings on
him." Dion pointed with his thumb to the small coop at his feet. "The
oracle is simple. You cast before him two piles of corn; if he picks at
the one to right we take toad's bone, to left the adder's fat. Heaven will
speak to us."

"Excellent," cried Niobe, brightening.

"But, of course, we must use only consecrated corn, that's two obols
more."

Niobe's face fell. "I've only this half-drachma."

"Then, _philotata_," said Dion, kindly but firmly, "we had better wait a
little longer."

Niobe wept. "_Ai!_ woe. 'A little longer' and Jocasta has Procles. I can't
ask Hermione again for money. _Ai! ai!_"

Two round tears did not move Dion in the slightest. Niobe was sobbing, at
her small wits' end, when a voice sounded behind her.

"What's there wrong, lass? By Zeus, but you carry a handsome child!"

Niobe glanced, and instantly stopped weeping. A young man dressed roughly
as a sailor, and with long black hair and beard, had approached her, but
despite dress and beard she was quite aware he was far handsomer than even
Procles.

"I beg pardon, _kyrie_,"--she said "_kyrie_" by instinct,--"I'm only an
honest maid. Dion is terribly extortionate." She cast down her eyes,
expecting instant succour from the susceptible seaman, but to her disgust
she saw he was admiring only the babe, not herself.

"Ah! Gods and goddesses, what a beautiful child! A girl?"

"A boy," answered Niobe, almost sullenly.

"Blessed the house in Troezene then that can boast of such a son."

"Oh, he's not Troezenian, but one of the exiles from Athens," volunteered
Dion, who kept all the tittle-tattle of the little city in stock along
with his philtres.

"An Athenian! Praised be Athena Polias, then. I am from Athens myself. And
his father?"

"The brat will never boast of his father," quoth Dion, rolling his eyes.
"He left the world in a way, I wager five minae, the mother hopes she can
hide from her darling, but the babe's of right good stock, an Alcmaeonid,
and the grandfather is that Hermippus--"

"Hermippus?" The stranger seemed to catch the word out of Dion's mouth. A
donkey had broken loose at the upper end of the Agora; he turned and
stared at it and its pursuers intently.

"If you're Athenian," went on the soothsayer, "the story's an old one--of
Glaucon the Traitor."

The stranger turned back again. For a moment Dion saw he was blinking, but
no doubt it was dust. Then he suddenly began to fumble in his girdle.

"What do you want, girl?" he demanded of Niobe, nigh fiercely.

"Two obols."

"Take two drachmae. I was once a friend to that Glaucon, and traitor though
he has been blazed, his child is yet dear to me. Let me take him."

Without waiting her answer he thrust the coin into her hands, and caught
the child out of them. Phoenix looked up into the strange, bearded face,
and deliberated an instant whether to crow or to weep. Then some friendly
god decided him. He laughed as sweetly, as musically, as ever one can at
his most august age. With both chubby hands he plucked at the black beard
and held tight. The strange sailor answered laugh with laugh, and released
himself right gayly. Then whilst Niobe and Dion watched and wondered they
saw the sailor kiss the child full fifty times, all the time whispering
soft words in his ear, at which Phoenix crowed and laughed yet more.

"An old family servant," threw out Dion, in a whisper.

"Sheep!" retorted the nurse, "do you call yourself wise? Do you think a
man with that face and those long hands ever felt the stocks or the whip?
He's gentleman born, by Demeter!"

"War makes many changes," rejoined Dion. "_Ai!_ is he beside himself or a
kidnapper? He is walking off with the babe."

The stranger indeed had seemed to forget them all and was going with swift
strides up the Agora, but just before Niobe could begin her outcry he
wheeled, and brought his merry burden back to the nurse's arms.

"You ought to be exceeding proud, my girl," he remarked almost severely,
"to have such a precious babe in charge. I trust you are dutiful."

"So I strive, _kyrie_, but he grows very strong. One cannot keep the
swaddling clothes on him now. They say he will be a mighty athlete like
his father."

"Ah, yes--his father--" The sailor looked down.

"You knew Master Glaucon well?" pressed Dion, itching for a new bit of
gossip.

"Well," answered the sailor, standing gazing on the child as though
something held him fascinated, then shot another question. "And does the
babe's lady-mother prosper?"

"She is passing well in body, _kyrie_, but grievously ill in mind. Hera
give her a release from all her sorrow!"

"Sorrow?" The man's eyes were opening wider, wider. "What mean you?"

"Why, all Troezene knows it, I'm sure."

"I'm not from Troezene. My ship made port from Naxos this morning. Speak,
girl!"

He seized Niobe's wrist in a grip which she thought would crush the bone.

"_Ai!_ Let go, sir, you hurt. Don't stare so. I'm frightened. I'll tell as
fast as I can. Master Democrates has come back from Corinth. Hermippus is
resolved to make the _kyria_ wed him, however bitterly she resists. It's
taken a long time for her father to determine to break her will, but now
his mind's made up. The betrothal is in three days, the wedding ten days
thereafter."

The sailor had dropped her hand. She shrank at the pallor of his face. He
seemed struggling for words; when they came she made nothing of them.

"Themistocles, Themistocles--your promise!"

Then by some giant exercise of will he steadied. His speech grew more
coherent.

"Give me the child," he commanded, and Niobe mutely obeyed. He kissed
Phoenix on both cheeks, mouth, forehead. They saw that tears were running
down his bronzed face. He handed back the babe and again held out money,--a
coin for both the slave girl and the soothsayer,--gold half-darics, that
they gaped at wonderingly.

"Say nothing!" ordered the sailor, "nothing of what I have said or done,
or as Helios shines this noon, I will kill you both."

Not waiting reply, he went down the Agora at a run, and never looked back.
It took some moments for Dion and Niobe to recover their equanimity; they
would have believed it all a dream, but lo! in their hands gleamed the
money.

"There are times," remarked the soothsayer, dubiously at last, "when I
begin to think the gods again walk the earth and work wonders. This is a
very high matter. Even I with my art dare not meddle with it. It is best
to heed the injunction to silence. Wagging tongues always have troubles as
their children. Now let us proceed with my sacred cock and his
divination."

Niobe got her philtre,--though whether it reconquered Procles is not
contained in this history. Likewise, she heeded Dion's injunction. There
was something uncanny about the strange sailor; she hid away the
half-daric, and related nothing of her adventure even to her confidant
Cleopis.

                              * * * * * * *

Three days later Democrates was not drinking wine at his betrothal feast,
but sending this cipher letter by a swift and trusty "distance-runner" to
Sparta.

"Democrates to Lycon, greeting:--At Corinth I cursed you. Rejoice
therefore; you are my only hope. I am with you whether your path leads to
Olympus or to Hades. Tartarus is opened at my feet. You must save me. My
words are confused, do you think? Then hear this, and ask if I have not
cause for turning mad.

"Yesterday, even as Hermippus hung garlands on his house, and summoned the
guests to witness the betrothal contract, Themistocles returned suddenly
from Euboea. He called Hermippus and myself aside. '_Glaucon lives_,' he
said, 'and with the god's help we'll prove his innocence.' Hermippus at
once broke off the betrothal. No one else knows aught thereof, not even
Hermione. Themistocles refuses all further details. 'Glaucon lives,'--I can
think of nothing else. Where is he? What does he? How soon will the awful
truth go flying through Hellas? I trembled when I heard he was dead. But
name my terrors now I know he is alive! Send Hiram. He, if any snake
living, can find me my enemy before it is too late. And speed the victory
of Mardonius! _Chaire._"

"Glaucon lives." Democrates had only written one least part of his
terrors. Two words--but enough to make the orator the most miserable man in
Hellas, the most supple of Xerxes's hundred million slaves.




                              CHAPTER XXXIII


                       WHAT BEFELL ON THE HILLSIDE


Once more the Persians pressed into Attica, once more the Athenians,--or
such few of them as had ventured home in the winter,--fled with their
movables to Salamis or Peloponnesus, and an embassy, headed by Aristeides,
hastened to Sparta to demand for the last time that the tardy ephors make
good their promise in sending forth their infantry to hurl back the
invader. If not, Aristeides spoke plainly, his people must perforce close
alliance with Mardonius.

Almost to the amazement of the Athenian chiefs, so accustomed were they to
Dorian doltishness and immobility, after a ten days' delay and excuses
that "they must celebrate their festival the Hyacinthia," the ephors
called forth their whole levy. Ten thousand heavy infantrymen with a host
of lightly armed "helots"(11) were started northward under the able lead
of Pausanias, the regent for Leonidas's young son. Likewise all the allies
of Lacedaemon--Corinthians, Sicyonians, Elians, Arcadians--began to hurry
toward the Isthmus. Therefore men who had loved Hellas and had almost
despaired for her took courage. "At last we will have a great land battle,
and an end to the Barbarian."

All was excitement in the Athenian colony at Troezene. The board of
strategi met and voted that now was the time for a crowning effort. Five
thousand men-at-arms should march under Aristeides to join against
Mardonius in Boeotia. By sea Themistocles should go with every available
ship to Delos, meet the allied squadrons there, and use his infallible art
in persuading the sluggish Spartan high admiral to conduct a raid across
the AEgean at Xerxes's own doors. Of the ten strategi Democrates had called
loudest for instant action, so loudly indeed that Themistocles had
cautioned him against rashness. Hermippus was old, but experienced men
trusted him, therefore he was appointed to command the contingent of his
tribe. Democrates was to accompany Aristeides as general adjutant; his
diplomatic training would be invaluable in ending the frictions sure to
arise amongst the allies. Cimon would go with Themistocles, and so every
other man was sent to his place. In the general preparation private
problems seemed forgotten. Hermippus and Democrates both announced that
the betrothal of Hermione had been postponed, pending the public crisis.
The old Eleusinian had not told his daughter, or even his wife, why he had
seemed to relax his announced purpose of forcing Hermione to an unwelcome
marriage. The young widow knew she had respite--for how long nothing told
her, but for every day her agony was postponed she blessed kind Hera. Then
came the morning when her father must go forth with his men. She still
loved him, despite the grief he was giving her. She did him justice to
believe he acted in affection. The gay ribbons that laced his cuirass, the
red and blue embroidery that edged his "taxiarch's" cloak, were from the
needle of his daughter. Hermione kissed him as she stood with her mother
in the aula. He coughed gruffly when he answered their "farewell." The
house door closed behind him, and Hermione and Lysistra ran into one
another's arms. They had given to Hellas their best, and now must look to
Athena.

Hermippus and Aristeides were gone, Democrates remained in Troezene. His
business, he said, was more diplomatic than military, and he was expecting
advices from the islands which he must take to Pausanias in person. He had
a number of interviews with Themistocles, when it was observed that every
time he came away with clouded brow and gruff answers to all who accosted.
It began to be hinted that all was not as well as formerly between the
admiral and the orator, that Democrates had chosen to tie too closely to
Aristeides for the son of Neocles's liking, and that as soon as the
campaign was decided, a bitter feud would break out betwixt them. But this
was merest gossip. Outwardly Democrates and Themistocles continued
friends, dined together, exchanged civilities. On the day when
Themistocles was to sail for Delos he walked arm in arm with Democrates to
the quay. The hundreds of onlookers saw him embrace the young strategus in
a manner belying any rumour of estrangement, whilst Democrates stood on
the sand waving his good wishes until the admiral climbed the ladder of
the _Nausicaae_.

It was another day and landscape which the stranger in Hellas would have
remembered long. The haven of Troezene, noblest in Peloponnesus, girt by
its two mountain promontories, Methana and the holy hill Calauria, opened
its bright blue into the deeper blue of the Saronic bay. Under the eye of
the beholder AEgina and the coasts of Attica stood forth, a fit frame to
the far horizon. Sun, sea, hills, and shore wrought together to make one
glorious harmony, endless variety, yet ordered and fashioned into a divine
whole. "Euopis," "The Fair-Faced," the beauty-loving dwellers of the
country called it, and they named aright.

Something of the beauty touched even Hermione as she stood on the hill
slope, gazing across the sea. Only Cleopis was with her. The young widow
had less trembling when she looked on the _Nausicaae_ than when one year
before the stately trireme had sailed for Artemisium. If ill news must
come, it would be from the plains of Boeotia. Most of Themistocles's fleet
was already at Delos. He led only a dozen sail. When his squadron glided
on into the blue deep, the haven seemed deserted save for the Carthaginian
trader that swung at her cables close upon the land. As Hermione looked
and saw the climbing sun change the tintings of the waters, here spreading
a line of green gold amidst the blue, here flashing the waves with dark
violet, something of the peace and majesty of the scene entered into her
own breast. The waves at the foot of the slope beat in monotonous music.
She did not wonder that Thetis, Galatea, and all the hundred Nereids loved
their home. Somewhere, far off on that shimmering plain, Glaucon the
Beautiful had fallen asleep; whether he waked in the land of Rhadamanthus,
whether he had been stolen away by Leucothea and the other nymphs to be
their playfellow, she did not know. She was not sad, even to think of him
crowned with green seaweed, and sitting under the sea-floor with
fish-tailed Tritons at their tables of pearl, while the finny shoals like
birds flitted above their heads. Thales the Sage made all life proceed out
of the sea. Perchance all life should return to it. Then she would find
her husband again, not beyond, but within the realms of great Oceanus.
With such beauty spreading out before her eyes the phantasy was almost
welcome.

The people had wandered homeward. Cleopis set the parasol on the dry grass
where it would shade her mistress and betook herself to the shelter of a
rock. If Hermione was pleased to meditate so long, she would not deny her
slave a siesta. So the Athenian sat and mused, now sadly, now with a gleam
of brightness, for she was too young to have her sun clouded always.

A speaker near by her called her out of her reverie.

"You sit long, _kyria_, and gaze forth as if you were Zeus in Olympus and
could look on all the world."

Hermione had not exchanged a word with Democrates since that day she cast
scorn on him on that other hill slope at Munychia, but this did not make
his intrusion more welcome. With mortification she realized that she had
forgotten herself. That she lay on the sunny bank with her feet
outstretched and her hair shaken loose on her shoulders. Her feet she
instantly covered with her long himation. Her hands flew instantly to her
hair. Then she uprose, flushing haughtily.

"It has pleased my father, sir," she spoke with frigid dignity, "to tell
me that you are some day perchance to be my husband. The fulfilment lies
with the gods. But to-day the strategus Democrates knows our customs too
well to thrust himself upon an Attic gentlewoman who finds herself alone
save for one servant."

"Ah, _kyria_; pardon the word, it's overcold; _makaira_, I'd say more
gladly," Democrates was marvellously at his ease despite her frowns, "your
noble father will take nothing amiss if I ask you to sit again that we may
talk together."

"I do not think so." Hermione drew herself up at full height. But
Democrates deliberately placed himself in the path up the hillside. To
have run toward the water seemed folly. She could expect no help from
Cleopis, who would hardly oppose a man soon probably to be her master. As
the less of evils, Hermione did not indeed sit as desired, but stood
facing her unloved lover and hearkening.

"How long I've desired this instant!" Democrates looked as if he might
seize her hands to kiss them, but she thrust them behind her. "I know you
hate me bitterly because, touching your late husband, I did my duty."

"Your duty?" Nestor's eloquence was in her incredulous echo.

"If I have pained you beyond telling, do you think my act was a pleasant
one for me? A bosom friend to ruin, the most sacred bonds to sever, last
and not least, to give infinite sorrow to her I love?"

"I hardly understand."

Democrates drew a step nearer.

"Ah! Hera, Artemis, Aphrodite the Golden--by what name shall I call my
goddess?" Hermione drew back a step. There was danger in his eyes. "I have
loved you, loved you long. Before Glaucon took you in marriage I loved
you. But Eros and Hymen hearkened to his prayers, not mine. You became his
bride. I wore a bright face at your wedding. You remember I was Glaucon's
groomsman, and rode beside you in the bridal car. You loved him, he seemed
worthy of you. Therefore I trod my own grief down into my heart, and
rejoiced with my friends. But to cease loving you I could not. Truly they
say Eros is the strongest god, and pitiless--do not the poets say bloody
Ares begat him--"

"Spare me mythologies," interposed Hermione, with another step back.

"As you will, but you shall hearken. I have desired this moment for two
years. Not as the weak girl given by her father, but as the fair goddess
who comes to me gladly, I do desire you. And I know you will smile on me
when you have heard me through."

"Keep back your eloquence. You have destroyed Glaucon. That is enough."

"Hear me." Democrates cried desperately now. Hermione feared even to
retreat farther, lest he pass to violence. She summoned courage and looked
him in the eye.

"Say on, then. But remember I am a woman and alone save for Cleopis. If
you profess to love me, you will not forget that."

But Democrates was passing almost beyond the limits of coherent speech.

"Oh, when you come to me, you will not know what a price I have paid for
you. In Homer's day men wooed their wives with costly gifts, but I--have I
not paid for you with my soul? My soul, I say--honour, friendship, country,
what has weighed against Himeros, 'Master Desire,'--the desire ever for
you!"

She hardly understood him, his speech flowed so thick. She knew he was on
the edge of reason, and feared to answer lest she drive beyond it.

"Do you hear the price I have paid? Do you still look on in cold hate,
lady? Ah, by Zeus, even in your coldest, most forbidding mood you are fair
as the Paphian when she sprang above the sea! And I will win you, lady, I
will win your heart, for they shall do you homage, even all Athens, and I
will make you a queen. Yes! the house of Athena on the Acropolis shall be
your palace if you will, and they will cry in the Agora, 'Way, way for
Hermione, glorious consort of Democrates our king!' "

"Sir," spoke Hermione, while her hands grew chill, for now she was sure he
raved, "I have not the joy to comprehend. There is no king in Athens,
please Athena, there never will be. Treason and blasphemy you speak all in
one." She sought vainly with her eyes for refuge. None in sight. The hill
slope seemed empty save for the scattered brown boulders. Far away a goat
was wandering. She motioned to Cleopis. The old woman was staring now, and
doubtless thought Democrates was carrying his familiarities too far, but
she was a weak creature, and at best could only scream.

"Treason and blasphemy," cried Democrates, dropping on his knees, his
frame shaking with dishonest passion, "yes! call them so now. They will be
blessed truth for me in a month, for me, for you. Hermes the Trickster is
a mighty god. He has befriended Eros. I shall possess Athens and possess
you. I shall be the most fortunate mortal upon earth as now I am most
miserable. Ah! but I have waited so long." He sprang to his feet. "Tarry,
_makaira_, tarry! A kiss!"

Hermione screamed at last shrilly and turned to fly. Instantly Democrates
was upon her. In that fluttering white dress escape was hopeless.

"Apollo pursuing Daphne!"--his crazed shout as his arms closed around
her,--"but Daphne becomes no laurel this time. Her race is lost. She shall
pay the forfeit."

She felt him seize her girdle. He swung her face to face. She saw his wide
eyes, his mad smile. His hot breath smote her cheek. Cleopis at last was
screaming.

"Mine," he triumphed, while he forced her resisting head to his own,
"there is none to hinder!"

But even while the woman's flesh crept back at his impure kiss, a giant
power came rending the twain apart. A man had sundered them, sprung from
the ground or from heaven belike, or from behind a boulder? He tore
Democrates's hands away as a lion tears a lamb. He dashed the mad orator
prone upon the sod, and kicked him twice, as of mingled hatred and
contempt. All this Hermione only knew in half, while her senses swam. Then
she came to herself enough to see that the stranger was a young man in a
sailor's loose dress, his features almost hidden under the dishevelled
hair and beard. All this time he uttered no word, but having smitten
Democrates down, leaped back, rubbing his hands upon his thigh, as if
despising to touch so foul an object. The orator groaned, staggered
upward. He wore a sword. It flew from its scabbard as he leaped on the
sailor. The stranger put forth his hand, snatched his opponent's wrist,
and with lightning dexterity sent the blade spinning back upon the grass.
Then he threw Democrates a second time, and the latter did not rise again
hastily, but lay cursing. The fall had not been gentle.

But all this while Cleopis was screaming. People were hastening up the
hill,--fishermen from a skiff upon the beach, slaves who had been carrying
bales to the haven. In a moment they would be surrounded by a dozen. The
strange sailor turned as if to fly. He had not spoken one word. Hermione
herself at last called to him.

"My preserver! Your name! Blessed be you forever!"

The fisherfolk were very close. Cleopis was still screaming. The sailor
looked once into the lady's eyes.

"I am nameless! You owe me nothing!" And with that he was gone up the hill
slopes, springing with long bounds that would have mocked pursuing, had
any attempted. But Cleopis quenched her outcry instantly; her screams had
been drowned by a louder scream from Hermione, who fell upon the
greensward, no marble whiter than her face. The nurse ran to her mistress.
Democrates staggered to his feet. Whatever else the chastisement had given
him, it had restored his balance of mind. He told the fisherfolk a glib
story that a sailor wandering along the strand had accosted Hermione, that
he himself had chased the villain off, but had tripped whilst trying to
follow. If the tale was not of perfect workmanship at all points, there
was no one with interest to gainsay it. A few ran up the hill slope, but
the sailor was nowhere in sight. Hermione was still speechless. They made
a litter of oars and sail-cloth and carried her to her mother. Democrates
oiled Cleopis's palm well, that she should tell nothing amiss to Lysistra.
It was a long time before Hermione opened her eyes in her chamber. Her
first words were:--

"Glaucon! I have seen Glaucon!"

"You have had a strange dream, _philotata_," soothed Lysistra, shifting
the pillows, "lie still and rest."

But Hermione shook her shining brown head and repeated, many times:--

"No dream! No dream! I have seen Glaucon face to face. In that instant he
spoke and looked on me I knew him. He lives. He saved me. Ah! why does he
stay away?"

Lysistra, whose husband had not deemed it prudent to inform her of
Themistocles's revelations, was infinitely distressed. She sent for the
best physicians of the city, and despatched a slave to the temple of
Asclepius at Epidaurus--not distant--to sacrifice two cocks for her
daughter's recovery. The doctors looked wise and recommended heavy doses
of spiced wine, and if those did not suffice, said that the patient might
spend a night in the temple of the Healer, who would no doubt explain the
true remedy in a dream. A "wise woman" who had great following among the
slaves advised that a young puppy be tied upon Hermione's temples to
absorb the disaffection of her brain. Lysistra was barely persuaded not to
follow her admonitions. After a few days the patient grew better,
recovered strength, took an interest in her child. Yet ever and anon she
would repeat over Phoenix's cradle:--

"Your father lives! I have seen him! I have seen him!"

What, however, puzzled Lysistra most, was the fact that Cleopis did not
contradict her young mistress in the least, but maintained a mysterious
silence about the whole adventure.




                              CHAPTER XXXIV


                          THE LOYALTY OF LAMPAXO


The night after his adventure on the hill slope Democrates received in his
chambers no less an individual than Hiram. That industrious Phoenician had
been several days in Troezene, occupied in a manner he and his superior
discreetly kept to themselves. The orator had a bandage above one eye,
where a heavy sandal had kicked him. He was exceedingly pale, and sat in
the arm-chair propped with pillows. That he had awaited Hiram eagerly,
betrayed itself by the promptness with which he cut short the inevitable
salaam.

"Well, my dear rascal, have you found him?"

"May it please your Excellency to hearken to even the least of your
slaves?"

"Do you hear, fox?--have you found him?"

"My Lord shall judge for himself."

"Cerberus eat you, fellow,--though you'd be a poisonous mouthful,--tell your
story in as few words as possible. I _know_ that he is lurking about
Troezene."

"Compassion, your Lordship, compassion,"--Hiram seemed washing his hands in
oil, they waved so soothingly--"if your Benignity will grant it, I have a
very worthy woman here who, I think, can tell a story that will be
interesting."

"In with her, then."

The person Hiram escorted into the room proved to be no more nor less than
Lampaxo. Two years had not removed the wrinkles from her cheek, the
sharpness from her nose, the rasping from her tongue. At sight of her
Democrates half rose from his seat and held out his hand affably, the
demagogue's instinct uppermost.

"Ah! my good dame, whom do I recognize? Are you not the wife of our
excellent fishmonger, Phormio? A truly sterling man, and how, pray, is
your good husband?"

"Poorly, poorly, _kyrie_." Lampaxo looked down and fumbled her dirty
chiton. Such condescension on the part of a magnate barely less than
Themistocles or Aristeides was overpowering.

"Poorly? I grieve to learn it. I was informed that he was comfortably
settled here until it was safe to return to Attica, and had even opened a
prosperous stall in the market-place."

"Of course, _kyrie_; and the trade, considering the times, is not so
bad--Athena be praised--and he's not sick in body. It's worse, far worse. I
was even on the point of going to your Lordship to state my misgivings,
when your good friend, the Phoenician, fell into my company, and I found he
was searching for the very thing I wanted to reveal."

"Ah!" Democrates leaned forward and battled against his impatience,--"and
what is the matter wherein I can be of service to so deserving a citizen
as your husband?"

"I fear me,"--Lampaxo put her apron dutifully to her face and began to
sniff,--"your Excellency won't call him 'deserving' any more. Hellas knows
your Excellency is patriotism itself. The fact is Phormio has 'Medized.' "

"Medized!" The orator started as became an actor. "Gods and goddesses!
what trust is in men if Phormio the Athenian has Medized?"

"Hear my story, _mu! mu!_" groaned Lampaxo. "It's a terrible thing to
accuse one's own husband, but duty to Hellas is duty. Your Excellency is a
merciful man, if he could only warn Phormio in private."

"Woman,"--Democrates pulled his most consequential frown,--"Medizing is
treason. On your duty as a daughter of Athens I charge you tell
everything, then rely on my wisdom."

"Certainly, _kyrie_, certainly," gasped Lampaxo, and so she began a
recital mingled with many moans and protestations, which Democrates dared
not bid her hasten.

The good woman commenced by reminding the strategus how he had visited her
and her brother Polus to question them as to the doings of the Babylonish
carpet merchant, and how it had seemed plain to them that Glaucon was
nothing less than a traitor. Next she proceeded to relate how her husband
had enabled the criminal to fly by sea, and her own part therein--for she
loudly accused herself of treason in possessing a guilty knowledge of the
outlaw's manner of escape. As for Bias, he had just now gone on a message
to Megara, but Democrates would surely castigate his own slave. "Still,"
wound up Lampaxo, "the traitor seemed drowned, and his treason locked up
in Phorcys's strong box, and so I said nothing about him. More's the
pity."

"The more reason for concealing nothing now."

"Zeus strike me if I keep back anything. It's now about ten days since
_he_ returned."

" 'He?' Whom do you mean?"

"It's not overeasy to tell, _kyrie_. He calls himself Critias, and wears a
long black beard and tangled hair. Phormio brought him home one
evening--said he was the _proreus_ of a Melian trireme caulking at
Epidaurus, but was once in the fish trade at Peiraeus and an old friend. I
told Phormio we had enough these days to fill our own bellies, but my
husband would be hospitable. I had to bring out my best honey cakes. Your
Lordship knows I take just pride in my honey cakes."

"Beyond doubt,"--Democrates's hand twitched with impatience,--"but tell of
the stranger."

"At once, _kyrie_; well, we all sat down to sup. Phormio kept pressing
wine on the fellow as if we had not only one little jar of yellow Rhodian
in the cellar. All the time the sailor barely spoke a few words of island
Doric, but my heart misgave. He seemed so refined, so handsome. And near
the roots of his hair it was not so dark--as if dyed and needing renewal.
Trust a woman's eyes for that. When supper was over Phormio orders me, 'Up
the ladder and to bed. I'll come shortly, but leave a blanket and pillow
for our friend who sleeps on the hearth.' Your Excellency knows we hired a
little house on the 'Carpenter's Street,' very reasonably you will
grant--only half a minae for the winter. I gave the stranger a fine pillow
and a blanket embroidered by Stephanium, she was my great-aunt, and left
it to me by will, and the beautiful red wool was from Byzantium--"

"But you spoke of Critias?" Democrates could scarce keep upon his seat.

"Yes, _kyrie_. Well, I warned Phormio not to give him any more wine. Then
I went up the ladder. O Mother Demeter, how sharply I listened, but the
rascals spoke too low together for me to catch anything, save that Critias
had dropped his Doric and spoke good Attic now. At last Phormio came up to
me, and I pretended to snore. In the morning, lo! the scoundrelly stranger
had slipped away. In the evening he returns late. Phormio harbours him
again. So for several nights, coming late, going early. Then to-night he
comes a bit before his wont. He and Phormio drank more than common. After
Phormio sent me away, they talked a long time and in louder voice."

"You overheard?" Democrates gripped his arm-chair.

"Yes, _kyrie_, blessed be Athena! The stranger spoke pure Attic such as
your Excellency might use. Many times I heard Hermione named, and yourself
once--"

"And how?"

"The stranger said: 'So she will not wed Democrates. She loathes him.
Aphrodite shed joy on her forever.' Then Phormio answered him, 'Therefore,
dear Glaucon, you should trust the gods a little longer.' "

" 'Glaucon,' said he?" Democrates leaped from the chair.

" 'Glaucon,' on my oath by the Styx. Then I covered my head and wept. I
knew my husband harboured the arch-traitor. Heaven can tell how he escaped
the sea. As soon as Phormio was sleeping snug beside me, I went down the
ladder, intending to call the watch. In the street I met a man, this good
Phoenician here,--he explained he was suspecting this 'Critias' himself, and
lurked about in hopes of tracing him in the morning. I told my story. He
said it was best to come straight to you. And now I have accused my own
husband, Excellency. _Ai!_ was wife ever harder beset? Phormio is a kindly
and commonly obedient man, even if he doesn't know the value of an obol.
You will be merciful--"

"Peace," commanded Democrates, with portentous gravity, "justice first,
mercy later. Do you solemnly swear you heard Phormio call this stranger
'Glaucon'?"

"Yes, _kyrie_. Woe! woe!"

"And you say he is now asleep in your house?"

"Yes, the wine has made them both very heavy."

"You have done well." Democrates extended his hand again. "You are a
worthy daughter of Athens. In years to come they will name you with King
Codrus who sacrificed his life for the freedom of Attica, for have you not
sacrificed what should be dearer than life,--the fair name of your husband?
But courage. Your patriotism may extenuate his crime. Only the traitor
must be taken."

"Yes, he was breathing hard when I went out. Ah! seize him quickly."

"Retire," commanded Democrates, with a flourish; "leave me to concert with
this excellent Hiram the means of thwarting I know not what gross
villany."

The door had hardly closed behind Lampaxo, when Democrates fell as a heap
into the cushions. He was ashen and palsied.

"Courage, master,"--Hiram was drawing a suggestive finger across his
throat,--"the woman's tale is true metal. Critias shall sleep snug and
sweetly to-night, if perchance too soundly."

"What will you do?" shrieked the wretched man.

"The thing is marvellously simple, master. The night is not yet old.
Hasdrubal and his crew of Carthaginians are here and by the grace of Baal
can serve you. This cackling hen will guide us to the house. Heaven has
put your enemy off his guard. He and Phormio will never wake to feel their
throats cut. Then a good stone on each foot takes the corpses down in the
harbour."

But Democrates dashed his hand in negation.

"No, by the infernal gods, not so! No murder. I cannot bear the curse of
the Furies. Seize him, carry him to the ends of the earth, to hardest
slavery. Let him never cross my path again. But no bloodshed--"

Hiram almost lost his never failing smile, so much he marvelled.

"But, your Lordship, the man is a giant, mighty as Melkarth.(12) Seizing
will be hard. Sheol is the safest prison."

"No." Democrates was still shaking. "His ghost came to me a thousand
times, though yet he lived. It would hound me mad if I murdered him."

"_You_ would not murder him. Your slave is not afflicted by dreams."
Hiram's smile was extremely insinuating.

"Don't quibble with words. It would be I who slew him, though I never
struck the blow. You can seize him. Is he not asleep? Call Hasdrubal--bind
Glaucon, gag him, drag him to the ship. But he must not die."

"Very good, Excellency." Hiram seldom quarrelled to no purpose with his
betters. "Let your Lordship deign to leave this small matter to his slave.
By Baal's favour Hasdrubal and six of his crew sleep on shore to-night.
Let us pray they be not deep in wine. Wait for me one hour, perhaps two,
and your heart and liver shall be comforted."

"Go, go! I will wait and pray to Hermes Dolios."

Hiram even now did not forget his punctilious salaam before departing.
Never had he seemed more the beautiful serpent with the shining scales
than the instant he bent gracefully at Democrates's feet, the red light
falling on his gleaming ear and nose rings, his smooth brown skin and
beady eyes. The door turned on its pivots--closed. Democrates heard the
retiring footsteps. No doubt the Phoenician was taking Lampaxo with him.
The Athenian staggered across the room to his bed and flung himself on it,
laughing hysterically. How absolutely his enemy was delivered into his
hands! How the Morae in sending that Carthaginian ship, to do Lycon's
business and his, had provided the means of ridding him of the haunting
terror! How everything conspired to aid him! He need not even kill
Glaucon. He would have no blood guiltiness, he need not dread Alecto and
her sister Furies. He could trust Hiram and Hasdrubal to see to it that
Glaucon never returned to plague him. And Hermione? Democrates laughed
again. He was almost frightened at his own glee.

"A month, my nymph, a month, and you and your dear father, yes,
Themistocles himself, will be in no state to answer me 'nay,'--though
Glaucon come to claim you."

Thus he lay a long time, while the drip, drip from the water-clock in the
corner told how the night was passing. The lamp flickered and burned
lower. He never knew the hours to creep so slowly.

                              * * * * * * *

At last, a knock; Scodrus, the yawning valet, ushering in a black and
bearded sailor, who crouched eastern fashion at the feet of the strategus.

"You have seized him?"

"Blessed be Moloch, Baal, and Melkarth! They have poured sleep upon my
Lord's enemy." The sailor's Greek was harsh and execrable. "Your servants
did even as commanded. The woman let us in. The young man my Lord hates
was bound and gagged almost ere he could waken, likewise the fishmonger
was seized."

"Bravely done. I never forget good service. And the woman?"

"She is retained likewise. I have hastened hither to learn the further
will of my Lord."

Democrates arose hastily.

"My himation, staff, and shoes, boy!" he ordered. "I will go forth myself.
The prisoners are still at the fishmonger's house?"

"Even so, Excellency."

"I go back with you. I must see this stranger with my own eyes. There must
be no mistake."

Scodrus stared widely when he saw his master go out into the dark, for his
only escort a black Carthaginian sailor with a dirk a cubit long.
Democrates did not even ask for a lantern. None of the servants could
fathom their master's doings of late. He gave strappings when they asked
questions, and Bias was away.

The streets of Troezene were utterly deserted when Democrates threaded
them. There was no moon, neither he nor his companion were overcertain of
the way. Once they missed the right turn, wandered down a blind alley, and
plunged into a pile of offal awaiting the scavenger dogs. But finally the
seaman stopped at a low door in a narrow street, and a triple rap made it
open. The scene was squalid. A rush-candle was burning on a table. Around
it squatted seven men who rose and bowed as the strategus entered. In the
dim flicker he could just recognize the burly shipmaster Hasdrubal and
gigantic Hib, the Libyan "governor," whose ebon face betrayed itself even
there.

"We have expected you, _kyrie_," said Hiram, who was one of the group.

"Thanks be to Hermes and to you all. I have told my guide already I will
be grateful. Where is he?"

"In the kitchen behind, your Lordship. We were singularly favoured. Hib
had the cord around his arms before he wakened. He could scarcely struggle
despite his power. The fishmonger awoke before Hasdrubal could nip him.
For a moment we feared his outcries would rouse the street. But again the
gods blessed us. No one stirred, and we soon throttled him."

"Take the light," ordered Democrates. "Come."

Accompanied by Hiram, the orator entered the kitchen, a small square room.
The white-washed ceiling was blacked around the smoke-hole, a few pots and
pans lay in the corners, a few dying embers gleamed on the hearth. But
Democrates had eyes only for two objects,--human figures tightly bound
lying rigid as faggots in the further corner.

"Which is he?" asked Democrates again, stepping softly as though going to
danger.

"The further one is Phormio, the nearer is my Lord's enemy. Your
Excellency need not fear to draw close. He is quite secure."

"Give me the candle."

Democrates held the light high and trod gently over to the prostrate men.
Hiram spoke rightly that his victim was secure. They had lashed him hand
and foot, using small chains in lieu of cords. A bit of wood had been
thrust into his mouth and tied with twine under the ears. Democrates stood
an instant looking down, then very deliberately knelt beside the prisoner
and moved the candle closer. He could see now the face hidden half by the
tangled black hair and beard and the gag--but who could doubt it?--the deep
blue eye, the chiselled profile, the small, fine lips, yes, and the
godlike form visible in its comeliness despite the bands. He was gazing
upon the man who two years ago had called him "bosom-friend."

The prisoner looked straight upward. The only thing he could move was his
eyes, and these followed Democrates's least motion. The orator pressed the
candle closer yet. He even put out his hand, and touched the face to brush
away the hair. A long look--and he was satisfied. No mistake was possible.
Democrates arose and stood over the prisoner, then spoke aloud.

"Glaucon, I have played at dice with Fortune. I have conquered. I did not
ruin you willingly. There was no other way. A man must first be a friend
to himself, and then friendly to others. I have cast in my lot with the
Persians. It was I who wrote that letter which blasted you at Colonus.
Very soon there will be a great battle fought in Boeotia. Lycon and I will
make it certain that Mardonius conquers. I am to be tyrant of Athens.
Hermione shall be my wife." The workings of the prisoner's face made
Democrates wince; from Glaucon's throat came rattlings, his eyes were
terrible. But the other drove recklessly forward. "As for you, you pass
this night out of my life. How you escaped the sea I know not and care
less. Hasdrubal will take you to Carthage, and sell you into the interior
of Libya. I wish you no misery, only you go where you shall never see
Hellas again. I am merciful. Your life is in my hands. But I restore it. I
am without blood guiltiness. What I have done you would have done, had you
loved as I--had you been under necessity as I. Eros is a great god, but
Anangke, Dame Necessity, is yet mightier. So to-night we part--farewell."

A strong spasm passed through the prisoner's frame. For a moment
Democrates thought the bonds would snap. Too strong. The orator swung on
his heel and returned to the outer room.

"The night wanes, _kyrie_," remarked Hasdrubal; "if these good people are
to be taken to the ship, it must be soon."

"As you will. I do nothing more concerning them."

"Fetch down the woman," ordered Hasdrubal; in the mongrel Greek current
amongst Mediterranean sea-folk. Two of his seamen ascended the ladder and
returned with Lampaxo, who smirked and simpered at sight of Democrates and
bobbed him a courtesy.

"The traitor is seized, your Excellency. I hope your Excellency will see
that he drinks hemlock. You will be merciful to my poor husband, even if
he must be arrested for the night. Gods and goddesses! what are these men
doing to me?"

A stalwart Carthaginian was in the act of knotting a cord around the good
woman's arms preparatory to pinioning them.

"_Kyrie! kyrie!_" she screamed, "they are binding me, too! Me--the most
loyal woman in Attica."

Democrates scowled and turned his back on her.

"Your Lordship surely intended this woman to be taken also," suggested
Hiram, sweetly. "It cannot be he will leave such a dangerous witness at
large."

"Of course not. Off with her!"

"_Kyrie! kyrie!_" was her shriek, but quickly ended, for Hasdrubal knitted
his fingers around her throat.

"A gag," he ordered, and with a few more struggles Lampaxo stood helpless
and silent.

A little later the band was threading its stealthy way down the black
streets. Four of the Carthaginians carried Glaucon, slung hands and feet
over a pole. They dared not trust him on his feet. Phormio and Lampaxo
walked, closely pinioned and pricked on by the captain's dagger. They were
soon at the deserted strand, and their ship's pinnace lay upon the beach.
Democrates accompanied them as far as the dark marge, and watched while
the boat glided out into the gloom of the haven. The orator paced homeward
alone. Everything had favoured him. He had even cleared himself of the
curse of the Furies and the pursuit of Nemesis. He had, he congratulated
himself, shown marvellous qualities of mercy. Glaucon lived? Yes--but the
parching sand-plains of Libya would be as fast a prison as the grave, and
the life of a slave in Africa was a short one. Glaucon had passed from his
horizon forever.




                               CHAPTER XXXV


                       MOLOCH BETRAYS THE PHOENICIAN


Even whilst the boat pulled out to the trader, Hiram suggested that since
his superior's "unfortunate scruples" forbade them to shed blood, at least
they could disable the most dangerous captive by putting out his eyes. But
Hasdrubal, thrifty Semite, would not hearken.

"Is not the fellow worth five hundred shekels in the Carthage market?--but
who will give two for a blind dog?"

And once at the ship the prisoners were stowed in the hold so securely
that even Hiram ceased to concern himself. In the morning some of the
neighbours indeed wondered at Phormio's closed door and the silence of the
jangling voice of Lampaxo; but the fishmonger was after all an exile, and
might have returned suddenly to Attica, now the Persians had retreated
again to Boeotia, and before these surmises could change to misdoubting,
the _Bozra_ was bearing forth into the AEgean.

The business of Hasdrubal with the _Bozra_ at Troezene appeared simple. The
war had disturbed the Greek harvests. He had come accordingly with a cargo
of African corn, and was taking a light return lading of olive oil and
salt fish. But those who walked along the harbour front remarked that the
_Bozra_ was hardly a common merchantman. She was a "sea-mouse," long,
shallow, and very fast under sail; she also carried again an unwontedly
heavy crew. When Hasdrubal's cargo seemed completed, he lingered a couple
of days, alleging he was repairing a cable; then the third morning after
his nocturnal adventure a cipher letter to Democrates sent the
Carthaginian to sea. The letter went thus:--

"Lycon, in the camp of the Greeks in Boeotia, to Democrates in Troezene,
greeting:--The armies have now faced many days. The soothsayers declare
that the aggressor is sure to be defeated, still there has been some
skirmishing in which your Athenians slew Masistes, Mardonius's chief of
cavalry. This, however, is no great loss to us. Your presence with
Aristeides is now urgently needed. Send Hasdrubal and Hiram at once to
Asia with the papers we arranged in Corinth. Come yourself with speed to
the army. Ten days and this merry dice-throwing is ended. _Chaire!_"

Democrates immediately after this gave Hiram a small packet of papyrus
sheets rolled very tight, with the ominous injunction to "conceal
carefully, weight it with lead, and fling it overboard if there is danger
of capture." At which Hiram bowed more elegantly than usual and answered,
"Fear not; it shall be guarded as the priests guard the ark of Moloch, and
when next your slave comes, it is to salute my Lord as the sovran of
Athens."

Hiram smiled fulsomely and departed. An hour later the _Bozra_ ran out on
the light wind around the point of Calauria and into the sparkling sea to
eastward. Democrates stood gazing after her until she was a dark speck on
the horizon.

The speck at last vanished. The strategus walked homeward. Glaucon was
gone. The fateful packet binding Democrates irrevocably to the Persian
cause was gone. He could not turn back. At the gray of morning with a few
servants he quitted Troezene, and hastened to join Aristeides and Pausanias
in Boeotia.

                              * * * * * * *

In the hold of the _Bozra_, where Hasdrubal had stowed his unwilling
passengers, there crept just enough sunlight to make darkness visible. The
gags had been removed from the prisoners, suffering them to eat, whereupon
Lampaxo had raised a truly prodigious outcry which must needs be silenced
by a vigorous anointing with Hasdrubal's whip of bullock's hide. Her
husband and Glaucon disdained to join a clamour which could never escape
the dreary cavern of the hold, and which only drew the hoots of their
unmagnanimous guardians. The Carthaginians had not misinterpreted
Glaucon's silence, however. They knew well they had a Titan in custody,
and did not even unlash his hands. His feet and Phormio's were tied
between two beams in lieu of stocks. The giant Hib took it upon himself to
feed them bean porridge with a wooden spoon, making the dainty sweeter
with tales of the parching heats of Africa and the life of a slave under
Libyan task-masters.

So one day, another, and another, while the _Bozra_ rocked at anchor, and
the prisoners knew that liberty lay two short cable lengths away, yet
might have been in Atlantis for all it profited them. Phormio never
reviled his wife as the author of their calamity, and Lampaxo, with nigh
childish earnestness, would protest that surely Democrates knew not what
the sailors did when they bound her.

"So noble a patriot! An evil god bewitched him into letting these harpies
take us. Woe! woe! What misfortune!"

To which plaint the others only smiled horribly and ground their teeth.

Phormio as well as Glaucon had heard the avowal of Democrates on the night
of the seizure. There was no longer any doubt of the answer to the great
riddle. But disheartening, benumbing beyond all personal anguish was the
dread for Hellas. The sacrifice at Thermopylae vain. The glory of Salamis
vain. Hellas and Athens enslaved. The will of Xerxes and Mardonius
accomplished not because of their valour, but because of their enemies'
infamy.

"O gods, if indeed there be gods!" Glaucon was greatly doubting that at
last; "if ye have any power, if justice, truth, and honour weigh against
iniquity, put that power forth, or never claim the prayers and sacrifice
of men again."

Glaucon was past dreading for himself. He prayed that Hermione might be
spared a long life of tears, and that Artemis might slay her quickly by
her silent arrows. To follow his thoughts in all their dark mazes were
profitless. Suffice it that the night which had brooded over his soul from
the hour he fled from Colonus was never so dark as now. He was too
despairing even to curse.

The last hope fled when they heard the rattling of the cables weighing
anchor. Soon the soft slap of the water around the bow and the regular
heaving motion told that the _Bozra_ was under way. The sea-mouse creaked
and groaned through all her timbers and her lading. The foul bilge-water
made the hold stifling as a charnel-house. Lampaxo, Hib being absent,
began to howl and moan.

"O Queen Hera! O Queen Hera, I die for a breath of air--I, the most
patriotic woman in Athens!"

"Silence, goodwife," muttered Phormio, twisting desperately on the filthy
straw under him. "Have I not enough to fret about without the addition of
your pipings?" And he muttered underbreath the old saw of Hesiod:--

  "He who doth a woman trust,
  Doth trust a den of thieves."

"Silence below there, you squealing sow," ordered Hib, from the hatchway.
"Must I tan your hide again?"

Lampaxo subsided. Phormio tugged vainly at his feet in the stocks. Glaucon
said nothing. A terrible hope had come to him. If he could not speedily
die, at least he would soon go mad, and that would rescue him from his
most terrible enemy--himself.

                              * * * * * * *

The _Bozra_, it has been said, headed not south but eastward. Hasdrubal's
commission was to fetch Samos, where the still formidable fleet of the
Barbarian lay, and to put the precious packet from Democrates in the hands
of Tigranes, Xerxes's commander-in-chief on the coast of Asia Minor. But
although speed had been enjoined, the voyage did not go prosperously. Off
Belbina the wind deserted them altogether, and Hasdrubal had been
compelled to force his craft along by sweeps,--ponderous oars, worked by
three men,--but his progress at best was slow. Off Cythnos the breeze had
again arisen, but it was the Eurus from the southeast, worse than useless;
the _Bozra_ had been obliged to ride at anchor off the island for two
days. Then another calm; and at last, "because," said Hasdrubal piously,
"he had vowed two black lambs to the Wind God," the breeze came clear and
cool from the north, which, if not wholly favourable, enabled the
merchantman to plough onward. It was the fifth day, finally, after
quitting Troezene, that the headlands of Naxos came in sight at dawn, and
the master began to take comfort. The fleet of the Greeks--a fisherboat had
told him--was swinging inactive at Delos well to the north and westward,
and he could fairly consider himself in waters dominated by the king.

"A fortunate voyage," the master was boasting to Hiram, as he sat at
breakfast in the stern-cabin above a platter of boiled dolphin; "two
talents from the Persians for acting as their messenger; a thousand
drachmae profit on the corn; a hundred from Master Democrates in return for
our little service, not to mention the profit on the return cargo, and
last but not least the three slaves."

"Yes, the three slaves. I had almost forgotten about them."

"You see, my dear Hiram," quoth the master, betwixt two unwontedly huge
mouthfuls, "you see what folly it was of you to suggest putting out that
handsome fellow's eyes. I am strongly thinking of selling him not to
Carthage, but to Babylon. I know a trader at Ephesus who makes a specialty
of handsome youths. The satrap Artabozares has commissioned him to find as
many good-looking out-runners as possible. Also for his harem--if this
Glaucon were only a eunuch--"

Hiram, breaking a large disk of bread, was smiling very suggestively
before making reply, when a sailor shouted at the hatch:--

"Ships, master! Ships with oars!"

"In what quarter?" Hasdrubal sprang up, letting the dishes clatter.

"From Myconus. They come up fast. Hib at the masthead counts eleven
triremes."

"Baal preserve us!" The master at once clambered on deck. "The Greek fleet
may be quitting Delos. We must pray for wind."

It was a gray, hazy day after a dozen bright ones. The northerly breeze
seemed falling. The water spread out a sombre lead colour. The heights of
Naxos were in sight to starboard, but none too clearly. Much more
interesting to Hasdrubal was the line of dots spreading on the horizon to
northwest. Despite the distance his keen eyes could catch the rise and
fall of the oar banks--war-ships, not traders. Hib was right, and
Hasdrubal's face grew longer. No triremes save the Greeks could be bearing
thither, and a merchantman, even from nominally neutral Carthage, caught
headed for the king's coasts in those days of blazing war was nothing if
not fair prize. The master's decision was prompt.

"They are far off. Put the ship before the wind."

The sea-mouse was fleet indeed for a trader, but unlike a trireme must
count on her canvas for her speed. With a piping breeze she could mock
pursuit. In a calm she was fearfully handicapped. However, for a moment
Hasdrubal congratulated himself he could slip away unnoticed. The distance
was very great. Then his dark lips cursed.

"Moloch consume me! If I see aright, we are chased."

Two vessels, in fact, seemed turning away from the rest. They were heading
straight after the _Bozra_. A long race it would be, but with the gale so
light the chances were against the sea-mouse. Hasdrubal had no need to
urge his crew to rig out the oars and tug furiously, if they wished to
escape a Greek prison and a slave market.

The whole crew, forty black-visaged, black-eyed creatures, were soon busy
over the dozen great sweeps in a frantic attempt to force the _Bozra_
beyond danger. Panting, yelling, blaspheming, for a while they seemed
holding their own, but the master watched with sinking heart the waning
breeze. At the end of an hour their pursuers could be distinguished,--a
tall trireme behind, but closer, pulling more rapidly, a penteconter, a
slim scouting galley working fifty oars in a single bank.

Hasdrubal began to shout desperately: "Wind, Baal, wind! Fill the sails,
and seven he-goats await thy altar in Carthage!"

Either the god found the bribe too small or lacked the power to accept it.
The breeze did not stiffen. The sailors strove like demons at the sweeps,
but almost imperceptibly the gap betwixt them and the war-ships was
narrowing.

Hiram, who had been rowing, now left his post to approach the master.

"What of the captives? Crucifixion waits us all if they are found on the
ship and tell their story. Kill them at once and fling the bodies
overboard."

Hasdrubal shook his head.

"Not yet. Still a good chance. I'll not cast five hundred bright shekels
to the fish till harder pressed. The breeze may strengthen." Then he
redoubled his shout. "Wind, Baal, wind!"

But a little later the gap betwixt the sea-mouse and the penteconter had
so dwindled that even the master's inborn thrift began to yield to
prudence.

"Hark you, Hib," he cried from the helm. "Take Adherbal and Lars the
Etruscan. It's a good ten furlongs to that cursed galley still, but we
must have those prisoners ready on deck. Over they go if the chase gets a
bit closer."

The giant Libyan hastened to comply, while all the crew joined in the
captain's howl, "Wind, Baal, wind!" and cried reckless vows, while they
scanned the fateful stretch of gray-green water behind the stern, whereon
liberty if not life depended.

The trireme, pulling only one of her banks, was dropping behind, her
navarch leaving the tiring chase to the penteconter, but the latter hung
on doggedly.

"Curse those war-ships with their long oars and heavy crews," growled Hib,
reappearing above the hatch with the prisoners. "The penteconter's only
nine furlongs off."

He had been obliged to release the captives from the stocks, but Hib had
taken the precaution to place on the formidable athlete a pair of leg
irons joined by a shackle. Not merely were Glaucon's arms pinioned by a
stout cord, but the great Libyan was gripping them tightly. Lars and
Adherbal conducted the other prisoners, whose feet, however, were not
bound. For a moment the three captives stood blinking at the unfamiliar
light, unconscious of the situation and their extremity, whilst Hasdrubal
for the fortieth time measured the distance. The wind had strengthened a
little. Let it strengthen a trifle more and the _Bozra_ would hold her
own. Still her people were nearly spent with their toiling, and the keen
beak and large complement of the man-of-war made resistance madness if she
once came alongside.

"Have ready sand-bags," ordered Hasdrubal, "to tie to these wretches'
feet. Set them by the boat mast, so the sail can hide our pretty deed from
the penteconter. Have ready an axe. We'll bide a little longer, though,
before we say 'farewell' to our passengers. The gods may help yet."

Hib and his fellows were marching the prisoners to the poop, when the
sight of the war-ship told Phormio all the story. No gag now hindered his
tongue.

"Oh, dragons from Carthage, are you going to murder us?" he began in tones
more indignant than terrified.

"No, save as Heaven enjoins it!" quoth the master, clapping his hands to
urge on the rowing stroke. "Pray, then, your AEolus, Hellene, to stiffen
the breeze."

"Pray, then, to Pluto, whelps," bawled the undaunted fishmonger, "to give
you a snug berth in Orcus. Ha! but it's a merry thought of you and all
your pretty lads stretched on crosses and waiting for the crows."

But a violent screech came from Lampaxo, who had just comprehended the
fate awaiting.

"_Ai! ai!_ save me, fellow-Hellenes!" she bawled toward the penteconter,
"a citizeness of Athens, the most patriotic woman in the city, slaughtered
by Barbarians--"

"Silence the squealing sow!" roared Hasdrubal. "They'll hear her on the
war-ship. Aft with her and overboard at once."

But as they dragged Lampaxo on the poop, her outcry rose to a tempest till
Lars the Etruscan clapped his hand upon her mouth. Her screaming stilled,
but his own outcry more than replaced it. In a twinkling the virago's hard
teeth closed over his fingers. Two ran from the oars to him. But the
woman, conscious that she fought for life or death, held fast. Curses,
blows, even a dagger pried betwixt her lips--all bootless. She seemed as a
thing possessed. And all the time the Etruscan howled in mortal agony.

The thin dagger, bent too hard, snapped betwixt her teeth. Lars's clamour
could surely be heard on the penteconter. Again the breeze was falling.

They seized the fury's throat, and pressed it till she turned black, but
the grip of her jaw only tightened.

"_Attatai! attatai!_" groaned the victim, "forbear. Don't throttle her.
Her teeth are iron. They are biting through the bone. If you strangle her,
they will never relax. _Attatai! attatai!_"

"Nip him tight, little wife," called Phormio, for once regarding his
spouse with supreme satisfaction. "It's a dainty morsel you have in your
mouth. Chew it well!"

Lampaxo's attackers paused an instant, uncertain how to release the
Etruscan. To their threats of torture the woman was deaf as the mainmast,
and still the Etruscan screamed.

Glaucon had stood perfectly passive during all this grim by-play. Once
Phormio saw his fellow-captive's face twist into a smile, but in the
excitement of the moment the fishmonger as well as the Carthaginians
almost forgot the Isthmionices, and Hib relaxed his grip and guard. Lars's
finger was streaming red, when Hasdrubal threw away the steering-paddle in
a rage.

"Silence her forever! The axe, Hib. Split her skull open!"

The axe lay at the Libyan's feet. One instant, only one, betook his hands
from the athlete's wrists to seize the weapon, but in that instant the
yell from all the crew drowned even the howls of Lars. Had any watched,
they might have seen all the muscles in the Alcmaeonid's glorious body
contract, might have seen the fire spring from his eyes as he put forth a
godlike might. Heracles and Athena Polias had been with him when he threw
his strength upon the bands that held his arms. The crushing of Lycon down
had been no feat like this. In a twinkling the cords about his wrists were
snapped. He swung his free hands in the air.

"Athens!" he shouted, whilst the crew stood spellbound. "Hermione! Glaucon
is still Glaucon!"

Hib had grasped the axe, but he never knew what smote him once behind the
ear and sent him rolling lifeless against the bulwark. In an instant his
bright weapon was swinging high above the athlete's head. Glaucon stood
terrible as Achilles before the cowering Trojans.

"Woe! woe! he is Melkarth. We are lost men!" groaned the crew.

"At him, fools!" bawled Hasdrubal, first to recover wits, "his feet are
still shackled."

But whilst the master called to them, the axe dashed down upon the
fetters, and one great stroke smote the coupling-link in twain. The
Athenian stood a moment looking right and left, the axe dancing as a toy
in his grasp, and a smile on his face inviting, "Prove me."

A javelin singing from the hand of Adherbal flew at him. An imperceptible
bending of the body, a red streak on Glaucon's naked side, and it dug into
the deck. Yet whilst it quivered, was out again and hurled through the
Carthaginian's breast and shoulders. He fell in a heap beside the Libyan.

Another howl from the sailors.

"Not Melkarth, but Baal the Dragon-Slayer. We are lost. Who can contend
with him?"

"Cowards!" thundered Hasdrubal, whipping the sword from his thigh, "do you
not know these three sniff our true business? If they live when the
penteconter comes, it's not prison but Sheol that's waiting. Their lives
or ours. One rush and we have this madman down!"

But their terrible adversary gave the master no time to gather his
myrmidons. One stroke of the axe had already released Phormio, who
clutched the arms of his wife.

"The cabin!" the ready-witted fishmonger commanded, and Lampaxo, scarce
knowing what she did, released her ungentle hold on Lars and suffered her
husband to drag her down the ladder. Glaucon went last; no man loving
death enough to come within reach of the axe. Hasdrubal saw his victims
escaping under his eyes and groaned.

"There is only one hatchway. We must force it. Darts, belaying-pins,
ballast stones--fling anything down. It's for life or death!"

"The penteconter is four furlongs away!" shrieked a sailor, growing gray
under his dark skin.

"And Democrates's despatches are hid in the cabin," added Hiram,
chattering. "If they do not go overboard, our deaths will be terrible."

"Hear, King Moloch!" called Hasdrubal, lifting his swarthy arms to heaven,
then striking them with his sword till the blood gushed down, "suffer us
to escape this calamity and I vow thee even my daughter Tibait,--a child in
her tenth year,--she shall die in thy holy furnace a sacrifice."

"Hear, Baal! Hear, Moloch!" chorussed the crew; and gathering courage from
necessity seized boat-hooks, oars, dirks, and all other handy weapons for
their attack.

But below the released prisoners had not been idle. Never--Glaucon knew
it--had his brain been clearer, his invention more fertile than now, and
Phormio was not too old to cease to be a valiant helper. The cabin was
small. A few spears and swords stood in the rack about the mast. The
athlete bolted the sliding hatch-cover, and tore down the weapons.

"Release your wife," he ordered Phormio; "yonder sea chest is strong. Drag
it over to bar the hatch-ladder. Work as Titans if you hope for another
sun."

"_Ai, ai, ai!_" screeched Lampaxo, who had released Lars's fingers only to
resume her din, "we all perish. They are hewing the hatch-cover with their
axes. Hera preserve us! The wood splinters. We die."

"We have no time to die," called the athlete, "but only to save Hellas."

A dozen blows beat the frail hatch-cover to splinters. A dark face with
grinning teeth showed itself. A heavy ballast stone grazed the athlete's
shoulder, but the intruder fell back with a gurgling in his throat, his
hands clutching the empty air. Glaucon had sent a heavy spear clean
through him.

More ballast stones, but the Titanic Alcmaeonid had torn a mattress from a
bunk, and held it as effective shield. By main force the others dragged
the chest across to the hatchway, making the entrance doubly narrow.
Vainly Hasdrubal stormed at his men to rush down boldly. They barely dared
to fling stones and darts, so fast their adversary sped them back, and to
the mark.

"A god! a god! We fight against Heaven!" bleated the seamen.

Their groans were answered by the screechings of Lampaxo through the
port-hole and the taunts of Phormio.

"Sing, sing, pretty Pisinoe, sweetest of the sirens," tossed the
fishmonger, playing his part at Glaucon's side; "lure that dear
penteconter a little nearer. And you, brave, gentle sirs, don't try 'to
flay a skinned dog' by thrusting down here. Your hands are just itching
for the nails, I warrant!"

Hasdrubal redoubled his vows to Moloch. In place of his daughter he
substituted his son, though the lad was fourteen years old and the darling
of his parents. But the god was not tempted even now. The attack on the
cabin had called the sailors from the oars. The penteconter consequently
had gained fast upon them. The trireme behind was manning her other banks
and drawing down apace. Hiram cast a hopeless glance toward her.

"I know those 'eyes'--those red hawse-holes--the _Nausicaae_. Come what may,
Themistocles must not read the packet in the cabin. There is one chance."

He approached the splintered hatchway and outstretched his
hands--weaponless.

"Ah, good and gracious Master Glaucon, and your honest friends, your gods
of Hellas are very great and have delivered us, your poor slaves, into
your hands. Your friends approach. We will resist no longer. Come on deck;
and when the ship is taken, entreat the navarch to be merciful and
generous."

"Bah!" spat Phormio, "you write your promises in water, or better in oil,
black-scaled viper. We know what time of day it is with us, and what for
you."

Hiram saw Glaucon's hand rise with a javelin, and shrank shivering.

"They won't hearken. All's lost," he whimpered, his smile becoming
ghastly.

"Another rush, men!" pleaded Hasdrubal.

"Lead the charge yourself, master!" retorted the seamen, sullenly.

The captain, swinging a cutlass, leaped down the bloodstained hatch. One
moment the desperate fury of his attack carried Glaucon backward. The two
fought--sword against axe--in doubtful combat.

"Follow! follow!" called Hasdrubal, dashing Phormio aside with the flat of
his blade. "I have him at last!" But just as Hiram was leading down a
dozen more, the athlete's axe swept past the sword, and fell like a
millstone on the master's skull. He never screamed as he crashed upon the
planks.

This was enough. The seamen were at the end of their valour. If they must
die, they must die. What use resisting destiny?

Slowly, slowly the moments crept for the three in the cabin. Even Lampaxo
grew still. They heard Hiram pleading frantically, vainly, for another
attempt, and raving strange things about Democrates, Lycon, and the
Persian. Then behind the _Bozra_ sounded the rushing of foam around a ram,
the bumping of fifty oars plying on the thole-pins. Into their sight shot
the penteconter, the brass glistening on her prow, the white blades
leaping in rhythm. Marines in armour stood on the forecastle. A few arrows
pattered on the plankings of the _Bozra_. Her abject crew obeyed the
demand to surrender. Their helmsman pushed over the steering-paddle, and
flung himself upon the deck. The sea-mouse went up into the wind. The
grappling-irons rattled over the bulwark. Glaucon heard the Phoenicians
whining, "Mercy! mercy!" as they embraced the boarders' feet, then the
_proreus_, in hearty Attic, calling, "Secure the prisoners and rummage the
prize!"

Glaucon had suffered many things of late. He had faced intolerable
captivity, immediate death. Now around his eyes swam hot mist. He fell
upon a sea chest, and for a little cared not for anything around, whilst
down his cheeks would flow the tears.




                              CHAPTER XXXVI


                        THE READING OF THE RIDDLE


A hard chase. The rowers of the penteconter were well winded before they
caught the _Bozra_. A merchantman making for Asia was, however, undoubted
prize; the luckless crew could be sold in the Agora, the cargo of oil,
fish, and pottery was likewise of value. Cimon was standing on his poop,
listening to the report of his _proreus_.

"We're all a mina richer for the race, captain, and they've some jars of
their good Numidian wine in the forecastle."

But here a seaman interrupted, staring blankly.

"_Kyrie_, here's a strange prize. Five men lie dead on the deck. The
planks are bloody. In the cabin are two men and a woman. All three seem
mad. They are Greeks. They keep us out, and bawl, 'The navarch! show us
the navarch, or Hellas is lost.' And one of them--as true as that I sucked
my mother's milk--is Phormio--"

"Phormio the fishmonger,"--Cimon dropped his steering oar,--"on a
Carthaginian ship? You're mad yourself, man."

"See with your own eyes, captain. They'll yield to none save you. The
prisoners are howling that one of these men is a giant."

For the active son of Miltiades to leap from bulwark to bulwark took an
instant. Only when he showed himself did the three in the cabin scramble
up the ladder, covered with blood, the red lines of the fetters marked
into wrist and ankle. Lampaxo had thrown her dress over her head and was
screaming still, despite assurances. The third Hellene's face was hid
under a tangle of hair. But Cimon knew the fishmonger. Many a morning had
he haggled with him merrily for a fine mackerel or tunny, and the navarch
recoiled in horror at his fellow-citizen's plight.

"Infernal gods! You a prisoner here? Where is this cursed vessel from?"

"From Troezene," gasped the refugee; "if you love Athens and Hellas--"

He turned just in time to fling an arm about Hiram, who--carelessly
guarded--was gliding down the hatchway.

"Seize that viper, bind, torture; he knows all. Make him tell or Hellas is
lost!"

"Control yourself, friend," adjured Cimon, sorely perplexed, while Hiram
struggled and began tugging out a crooked knife, before two brawny seamen
nipped him fast and disarmed.

"Ah! you carrion meat," shouted Phormio, shaking his fists under the
helpless creature's nose. "Honest men have their day at last. There's a
gay hour coming before Zeus claps the lid over you in Tartarus."

"Peace," commanded the navarch, who betwixt Phormio's shouts, Lampaxo's
howls, and Hiram's moans was at his wit's end. "Has no one on this ship
kept aboard his senses?"

"If you will be so good, sir captain," the third Hellene at last broke his
silence, "you will hearken to me."

"Who are you?"

"The _proreus_ of the _Alcyone_ of Melos. More of myself hereafter. But if
you love the weal of Hellas, demand of this Hiram where he concealed the
treasonable despatches he received at Troezene and now has aboard."

"Hiram? O Lord Apollo, I recognize the snake! The one that was always
gliding around Lycon at the Isthmus. If despatches he has, I know the way
to get them. Now, black-hearted Cyclops,"--Cimon's tone was not
gentle,--"where are your papers?"

Hiram had turned gray as a corpse, but his white teeth came together.

"Phormio is mistaken. Your slave has none."

"Bah!" threw out Cimon, "I can smell your lies like garlic. Silent still?
Good, see how I am better than Asclepius. I make the dumb talk by a
miracle. A cord and belaying-pin, Naon."

The seaman addressed passed a cord about the Phoenician's forehead with a
fearful dexterity, and put the iron pin at the back of the skull.

"Twist!" commanded Cimon. Two mariners gripped the victim's arms. Naon
pressed the cord tighter, tighter. A beastlike groan came through the lips
of the Phoenician. His beady eyes started from his head, but he did not
speak.

"Again," thundered the navarch, and as the cord stretched a howl of mortal
agony escaped the prisoner.

"Pity! Mercy! My head bursts. I will tell!"

"Tell quick, or we'll squeeze your brains out. Relax a little, Naon."

"In the boat mast." Hiram spit the words out one by one. "In the cabin.
There is a peg. Pull it out. The mast is hollowed. You will find the
papers. Woe! woe! cursed the day I was born. Cursed my mother for bearing
me."

The miserable creature fell to the deck, pressing his hands to his temples
and moaning in agony. No one heeded him now. Cimon himself ran below to
the mast, and wrenched the peg from its socket. Papyrus sheets were there,
rolled compactly, covered with writing and sealed. The navarch turned over
the packet curiously, then to the amazement of the sailors seemed to
stagger against the mast. He was as pale as Hiram. He thrust the packet
into the hands of his _proreus_, who stood near.

"What make you of this seal? As you fear Athena, tell the truth."

"You need not adjure me so, captain. The device is simple: Theseus slaying
the Minotaur."

"And who, in Zeus's name, do you know in Athens who uses a seal like
that?"

Silence for a moment, then the _proreus_ himself was pale.

"Your Excellency does not mean--"

"Democrates!" cried the trembling navarch.

"And why not Democrates?" The words came from the released prisoner, who
had been so silent, but who had glided down and stood at Cimon's elbow. He
spoke in a changed voice now; again the navarch was startled.

"Is Themistocles on the _Nausicaae_?" asked the stranger, whilst Cimon
gazed on him spellbound, asking if he himself were growing mad.

"Yes--but your voice, your face, your manner--my head is dizzy."

The stranger touched him gently on the hand.

"Have I so changed, you quite forget me, Cimon?"

The son of Miltiades was a strong man. He had looked on Hiram's tortures
with a laugh. To his own death he would have gone with no eyelash
trembling. But now the rest saw him blench; then with a cry, at once of
wonder and inexpressible joy, his arms closed round the tattered outlaw's
neck. Treason or no treason--what matter! He forgot all save that before
him was his long-time comrade.

"My friend! My boyhood's friend!" and so for many times they kissed.

The _Nausicaae_ had followed the chase at easy distance, ready with aid in
case the _Bozra_ resisted. Themistocles was in his cabin with Simonides,
when Cimon and Glaucon came to him. The admiral heard his young navarch's
report, then took the unopened packet and requested Cimon and the poet to
withdraw. As their feet sounded on the ladder in the companionway,
Themistocles turned on the outlaw, it seemed, fiercely.

"Tell your story."

Glaucon told it: the encounter on the hillside at Troezene, the seizure in
Phormio's house, the coming of Democrates and his boasts over the
captives, the voyage and the pursuing. The son of Neocles never hastened
the recital, though once or twice he widened it by an incisive question.
At the end he demanded:--

"And does Phormio confirm all this?"

"All. Question him."

"Humph! He's a truthful man in everything save the price of fish. Now let
us open the packet."

Themistocles was exceeding deliberate. He drew his dagger and pried the
wrapper open without breaking the seals or tearing the papyrus. He turned
the strips of paper carefully one by one, opened a casket, and drew thence
a written sheet which he compared painfully with those before him.

"The same hand," his remark in undertone.

He was so calm that a stranger would have thought him engaged with routine
business. Many of the sheets he simply lifted, glanced at, laid down
again. They did not seem to interest. So through half the roll, but the
outlaw, watching patiently, at last saw he eyebrows of the son of Neocles
pressing ever closer,--sign that the inscrutable brain was at its fateful
work.

At last he uttered one word, "Cipher."

A sheet lay before him covered with broken words and phrases--seemingly
without meaning--but the admiral knew the secret of the Spartan _scytale_,
the "cipher wood." Forth from his casket came a number of rounded sticks
of varying lengths. On one after another he wound the sheet spirally until
at the fifth trial the scattered words came together. He read with ease.
Then Themistocles's brows grew closer than before. He muttered softly in
his beard. But still he said nothing aloud. He read the cipher sheet
through once, twice; it seemed thrice. Other sheets he fingered
delicately, as though he feared the touch of venom. All without haste, but
at the end, when Themistocles arose from his seat, the outlaw trembled.
Many things he had seen, but never a face so changed. The admiral was
neither flushed nor pale. But ten years seemed added to those lines above
his eyes. His cheeks were hollowed. Was it fancy that put the gray into
his beard and hair? Slowly he rose; slowly he ordered the marine on guard
outside the cabin to summon Simonides, Cimon, and all the officers of the
flag-ship. They trooped hither and filled the narrow cabin--fifteen or more
hale, handsome Athenians, intent on the orders of the admiral. Were they
to dash at once for Samos and surprise the Persian? Or what other
adventure waited? The breeze had died. The gray breast of the AEgean rocked
the _Nausicaae_ softly. The thranites of the upper oar bank were alone on
the benches, and stroking the great trireme along to a singsong chant
about Amphitrite and the Tritons. On the poop above two sailors were
grumbling lest the penteconter's people get all the booty of the _Bozra_.
Glaucon heard their grunts and complainings whilst he looked on
Themistocles's awful face.

The officers ranged themselves and saluted stiffly. Themistocles stood
before them, his hands closed over the packet. The first time he started
to speak his lips closed desperately. The silence grew awkward. Then the
admiral gave his head a toss, and drew his form together as a runner
before a race.

"Democrates is a traitor. Unless Athena shows us mercy, Hellas is lost."

"Democrates is a traitor!"

The cry from the startled men rang through the ship. The rowers ceased
their chant and their stroking. Themistocles beckoned angrily for silence.

"I did not call you down to wail and groan." He never raised his voice;
his calmness made him terrible. But now the questions broke loose as a
flood.

"When? How? Declare."

"Peace, men of Athens; you conquered the Persian at Salamis, conquer now
yourselves. Harken to this cipher. Then to our task and prove our comrades
did not die in vain."

Yet despite him men wept on one another's shoulders as became true
Hellenes, whilst Themistocles, whose inexorable face never relaxed,
rewound the papyrus on the cipher stick and read in hard voice the words
of doom.

"This is the letter secreted on the Carthaginian. The hand is
Democrates's, the seals are his. Give ear.

"Democrates the Athenian to Tigranes, commander of the hosts of Xerxes on
the coasts of Asia, greeting:--Understand, dear Persian, that Lycon and I
as well as the other friends of the king among the Hellenes are prepared
to bring all things to pass in a way right pleasing to your master. Even
now I depart from Troezene to join the army of the allied Hellenes in
Boeotia, and, the gods helping, we cannot fail. Lycon and I will contrive
to separate the Athenians and Spartans from their other allies, to force
them to give battle, and at the crisis cause the divisions under our
personal commands to retire, breaking the phalanx and making Mardonius's
victory certain.

"For your part, excellent Tigranes, you must avoid the Hellenic ships at
Delos and come back to Mardonius with your fleet ready to second him at
once after his victory, which will be speedy; then with your aid he can
readily turn the wall at the Isthmus. I send also letters written, as it
were, in the hand of Themistocles. See that they fall into the hands of
the other Greek admirals. They will breed more hurt amongst the Hellenes
than you can accomplish with all your ships. I send, likewise, lists of
such Athenians and Spartans as are friendly to his Majesty, also memoranda
of such secret plans of the Greeks as have come to my knowledge.

"From Troezene, given into the hands of Hiram on the second of
Metageitnion, in the archonship of Xanthippus. _Chaire!_"

Themistocles ceased. No man spoke a word. It was as if a god had flung a
bolt from heaven. What use to cry against it? Then, in an ominously low
voice, Simonides asked a question.

"What are these letters which purport to come from your pen,
Themistocles?"

The admiral unrolled another papyrus, and as he looked thereon his fine
face contracted with loathing.

"Let another read. I am made to pour contempt and ridicule upon my
fellow-captains. I am made to boast 'when the war ends, I will be tyrant
of Athens.' A thousand follies and wickednesses are put in my mouth. Were
this letter true, I were the vilest wretch escaping Orcus. Since forged--"
his hands clinched--"by that man, that man whom I have trusted, loved,
cherished, called 'younger brother,' 'oldest son'--" He spat in rising fury
and was still.

" 'Fain would I grip his liver in my teeth,' " cried the little poet, even
in storm and stress not forgetting his Homer. And the howl from the
man-of-war's men was as the howl of beasts desiring their prey. But the
admiral's burst of anger ended. He stood again an image of calm power. The
voice that had charmed the thousands rang forth in its strength and
sweetness.

"Men of Athens, this is no hour for windy rage. Else I should rage the
most, for who is more wronged than I? One whom we loved is fallen--later
let us weep for him. One whom we trusted is false--later punish him. But
now the work is neither to weep nor to punish, but to save Hellas. A great
battle impends in Boeotia. Except the Zeus of our sires and Athena of the
Pure Eyes be with us, we are men without home, without fatherland.
Pausanias and Aristeides must be warned. The _Nausicaae_ is the
'Salaminia,'--the swiftest trireme in the fleet. Ours must be the deed, and
ours the glory. Enough of this--the men must hear, and then to the oars."

Themistocles had changed from despair to a triumph note. There was uplift
even to look upon him. He strode before all his lieutenants up and out
upon the poop. The long tiers of benches and the gangways filled with
rowers peered up at him. They had seen their officers gather in the cabin,
and Dame Rumour, subtlest of Zeus's messengers, had breathed
"ill-tidings." Now the admiral stood forth, and in few words told all the
heavy tale. Again a great shout, whilst the bronzed men groaned on the
benches.

"Democrates is a traitor!"

A deity had fallen from their Olympus; the darling of the Athenians's
democracy was sunk to vilest of the vile. But the admiral knew how to play
on their two hundred hearts better than Orpheus upon his lyre. Again the
note changed from despair to incitement, and when at last he called, "And
can we cross the AEgean as never trireme crossed and pluck back Hellas from
her fate?" thalamite, zygite, and thranite rose, tossing their brawny arms
into the air.

"_We can!_"

Then Themistocles folded his own arms and smiled. He felt the god was
still with him.

                              * * * * * * *

Yet, eager as was the will, they could not race forth instantly. Orders
must be written to Xanthippus, the Athenian vice-admiral far away, bidding
him at all hazards to keep the Persian fleet near Samos. Cimon was long in
privy council with Themistocles in the state cabin. At the same time a
prisoner was passed aboard the _Nausicaae_, not gently bound,--Hiram, a
precious witness, before the dogs had their final meal on him. But the
rest of the _Bozra's_ people found a quicker release. The penteconter's
people decided their fate with a yell.

"Sell such harpies for slaves? The money would stink through our pouches!"

So two by two, tied neck to neck and heel to heel, the wretches were flung
overboard, "because we lack place and wood to crucify you," called the
_Nausicaae's_ governor, as he pushed the last pair off into the leaden
sea,--for the day was distant when the destruction of such Barbarian rogues
would weigh even on tender consciences.

So the Carthaginians ceased from troubling, but before the penteconter and
the _Bozra_ bore away to join the remaining fleet, another deed was done
in sight of all three ships. For whilst Themistocles was with Cimon,
Simonides and Sicinnus had taken Glaucon to the _Nausicaae's_ forecastle.
Now as the penteconter was casting off, again he came to view, and the
shout that greeted him was not of fear this time, but wonder and delight.
The Alcmaeonid was clean-shaven, his hair clipped close, the black dye even
in a manner washed away. He had flung off the rough seaman's dress, and
stood forth in all his godlike beauty.

Before all men Cimon, coming from the cabin, ran and kissed him once more,
whilst the rowers clapped their hands.

"Apollo--it is Delian Apollo! Glaucon the Beautiful lives again. _Io! Io!
paean!_"

"Yes," spoke Themistocles, in a burst of gladness. "The gods take one
friend, they restore another. OEdipus has read the sphinx's riddle. Honour
this man, for he is worthy of honour through Hellas!"

The officers ran to the athlete, after them the sailors. They covered his
face and hands with kisses. He seemed escaped the Carthaginian to perish
in the embrace of his countrymen. Never was his blush more boyish, more
divine. Then a bugle-blast sent every man to his station. Cimon leaped
across to his smaller ship. The rowers of the _Nausicaae_ ran out their
oars, the hundred and seventy blades trailed in the water. Every man took
a long breath and fixed his eyes on the admiral standing on the poop. He
held a golden goblet set with turquoise, and filled with the blood-red
Pramnian wine. Loudly Themistocles prayed.

"Zeus of Olympus and Dodona, Zeus Orchios, rewarder of the oath-breaker,
to whom the Hellenes do not vainly pray, and thou Athena of the Pure Eyes,
give ear. Make our ship swift, our arms strong, our hearts bold. Hold back
the battle that we come not too late. Grant that we confound the guilty,
put to flight the Barbarian, recompense the traitor. So to you and all
other holy gods whose love is for the righteous we will proffer prayer and
sacrifice forever. Amen."

He poured out the crimson liquor; far into the sea he flung the golden
cup.

"Heaven speed you!" shouted from the penteconter. Themistocles nodded. The
_keleustes_ smote his gavel upon the sounding-board. The triple oar bank
rose as one and plunged into the foam. A long "h-a!" went up from the
benches. The race to save Hellas was begun.




                              CHAPTER XXXVII


                         THE RACE TO SAVE HELLAS


The chase had cost the Athenians dear. Before the _Bozra_ had submitted to
her fate, she had led the _Nausicaae_ and her consort well down into the
southern AEgean. A little more and they would have lifted the shaggy
headlands of Crete. The route before the great trireme was a long one. Two
thousand stadia,(13) as the crow flies, sundered them from the Euripus,
the nearest point whence they could despatch a runner to Pausanias and
Aristeides; and what with the twistings around the scattered Cyclades the
route was one-fourth longer. But men had ceased reckoning distance. Their
hearts were in the flying oars, and at first the _Nausicaae_ ran leaping
across the waves as leaps the dolphin,--the long gleaming blades springing
like shuttles in the hands of the ready crew. They had taken from the
penteconter all her spare rowers, and to make the great ship bound over
the steel-gray deep was children's play. "We must save Hellas, and we
can!" That was the thought of all from Themistocles to the meanest
thranite.

So at the beginning when the task seemed light and hands were strong. The
breeze that had betrayed the _Bozra_ ever sank lower. Presently it died
altogether. The sails they set hung limp on the mast. The navarch had them
furled. The sea spread out before them, a glassy, leaden-coloured floor;
the waves roaring in their wake faded in a wide ripple far behind. To
hearten his men the _keleustes_ ceased his beating on the sounding-board,
and clapped lips to his pipe. The whole trireme chorussed the familiar
song together:--

  "Fast and more fast
  O'er the foam-spray we're passed.
  And our creaking sails swell
  To the swift-breathing blast,
  For Poseidon's wild steeds
  With their manifold feet,
  Like a hundred white nymphs
  On the blue sea-floor fleet.
  And we wake as we go
  Gray old Phorcys below,
  Whilst on shell-clustered trumpets
    The loud Tritons blow!
    The loud Tritons blow!

  "All of AEolus's train
  Springing o'er the blue main
  To our paeans reply
  With their long, long refrain;
  And the sea-folk upleap
  From their dark weedy caves;
  With a clear, briny laugh
  They dance over the waves;
  Now their mistress below,--
  See bright Thetis go,
  As she leads the mad revels,
    While loud Tritons blow!
    While loud Tritons blow!

  "With the foam gliding white,
  Where the light flash is bright.
  We feel the live keel
  Leaping on with delight;
  And in melody wild
  Men and Nereids and wind
  Sing and laugh all their praise,
  To the bluff seagods kind;
  Whilst deep down below,
  Where no storm blasts may go,
  On their care-charming trumpets
    The loud Tritons blow,
    The loud Tritons blow."

Bravely thus for a while, but at last Themistocles, watching from the poop
with eyes that nothing evaded, saw how here and there the dip of the
blades was weakening, here and there a breast was heaving rapidly, a mouth
was panting for air.

"The relief," he ordered. And the spare rowers ran gladly to the places of
those who seemed the weariest. Only a partial respite. Fifty
supernumeraries were a poor stop-gap for the one hundred and seventy. Only
the weakest could be relieved, and even those wept and pled to continue at
the benches a little longer. The thunderous threat of Ameinias, that he
who refused a proffered relief must stand all day by the mast with an iron
anchor on his shoulder, alone sufficed to make the malcontents give place.
Yet after a little while the singing died. Breath was too precious to
waste. It was mockery to troll of "AEolus's winds" whilst the sea was one
motionless mirror of gray. The monotonous "beat," "beat" of the
_keleustes's_ hammer, and the creaking of the oars in their leathered
holes alone broke the stillness that reigned through the length of the
trireme. The penteconter and her prize had long since faded below the
horizon. With almost wistful eyes men watched the islets as they glided
past one after another, Thera now, then Ios, and presently the greater
Paros and Naxos lay before them. They relieved oars whenever possible. The
supernumeraries needed no urging after their scanty rest to spring to the
place of him who was fainting, but hardly any man spoke a word.

The first time the relief went in Glaucon had stepped forward.

"I am strong. I am able to pull an oar," he had cried almost angrily when
Themistocles laid his hand upon him, but the admiral would have none of
it.

"You shall not. Sooner will I go on to the bench myself. You have been
through the gates of Tartarus these last days, and need all your strength.
Are you not the Isthmionices,--the swiftest runner in Hellas?"

Then Glaucon had stepped back and said no more. He knew now for what
Themistocles reserved him,--that after the _Nausicaae_ made land he must
run, as never man ran before across wide Boeotia to bear the tidings to
Pausanias.

They were betwixt Paros and Naxos at last. Wine and barley cakes soaked in
oil were passed among the men at the oars. They ate without leaving the
benches. And still the sea spread out glassy, motionless, and the pennon
hung limp on the mainmast. The _keleustes_ slowed his beatings, but the
men did not obey him. No whipped cattle were they, such as rowed the
triremes of Phoenicia, but freemen born, sons of Athens, who called it joy
to die for her in time of need. Therefore despite the _keleustes's_ beats,
despite Themistocles's command, the rowing might not slacken. And the
black wave around the _Nausicaae's_ bow sang its monotonous music.

But Themistocles ever turned his face eastward, until men thought he was
awaiting some foe in chase, and presently--just as a rower among the
zygites fell back with the blood gushing from mouth and nostrils--the
admiral pointed his finger toward the sky-line of the morning.

"Look! Athena is with us!"

And for the first time in hours those panting, straining men let the hot
oar butts slip from their hands, even trail in the darkling water, whilst
they rose, looked, and blessed their gods.

It was coming, the strong kind Eurus out of the south and east. They could
see the black ripple springing over the glassy sea; they could hear the
singing of the cordage; they could catch the sweet sniff of the brine.
Admiral and rower lifted their hands together at this manifest favour of
heaven.

"Poseidon is with us! Athena is with us! AEolus is with us! We can save
Hellas!"

Soon the sun burst forth above the mist. All the wide ocean floor was
adance with sparkling wavelets. No need of Ameinias's lusty call to bend
again the sails. The smaller canvas on the foremast and great spread on
the mainmast were bellying to the piping gale. A fair wind, but no storm.
The oars were but helpers now,--men laughed, hugged one another as boys,
wept as girls, and let the benignant wind gods labour for them. Delos the
Holy they passed, and Tenos, and soon the heights of Andros lifted, as the
ship with its lading of fate flew over the island-strewn sea. At last,
just as the day was leaving them, they saw Helios going down into the
fire-tinged waves in a parting burst of glory. Darkness next, but the
kindly wind failed not. Through the night no man on that trireme
slumbered. Breeze or calm, he who had an obol's weight of power spent it
at the oars.

Long after midnight Themistocles and Glaucon clambered the giddy cordage
to the ship's top above the swelling mainsail. On the narrow platform,
with the stars above, the dim tracery of the wide sail, the still dimmer
tracery of the long ship below, they seemed transported to another world.
Far beneath by the glimmer of the lanterns they saw the rowers swaying at
their toil. In the wake the phosphorous bubbles ran away, opalescent
gleams springing upward, as if torches of Doris and her dancing Nereids.
So much had admiral and outlaw lived through this day they had thought
little of themselves. Now calmer thought returned. Glaucon could tell of
many things he had heard and thought, of the conversation overheard the
morning before Salamis, of what Phormio had related during the weary
captivity in the hold of the _Bozra_. Themistocles pondered long. Yet for
Glaucon when standing even on that calm pinnacle the trireme must creep
over the deep too slowly.

"O give me wings, Father Zeus," was his prayer; "yes, the wings of Icarus.
Let me fly but once to confound the traitor and deliver thy Hellas,--after
that, like Icarus let me fall. I am content to die."

But Themistocles pressed close against his side. "Ask for no wings,"--in
the admiral's voice was a tremor not there when he sped confidence through
the crew,--"if it be destined we save Hellas, it is destined; if we are to
die, we die. 'No man of woman born, coward or brave, can shun the fate
assigned.' Hector said that to Andromache, and the Trojan was right. But
we shall save Hellas. Zeus and Athena are great gods. They did not give us
glory at Salamis to make that glory tenfold vain. We shall save Hellas.
Yet I have fear--"

"Of what, then?"

"Fear that Themistocles will be too merciful to be just. Ah! pity me."

"I understand--Democrates."

"I pray he may escape to the Persians, or that Ares may slay him in fair
battle. If not--"

"What will you do?"

The admiral's hold upon the younger Athenian's arm tightened.

"I will prove that Aristeides is not the only man in Hellas who deserves
the name of 'Just.' When I was young, my tutor would predict great things
of me. 'You will be nothing small, Themistocles, but great, whether for
good or ill, I know not,--but great you will be.' And I have always
struggled upward. I have always prospered. I am the first man in Hellas. I
have set my will against all the power of Persia. Zeus willing, I shall
conquer. But the Olympians demand their price. For saving Hellas I must
pay--Democrates. I loved him."

The two men stood in silence long, whilst below the oars and the rushing
water played their music. At last the admiral relaxed his hand on Glaucon.

"_Eu!_ They will call me 'Saviour of Hellas' if all goes well. I shall be
greater than Solon, or Lycurgus, or Periander, and in return I must do
justice to a friend. Fair recompense!"

The laugh of the son of Neocles was harsher than a cry. The other answered
nothing. Themistocles set his foot on the ladder.

"I must return to the men. I would go to an oar, only they will not let
me."

The admiral left Glaucon for a moment alone. All around him was the
night,--the stars, the black aether, the blacker sea,--but he was not lonely.
He felt as when in the foot-race he turned for the last burst toward the
goal. One more struggle, one supreme summons of strength and will, and
after that the triumph and the rest.--Hellas, Athens, Hermione, he was
speeding back to all. Once again all the things past floated out of the
dream-world and before him,--the wreck, the lotus-eating at Sardis,
Thermopylae, Salamis, the agony on the _Bozra_. Now came the end, the end
promised in the moment of vision whilst he pulled the boat at Salamis.
What was it? He tried not to ask. Enough it was to be the end. He, like
Themistocles, had supreme confidence that the treason would be thwarted.
The gods were cruel, but not so cruel that after so many deliverances they
would crush him at the last. "The miracles of Zeus are never wrought in
vain." Had not Zeus wrought miracles for him once and twice? The proverb
was great comfort.

Suddenly whilst he built his palace of phantasy, a cry from the foreship
dissolved it.

"Attica, Attica, hail, all hail!"

He saw upon the sky-line the dim tracery of the Athenian headlands "like a
shield laid on the misty deep." Again men were springing from the oars,
laughing, weeping, embracing, whilst under the clear, unflagging wind the
_Nausicaae_ sped up the narrowing strait betwixt Euboea and the mainland.
Dawn glowed at last, unveiling the brown Attic shoreline with Pentelicus
the marble-fretted and all his darker peers.

Hour by hour they ran onward. They skirted the long low coast of Euboea to
the starboard. They saw Marathon and its plain of fair memories stretching
to port, and now the strait grew closer yet, and it needed all the
governor's skill at the steering-oars to keep the _Nausicaae_ from the
threatening rocks. Marathon was behind at last. The trireme rounded the
last promontory; the bay grew wider; the prow was set more to westward.
Every man--the faintest--struggled back to his oar if he had left it--this
was the last hundred stadia to Oropus, and after that the _Nausicaae_ might
do no more. Once again the _keleustes_ piped, and his note was swift and
feverish. The blades shot faster, faster, as the trireme raced down the
sandy shore of the Attic "Diacria." Once in the strait they saw a
brown-sailed fisherboat, and the helm swerved enough to bring her within
hail. The fishermen stared at the flying trireme and her straining,
wide-eyed men.

"Has there been a battle?" cried Ameinias.

"Not yet. We are from Styra on Euboea; we expect the news daily. The armies
are almost together."

"And where are they?"

"Near to Plataea."

That was all. The war-ship left the fishermen rocking in her wake, but
again Themistocles drew his eyebrows close together, while Glaucon
tightened the buckle on his belt. Plataea,--the name meant that the courier
must traverse the breadth of Boeotia, and with the armies face to face how
long would Zeus hold back the battle? How long indeed, with Democrates and
Lycon intent on bringing battle to pass? The ship was more than ever
silent as she rushed on the last stretch of her course. More men fell at
the oars with blood upon their faces. The supernumeraries tossed them
aside like logs of wood, and leaped upon their benches. Themistocles had
vanished with Simonides in the cabin; all knew their work,--preparing
letters to Aristeides and Pausanias to warn of the bitter truth. Then the
haven at last: the white-stuccoed houses of Oropus clustering down upon
the shore, the little mole, a few doltish peasants by the landing gaping
at the great trireme. No others greeted them, for the terror of
Mardonius's Tartar raiders had driven all but the poorest to some safe
shelter. The oars slipped from numb fingers; the anchor plunged into the
green water; the mainsail rattled down the mast. Men sat on the benches
motionless, gulping down the clear air. They had done their part. The rest
lay in the hands of the gods, and in the speed of him who two days since
they had called "Glaucon the Traitor." The messenger came from the cabin,
half stripped, on his head a felt skullcap, on his feet high hunter's
boots laced up to the knees. He had never shone in more noble beauty. The
crew watched Themistocles place a papyrus roll in Glaucon's belt, and
press his mouth to the messenger's ear in parting admonition. Glaucon gave
his right hand to Themistocles, his left to Simonides. Fifty men were
ready to man the pinnace to take him ashore. On the beach the _Nausicaae's_
people saw him stand an instant, as he turned his face upward to the
"dawn-facing" gods of Hellas, praying for strength and swiftness.

"Apollo speed you!" called two hundred after him. He answered from the
beach with a wave of his beautiful arms. A moment later he was hid behind
a clump of olives. The _Nausicaae's_ people knew the ordeal before him, but
many a man said Glaucon had the easier task. He could run till life failed
him. They now could only fold their hands and wait.

                              * * * * * * *

It was long past noon when Glaucon left the desolate village of Oropus
behind him. The day was hot, but after the manner of Greece not sultry,
and the brisk breeze was stirring on the hill slopes. Over the distant
mountains hung a tint of deep violet. It was early in Boedromion.(14) The
fields--where indeed the Barbarian cavalry men had not deliberately burned
them--were seared brown by the long dry summer. Here and there great black
crows were picking, and a red fox would whisk out of a thicket and go with
long bounds across the unharvested fields to some safer refuge. Glaucon
knew his route. Three hundred and sixty stadia lay before him, and those
not over the well-beaten course in the gymnasium, but by rocky goat trails
and by-paths that made his task no easier. He started off slowly. He was
too good an athlete to waste his speed by one fierce burst at the outset.
At first his road was no bad one, for he skirted the willow-hung Asopus,
the boundary stream betwixt Attica and Boeotia. But he feared to keep too
long upon this highway to Tanagra, and of the dangers of the road he soon
met grim warnings.

First, it was a farmstead in black ruin, with the carcass of a horse half
burned lying before the gate. Next, it was the body of a woman, three days
slain, and in the centre of the road,--no pleasant sight, for the crows had
been at their banquet,--and hardened though the Alcmaeonid was to war, he
stopped long enough to cast the ceremonial handful of dust on the poor
remains, as symbolic burial, and sped a wish to King Pluto to give peace
to the wanderer's spirit. Next, people met him: an old man, his wife, his
young son,--wretched shepherd-folk dressed in sheepskins,--the boy helping
his elders as they tottered along on their staves toward the mountain. At
sight of Glaucon they feebly made to fly, but he held out his hand,
showing he was unarmed, and they halted also.

"Whence and whither, good father?"

Whereat the old man began to shake all over and tell a mumbling story, how
they had been set upon by the Scythian troopers in their little farm near
OEnophytae, how he had seen the farmhouse burn, his two daughters swung
shrieking upon the steeds of the wild Barbarians, and as for himself and
his wife and son, Athena knew what saved them! They had lost all but life,
and fearful for that were seeking a cave on Mt. Parnes. Would not the
young man come with them, a thousand dangers lurked upon the way? But
Glaucon did not wait to hear the story out. On he sped up the rocky road.

"Ah, Mardonius! ah, Artazostra!" he was speaking in his heart, "noble and
brave you are to your peers, but this is your rare handiwork,--and though
you once called me friend, Zeus and Dike still rule, there is a price for
this and you shall tell it out."

Yet he bethought himself of the old man's warning, and left the beaten
way. At the long steady trot learned in the stadium, he went onward under
the greenwood behind the gleaming river, where the vines and branches
whipped on his face; and now and again he crossed a half-dried brook,
where he swept up a little water in his hands, and said a quick prayer to
the friendly nymphs of the stream. Once or twice he sped through fig
orchards, and snatched at the ripe fruit as he ran, eating without
slackening his course. Presently the river began to bend away to westward.
He knew if he followed it, he came soon to Tanagra, but whether that town
were held by the Persians or burned by them, who could tell? He quitted
the Asopus and its friendly foliage. The bare wide plain of Boeotia was
opening. Concealment was impossible, unless indeed he turned far eastward
toward Attica and took refuge on the foothills of the mountains. But speed
was more precious than safety. He passed Scolus, and found the village
desolate, burned. No human being greeted him, only one or two starving
dogs rushed forth to snap, bristle, and be chased away by a well-sent
stone. Here and yonder in the fields were still the clusters of crows
picking at carrion,--more tokens that Mardonius's Tartar raiders had done
their work too well. Then at last, an hour or more before the sunset, just
as the spurs of Cithaeron, the long mountain over against Attica, began to
thrust their bald summits up before the runner's ken, far ahead upon the
way approached a cloud of dust. The Athenian paused in his run, dashed
into the barren field, and flung himself flat between the furrows. He
heard the hoof-beats of the wiry steppe horses, the clatter of targets and
scabbards, the shrill shouts of the raiders. He lifted his head enough to
see the red streamers on their lance tips flutter past. He let the noise
die away before he dared to take the road once more. The time he lost was
redeemed by a burst of speed. His head was growing very hot, but it was
not time to think of that.

Already the hills were spreading their shadows, and Plataea was many stadia
away. Knowledge of how much remained made him reckless. He ran on without
his former caution. The plain was again changing to undulating foothills.
He had passed Erythrae now,--another village burned and deserted. He mounted
a slope, was descending to mount another, when lo! over the hill before
came eight riders at full speed. What must be done, must be done quickly.
To plunge into the fallow field again were madness, the horsemen had
surely seen him, and their sure-footed beasts could run over the furrows
like rabbits. Glaucon stood stock still and stretched forth both hands, to
show the horsemen he did not resist them.

"O Athena Polias," uprose the prayer from his heart, "if thou lovest not
me, forget not thy love for Hellas, for Athens, for Hermione my wife."

The riders were on him instantly, their crooked swords flew out. They
surrounded their captive, uttering outlandish cries and chatterings,
ogling, muttering, pointing with their swords and lances as if debating
among themselves whether to let the stranger go or hew him in pieces.
Glaucon stood motionless, looking from one to another and asking for
wisdom in his soul. Seven were Tartars, low-browed, yellow-skinned, flat
of nose, with the grins of apes. He might expect the worst from these. But
the eighth showed a long blond beard under his leather helm, and Glaucon
rejoiced; the chief of the band was a Persian and more amenable.

The Tartars continued gesturing and debating, flourishing their steel
points right at the prisoner's breast. He regarded them calmly, so calmly
that the Persian gave vent to his admiration.

"Down with your lance-head, Rukhs. By Mithra, I think this Hellene is
brave as he is beautiful! See how he stands. We must have him to the
Prince."

"Excellency," spoke Glaucon, in his best court Persian, "I am a courier to
the Lord Mardonius. If you are faithful servants of his Eternity the king,
where is your camp?"

The chief started.

"On the life of my father, you speak Persian as if you dwelled in Eran at
the king's own doors! What do you here alone upon this road in Hellas?"

Glaucon put out his hand before answering, caught the tip of Rukhs's
lance, and snapped it short like a reed. He knew the way to win the
admiration of the Barbarians. They yelled with delight, all at least save
Rukhs.

"Strong as he is brave and handsome," cried the Persian. "Again--who are
you?"

The Alcmaeonid drew himself to full height and gave his head its lordliest
poise.

"Understand, Persian, that I have indeed lived long at the king's gates.
Yes,--I have learned my Aryan at the Lord Mardonius's own table, for I am
the son of Attaginus of Thebes, who is not the least of the friends of his
Eternity in Hellas."

The mention of one of the foremost Medizers of Greece made the subaltern
bend in his saddle. His tone became even obsequious.

"Ah, I understand. Your Excellency is a courier. You have despatches from
the king?"

"Despatches of moment just landed from Asia. Now tell me where the army is
encamped."

"By the Asopus, much to northward. The Hellenes lie to south. Here, Rukhs,
take the noble courier behind you on the horse, and conduct him to the
general."

"Heaven bless your generosity," cried the runner, with almost precipitate
haste, "but I know the country well, and the worthy Rukhs will not thank
me if I deprive him of his share in your booty."

"Ah, yes, we have heard of a farm across the hills at Eleutherae that's not
yet been plundered,--handsome wenches, and we'll make the father dig up his
pot of money. Mazda speed you, sir, for we are off."

"Yeh! yeh!" yelled the seven Tartars, none more loudly than Rukhs, who had
no hankering for conducting a courier back into the camp. So the riders
came and went, whilst Glaucon drew his girdle one notch tighter and ran
onward through the gathering evening.

The adventure had been a warning. Once Athena had saved him, not perchance
twice,--again he took to the fields. He did not love the sight of the sun
ever lower, on the long brown ridge of Helicon far to west. Until now he
scarce thought enough of self to realize the terrible draughts he had made
upon his treasure-house of strength. Could it be that he--the Isthmionices,
who had crushed down the giant of Sparta before the cheering myriads--could
faint like a weary girl, when the weal of Hellas was his to win or lose?
Why did his tongue burn in his throat as a coal? Why did those feet--so
swift, so ready when he sped from Oropus--lift so heavily?

As a flash it came over him what he had endured,--the slow agony on the
_Bozra_, the bursting of the bands, the fight for life, the scene with
Themistocles, the sleepless night on the trireme. Now he was running as
the wild hare runs before the baying chase. Could it be that all this race
was vain?

"For Hellas! For Hermione!"

Whilst he groaned through his gritted teeth, some malignant god made him
misstep, stumble. He fell between the hard furrows, bruising his face and
hands. After a moment he rose, but rose to sink back again with keen pain
shooting through an ankle. He had turned it. For an instant he sat
motionless, taking breath, then his teeth came together harder.

"Themistocles trusts me. I carry the fate of Hellas. I can die, but I
cannot fail."

It was quite dusk now. The brief southern twilight was ending in pale bars
of gold above Helicon. Glaucon rose again; the cold sweat sprang out upon
his forehead. Before his eyes rose darkness, but he did not faint. Some
kind destiny set a stout pole upright in the field,--perhaps for vines to
clamber,--he clutched it, and stood until his sight cleared and the pain a
little abated. He tore the pole from the ground, and reached the roadway.
He must take his chance of meeting more raiders. He had one vast
comfort,--if there had been no battle fought that day, there would be none
before dawn. But he had still weary stadia before him, and running was out
of the question. Ever and anon he would stop his hobbling, take air, and
stare at the vague tracery of the hills,--Cithaeron to southward, Helicon to
west, and northward the wide dark Theban plain. He gave up counting how
many times he halted, how many times he spoke the magic words, "For
Hellas! For Hermione!" and forced onward his way. The moon failed, even
the stars were clouded. A kind of brute instinct guided him. At last--he
guessed it was nearly midnight--he caught once more the flashings of a
shallow river and the dim outlines of shrubbery beside the bank--again the
Asopus. He must take care or he would wander straight into Mardonius's
camp. Therefore he stopped awhile, drank the cool water, and let the
stream purl around his burning foot. Then he set his face to the south,
for there lay Plataea. There he would find the Hellenes.

He was almost unconscious of everything save the fierce pain and the need
to go forward even to the end. At moments he thought he saw the mountains
springing out of their gloom,--Helicon and Cithaeron beckoning him on, as
with living fingers.

"Not too late. Marathon was not vain, nor Thermopylae, nor Salamis. You can
save Hellas."

Who spoke that? He stared into the solitary night. Was he not alone? Then
phantasms came as on a flood. He was in a kind of euthanasy. The pain of
his foot had ceased. He saw the Paradise by Sardis and its bending
feathery palms; he heard the tinkling of the Lydian harps, and Roxana
singing of the magic Oxus, and the rose valleys of Eran. Next Roxana
became Hermione. He was standing at her side on the knoll of Colonus, and
watching the sun sink behind Daphni making the Acropolis glow with red
fire and gold. Yet all the time he knew he was going onward. He must not
stop.

"For Hellas! For Hermione!"

At last even the vision of the Violet-Crowned City faded to mist. Had he
reached the end,--the rest by the fields of Rhadamanthus, away from human
strife? The night was ever darkening. He saw nothing, felt nothing,
thought nothing save that he was still going onward, onward.

                              * * * * * * *

At some time betwixt midnight and dawning an Athenian outpost was pacing
his beat outside the lines of Aristeides. The allied Hellenes were
retiring from their position by the Asopus to a more convenient spot by
Plataea, less exposed to the dreaded Persian cavalry, but on the night
march the contingents had become disordered. The Athenians were halting
under arms,--awaiting orders from Pausanias the commander-in-chief. The
outpost--Hippon, a worthy charcoal-burner of Archarnae--was creeping gingerly
behind the willow hedges, having a well-grounded fear of Tartar arrows.
Presently his fox-keen ears caught footfalls from the road. His shield
went up. He couched his spear. His eyes, sharpened by the long darkness,
saw a man hardly running, nor walking, yet dragging one foot and leaning
on a staff. Here was no Tartar, and Hippon sprang out boldly.

"Halt, stranger, tell your business."

"For Aristeides." The apparition seemed holding out something in his hand.

"That's not the watchword. Give it, or I must arrest you."

"For Aristeides."

"Zeus smite you, fellow, can't you speak Greek? What have you got for our
general?"

"For Aristeides."

The stranger was hoarse as a crow. He was pushing aside the spear and
forcing a packet into Hippon's hands. The latter, sorely puzzled, whistled
through his fingers. A moment more the locharch of the scouting division
and three comrades appeared.

"Why the alarm? Where's the enemy?"

"No enemy, but a madman. Find what he wants."

The locharch in earlier days had kept an oil booth in the Athens Agora and
knew the local celebrities as well as Phormio.

"Now, friend," he spoke, "your business, and shortly; we've no time for
chaffering."

"For Aristeides."

"The fourth time he's said it,--sheep!" cried Hippon, but as he spoke the
newcomer fell forward heavily, groaned once, and lay on the roadway silent
as the dead. The locharch drew forth the horn lantern he had masked under
his chalmys and leaned over the stranger. The light fell on the seal of
the packet gripped in the rigid fingers.

"Themistocles's seal," he cried, and hastily turned the fallen man's face
upward to the light, when the lantern almost dropped from his own hand.

"Glaucon the Alcmaeonid! Glaucon the Traitor who was dead! He or his shade
come back from Tartarus."

The four soldiers stood quaking like aspen, but their leader was of
stouter stuff. Never had his native Attic shrewdness guided him to more
purpose.

"Ghost, traitor, what not, this man has run himself all but to death. Look
on his face. And Themistocles does not send a courier for nothing. This
packet is for Aristeides, and to Aristeides take it with speed."

Hippon seized the papyrus. He thought it would fade out of his hands like
a spectre. It did not. The sentinel dropped his spear and ran breathless
toward Plataea, where he knew was his general.




                             CHAPTER XXXVIII


                         THE COUNCIL OF MARDONIUS


Never since Salamis had Persian hopes been higher than that night. What if
the Spartans were in the field at last, and the incessant skirmishing had
been partly to Pausanias's advantage? Secure in his fortified camp by the
Asopus, Mardonius could confidently wait the turn of the tide. His light
Tartar cavalry had cut to pieces the convoys bringing provisions to the
Hellenes. Rumour told that Pausanias's army was ill fed, and his captains
were at loggerheads. Time was fighting for Mardonius. A joyful letter he
had sent to Sardis the preceding morning: "Let the king have patience. In
forty days I shall be banqueting even in Sparta."

In the evening the Prince sat at council with his commanders. Xerxes had
left behind his own war pavilion, and here the Persians met. Mardonius sat
on the high seat of the dais. Gold, purple, a hundred torches, made the
scene worthy of the monarch himself. Beside the general stood a young
page,--beautiful as Armaiti, fairest of the archangels. All looked on the
page, but discreetly kept their thoughts to whispers, though many had
guessed the secret of Mardonius's companion.

The debate was long and vehement. Especially Artabazus, general of the
rear-guard, was loud in asserting no battle should be risked. He was a
crafty man, who, the Prince suspected, was his personal enemy, but his
opinion was worth respecting.

"I repeat what I said before. The Hellenes showed how they could fight at
Thermopylae. Let us retire to Thebes."

"Bravely said, valiant general," sneered Mardonius, none too civilly.

"It is mine to speak, yours to follow my opinion as you list. I say we can
conquer these Hellenes with folded hands. Retreat to Thebes; money is
plentiful with us; we can melt our gold cups into coin. Sprinkle bribes
among the hostile chiefs. We know their weakness. Not steel but gold will
unlock the way to Sparta."

The generalissimo stood up proudly.

"Bribes and stealth? Did Cyrus and Darius win us empire with these? No, by
the Fiend-Smiter, it was sharp steel and the song of the bow-string that
made Eran to prosper, and prosper to this day. But lest Artabazus think
that in putting on the lion I have forgotten the fox, let the strangers
now come to us stand forth, that he and every other may know how I have
done all things for the glory of my master and the Persian name."

He smote with his commander's mace upon the bronze ewer on the table.
Instantly there appeared two soldiers, between them two men, one of
slight, one of gigantic, stature, but both in Grecian dress. Artabazus
sprang to his feet.

"Who are these men--Thebans?"

"From greater cities than Thebes. You see two new servants of the king,
therefore friends of us all. Behold Lycon of Sparta and Democrates, friend
of Themistocles."

His speech was Persian, but the newcomers both understood when he named
them. The tall Laconian straightened his bull neck, as in defiance. The
Athenian flushed. His head seemed sinking betwixt his shoulders. Much
wormwood had he drunk of late, but none bitterer than this,--to be welcomed
at the councils of the Barbarian. Artabazus salaamed to his superior half
mockingly.

"Verily, son of Gobryas, I was wrong. You are guileful as a Greek. There
can be no higher praise."

The Prince's nostrils twitched. Perhaps he was not saying all he felt.

"Let your praise await the issue," he rejoined coldly. "Suffice it that
these friends were long convinced of the wisdom of aiding his Eternity,
and to-night come from the camp of the Hellenes to tell all that has
passed and why we should make ready for battle at the dawning." He turned
to the Greeks, ordering in their own tongue, "Speak forth, I am
interpreter for the council."

An awkward instant followed. Lycon looked on Democrates.

"You are an Athenian, your tongue is readiest," he whispered.

"And you the first to Medize. Finish your handiwork," the retort.

"We are waiting," prompted Mardonius, and Lycon held up his great head and
began in short sentences which the general deftly turned into Persian.

"Your cavalry has made our position by the Asopus intolerable. All the
springs are exposed. We have to fight every time we try to draw water.
To-day was a meeting of the commanders, many opinions, much wrangling, but
all said we must retire. The town of Plataea is best. It is strong, with
plenty of water. You cannot attack it. To-night our camp has been struck.
The troops begin to retire, but in disorder. The contingent of each city
marches by itself. The Athenians, thanks to Democrates, delay retreating;
the Spartans I have delayed also. I have persuaded Amompharetus, my
cousin, who leads the Pitanate _mora_,(15) and who was not at the council,
that it is cowardly for a Spartan to retreat. He is a sheep-skulled fool
and has believed me. Consequently, he and his men are holding back. The
other Spartans wait for them. At dawn you will find the Athenians and
Spartans alone near their old camping ground, their allies straggling in
the rear. Attack boldly. When the onset joins, Democrates and I will order
our own divisions to retire. The phalanxes will be broken up. With your
cavalry you will have them at mercy, for once the spear-hedge is
shattered, they are lost. The battle will not cost you twenty men."

Artabazus rose again and showed his teeth.

"A faithful servant of the king, Mardonius,--and so well is all provided,
do we brave Aryans need even to string our bows?"

The Prince winced at the sarcasm.

"I am serving the king, not my own pleasure," he retorted stiffly. "The
son of Gobryas is too well known to have slurs cast on his courage. And
now what questions would my captains ask these Greeks? Promptly--they must
be again in their own lines, or they are missed."

An officer here or there threw an interrogation. Lycon answered briefly.
Democrates kept sullen silence. He was clearly present more to prove the
good faith of his Medizing than for anything he might say. Mardonius smote
the ewer again. The soldiers escorted the two Hellenes forth. As the
curtains closed behind them, the curious saw that the features of the
beautiful page by the general's side were contracted with disgust.
Mardonius himself spat violently.

"Dogs, and sons of dogs, let Angra-Mainyu wither them forever. Bear
witness, men of Persia, how, for the sake of our Lord the King, I hold
converse even with these vilest of the vile!"

Soon the council was broken up. The final commands were given. Every
officer knew his task. The cavalry was to be ready to charge across the
Asopus at gray dawn. With Lycon and Democrates playing their part the
issue was certain, too certain for many a grizzled captain who loved the
ring of steel. In his own tent Mardonius held in his arms the beautiful
page--Artazostra! Her wonderful face had never shone up at his more
brightly than on that night, as he drew back his lips from a long fond
kiss.

"To-morrow--the triumph. You will be conqueror of Hellas. Xerxes will make
you satrap. I wish we could conquer in fairer fight, but what wrong to
vanquish these Hellenes with their own sly weapons? Do you remember what
Glaucon said?"

"What thing?"

"That Zeus and Athena were greater than Mazda the Pure and glorious
Mithra? To-morrow will prove him wrong. I wonder whether he yet
lives,--whether he will ever confess that Persia is irresistible."

"I do not know. From the evening we parted at Phaleron he has faded from
our world."

"He was fair as the Amesha-Spentas, was he not? Poor Roxana--she is again
in Sardis now. I hope she has ceased to eat her heart out with vain
longing for her lover. He was noble minded and spoke the truth. How rare
in a Hellene. But what will you do with these two gold-bought traitors,
'friends of the king' indeed?"

Mardonius's face grew stern.

"I have promised them the lordships of Athens and of Sparta. The pledge
shall be fulfilled, but after that,"--Artazostra understood his sinister
smile,--"there are many ways of removing an unwelcome vassal prince, if I
be the satrap of Hellas."

"And you are that in the morning."

"For your sake," was his cry, as again he kissed her, "I would I were not
satrap of Hellas only, but lord of all the world, that I might give it to
you, O daughter of Darius and Atossa."

"I am mistress of the world," she answered, "for my world is Mardonius.
To-morrow the battle, the glory, and then what next--Sicily, Carthage,
Italy? For Mazda will give us all things."

                              * * * * * * *

Otherwise talked Democrates and Lycon as they quitted the Persian pickets
and made their way across the black plain, back to the lines of the
Hellenes.

"You should be happy to-night," said the Athenian.

"Assuredly. I draw up my net and find it very full of mullets quite to my
liking."

"Take care it be not so full that it break."

"Dear Democrates,"--Lycon slapped his paw on the other's shoulder,--"why
always imagine evil? Hermes is a very safe guide. I only hope our victory
will be so complete Sparta will submit without fighting. It will be
awkward to rule a plundered city."

"I shudder at the thought of being amongst even conquered Athenians; I
shall see a tyrannicide in every boy in the Agora."

"A stout Persian garrison in your Acropolis is the surest physic against
that."

"By the dog, Lycon, you speak like a Scythian. Hellene you surely are
not."

"Hellene I am, and show my native wisdom in seeing that Persia must
conquer and trimming sail accordingly."

"Persia is not irresistible. With a fair battle--"

"It will not be a fair battle. What can save Pausanias? Nothing--except a
miracle sent from Zeus."

"Such as what?"

"As merciful Hiram's relenting and releasing your dear Glaucon." Lycon's
chuckle was loud.

"Never, as you hope me to be anything save your mortal enemy, mention that
name again."

"As you like it--it's no very pretty tale, I grant, even amongst Medizers.
Yet it was most imprudent to let him live."

"You have never heard the Furies, Lycon." Democrates's voice was so grave
as to dry up the Spartan's banter. "But I shall never see him again, and I
shall possess Hermione."

"A pretty consolation. _Eu!_ here are our outposts. We must pass for
officers reconnoitring the enemy. You know your part to-morrow. At the
first charge bid your division 'wheel to rear.' Three words, and the thing
is done."

Lycon gave the watchword promptly to one of Pausanias's outposts. The man
saluted his officers, and said that the Greeks of the lesser states had
retreated far to the rear, that Amompharetus still refused to move his
division, that the Spartans waited for him, and the Athenians for the
Spartans.

"Noble tidings," whispered the giant, as the two stood an instant, before
each went to his own men. "Behold how Hermes helps us--a great deity."

"Sometimes I think Nemesis is greater," said Democrates, once again
refusing Lycon's proffered hand.

"By noon you'll laugh at Nemesis, _philotate_, when we both drink Helbon
wine in Xerxes's tent!" and away went Lycon into the dark.

Democrates went his own way also. Soon he was in the fallow-field, where
under the warm night the Athenians were stretched, each man in armour, his
helmet for a pillow. A few torches were moving. From a distance came the
hum from a group of officers in excited conversation. As the orator picked
his way among the sleeping men, a locharch with a lantern accosted him
suddenly.

"You are Democrates the strategus?"

"Certainly."

"Aristeides summons you at once. Come."

There was no reason for refusing. Democrates followed.




                              CHAPTER XXXIX


                         THE AVENGING OF LEONIDAS


Morning at last, ruddy and windy. The Persian host had been long prepared.
The Tartar cavalry with their bulls-hide targets and long lances, the
heavy Persian cuirassiers, the Median and Assyrian archers with their
ponderous wicker-shields, stood in rank waiting only the word that should
dash them as sling-stones on Pausanias and his ill-starred following. The
Magi had sacrificed a stallion, and reported that the holy fire gave every
favouring sign. Mardonius went from his tent, all his eunuchs bowing their
foreheads to the earth and chorussing, "Victory to our Lord, to Persia,
and to the King."

They brought Mardonius his favourite horse, a white steed of the sacred
breed of Nisaea. The Prince had bound around his turban the gemmed tiara
Xerxes had given him on his wedding-day. Few could wield the Babylonish
cimeter that danced in the chieftain's hand. The captains cheered him
loudly, as they might have cheered the king.

"Life to the general! To the satrap of Hellas!"

But beside the Nisaean pranced another, lighter and with a lighter mount.
The rider was cased in silvered scale-armour, and bore only a steel-tipped
reed.

"The general's page," ran the whisper, and other whispers, far softer,
followed. None heard the quick words passed back and forth betwixt the two
riders.

"You may be riding to death, Artazostra. What place is a battle for
women?"

"What place is the camp for the daughter of Darius, when her husband rides
to war? We triumph together; we perish together. It shall be as Mazda
decrees."

Mardonius answered nothing. Long since he had learned the folly of setting
his will against that of the masterful princess at his side. And was not
victory certain? Was not Artazostra doing even as Semiramis of Nineveh had
done of old?

"The army is ready, Excellency," declared an adjutant, bowing in his
saddle.

"Forward, then, but slowly, to await the reconnoitring parties sent toward
the Greeks."

In the gray morning the host wound out of the stockaded camp. The women
and grooms called fair wishes after them. The far slopes of Cithaeron were
reddening. A breeze whistled down the hills. It would disperse the mist.
Soon the leader of the scouts came galloping, leaped down and salaamed to
the general. "Let my Lord's liver find peace. All is even as our friends
declared. The enemy have in part fled far away. The Athenians halt on a
foot-hill of the mountain. The Laconians sit in companies on the ground,
waiting their division that will not retreat. Let my Lord charge, and
glory waits for Eran!"

Mardonius's cimeter swung high.

"Forward, all! Mazda fights for us. Bid our allies the Thebans(16) attack
the Athenians. Ours is the nobler prey--even the men of Sparta."

"Victory to the king!" thundered the thousands. Confident of triumph,
Mardonius suffered the ranks to be broken, as his myriads rushed onward.
Over the Asopus and its shallow fords they swept, and raced across the
plain-land. Horse mingled with foot; Persians with Tartars. The howlings
in a score of tongues, the bray of cymbals and kettledrums, the clamour of
spear-butts beaten on armour--who may tell it? Having unleashed his wild
beasts, Mardonius dashed before to guide their ragings as he might. The
white Nisaean and its companion led the way across the hard plain. Behind,
as when in the springtime flood the watery wall goes crashing down the
valley, so spread the thousands. A god looking from heaven would not have
forgotten that sight of whirling plumes, plunging steeds, flying steel, in
all the aeons.

Five stadia, six, seven, eight,--so Mardonius led. Already before him he
could see the glistering crests and long files of the Spartans--the prey he
would crush with one stroke as a vulture swoops over the sparrow. Then
nigh involuntarily his hand drew rein. What came to greet him? A man on
foot--no horseman even. A man of huge stature running at headlong speed.

The risen sun was now dazzling. The general clapped his hand above his
eyes. Then a tug on the bridle sent the Nisaean on his haunches.

"Lycon, as Mazda made me!"

The Spartan was beside them soon, he had run so swiftly. He was so dazed
he barely heeded Mardonius's call to halt and tell his tale. He was almost
naked. His face was black with fear, never more brutish or loathsome.

"All is betrayed. Democrates is seized. Pausanias and Aristeides are
warned. They will give you fair battle. I barely escaped."

"Who betrayed you?" cried the Prince.

"Glaucon the Alcmaeonid, he is risen from the dead. _Ai!_ woe! no fault of
mine."

Never before had the son of Gobryas smiled so fiercely as when the giant
cowered beneath his darting eyes. The general's sword whistled down on the
skull of the traitor. The Laconian sprawled in the dust without a groan.
Mardonius laughed horribly.

"A fair price then for unlucky villany. Blessed be Mithra, who suffers me
to give recompense. Wish me joy,"--as his captains came galloping around
him,--"our duty to the king is finished. We shall win Hellas in fair
battle."

"Then it were well, Excellency," thrust in Artabazus, "since the plot is
foiled, to retire to the camp."

Mardonius's eyes flashed lightnings.

"Woman's counsel that! Are we not here to conquer Hellas? Yes, by Mithra
the Glorious, we will fight, though every _daeva_ in hell joins against us.
Re-form the ranks. Halt the charge. Let the bowmen crush the Spartans with
their arrows. Then we will see if these Greeks are stouter than
Babylonian, Lydian, and Egyptian who played their game with Persia to sore
cost. And you, Artabazus, to your rear-guard, and do your duty well."

The general bowed stiffly. He knew the son of Gobryas, and that
disobedience would have brought Mardonius's cimeter upon his own helmet.
By a great effort the charge was stayed,--barely in time,--for to have flung
that disorganized horde on the waiting Spartan spears would have been
worse than madness. A single stadium sundered the two hosts when Mardonius
brought his men to a stand, set his strong divisions of bowmen in array
behind their wall of shields, and drew up his cavalry on the flanks of the
bowmen. Battle he would give, but it must be cautious battle now, and he
did not love the silence which reigned among the motionless lines of the
Spartans.

It was bright day at last. The two armies--the whole strength of the
Barbarian, the Spartans with only their Tegean allies--stood facing, as
athletes measuring strength before the grapple. The Spartan line was
thinner than Mardonius's: no cavalry, few bowmen, but shield was set
beside shield, and everywhere tossed the black and scarlet plumes of the
helmets. Men who remembered Thermopylae gripped their spear-stocks tighter.
No long postponing now. On this narrow field, this bit of pebble and
greensward, the gods would cast the last dice for the destiny of Hellas.
All knew that.

The stolidity of the Spartans was maddening. They stood like bronze
statues. In clear view at the front was a tall man in scarlet chlamys, and
two more in white,--Pausanias and his seers examining the entrails of
doves, seeking a fair omen for the battle. Mardonius drew the turban lower
over his eyes.

"An end to this truce. Begin your arrows."

A cloud of bolts answered him. The Persian archers emptied their quivers.
They could see men falling among the foe, but still Pausanias stood beside
the seers, still he gave no signal to advance. The omens doubtless were
unfavourable. His men never shifted a foot as the storm of death flew over
them. Their rigidity was more terrifying than any battle-shout. What were
these men whose iron discipline bound so fast that they could be pelted to
death, and no eyelash seem to quiver? The archers renewed their volley.
They shot against a rock. The Barbarians joined in one rending yell,--their
answer was silence.

Deliberately, arrows dropping around him as tree-blossoms in the gale,
Pausanias raised his hand. The omens were good. The gods permitted battle.
Deliberately, while men fell dying, he walked to his post on the right
wing. Deliberately, while heaven seemed shaking with the Barbarians'
clamour, his hand went up again. Through a lull in the tumult pealed a
trumpet. _Then the Spartans marched._

Slowly their lines of bristling spear-points and nodding crests moved on
like the sea-waves. Shrill above the booming Tartar drums, the blaring
Persian war-horns pierced the screams of their pipers. And the Barbarians
heard that which had never met their ears before,--the chanting of their
foes as the long line crept nearer.

"Ah!--la--la--la--la! Ah!--la--la--la--la!" deep, prolonged, bellowed in chorus
from every bronze visor which peered above the serried shields.

"Faster," stormed the Persian captains to their slingers and bowmen, "beat
these madmen down." The rain of arrows and sling-stones was like hail,
like hail it rattled from the shields and helms. Here, there, a form sank,
the inexorable phalanx closed and swept onward.

"Ah!--la--la--la! Ah!--la--la--la!"

The chant never ceased. The pipers screamed more shrilly. Eight deep,
unhasting, unresting, Pausanias was bringing his heavy infantry across the
two hundred paces betwixt himself and Mardonius. His Spartan spearmen
might be unlearned, doltish, but they knew how to do one deed and that
surpassingly well,--to march in line though lightnings dashed from heaven,
and to thrust home with their lances. And not a pitiful three hundred, but
ten thousand bold and strong stood against the Barbarian that morning.
Mardonius was facing the finest infantry in the world, and the avenging of
Leonidas was nigh.

"Ah!--la--la--la! Ah!--la--la--la!"

Flesh and blood in the Persian host could not wait the death grip longer.
"Let us charge, or let us flee," many a stout officer cried to his chief,
and he sitting stern-eyed on the white horse gave to a Tartar troop its
word, "Go!"

Then like a mountain stream the wild Tartars charged. The clods flew high
under the hoofs. The yell of the riders, the shock of spears on shields,
the cry of dying men and dying beasts, the stamping, the dust-cloud, took
but a moment. The chant of the Spartans ceased--an instant. An instant the
long phalanx halted, from end to end bent and swayed. Then the dust-cloud
passed, the chanting renewed. Half of the Tartars were spurring back, with
shivered lances, bleeding steeds. The rest,--but the phalanx shook now
here, now there, as the impenetrable infantry strode over red forms that
had been men and horses. And still the Spartans marched, still the pipes
and the war-chant.

Then for the first time fear entered the heart of Mardonius, son of
Gobryas, and he called to the thousand picked horsemen, who rode beside
him,--not Tartars these, but Persians and Medes of lordly stock, men who
had gone forth conquering and to conquer.

"Now as your fathers followed Cyrus the Invincible and Darius the
Dauntless, follow you me. Since for the honour of Eran and the king I ride
this day."

"We ride. For Eran and the king!" shouted the thousand. All the host
joined. Mardonius led straight against the Spartan right wing where
Pausanias's life-guard marched.

                              * * * * * * *

Old soldiers of Lacedaemon fighting their battles in the after days, when a
warrior of Plataea was as a god to each youth in Hellas, would tell how the
Persian cavalrymen rode their phalanx down.

"And say never," they always added, "the Barbarians know not how to fight
and how to die. Fools say it, not we of Plataea. For our first line seemed
broken in a twinkling. The Pitanate _mora_ was cut to pieces; Athena
Promachus and Ares the City-Waster alone turned back that charge when
Mardonius led the way."

But turned it was. And the thousand horse, no thousand now, drifted to the
cover of their shield wall, raging, undaunted, yet beaten back.

Then at last the phalanx locked with the Persian footmen and their rampart
of wicker shields. At short spear length men grinned in each other's
faces, while their veins were turned to fire. Many a soldier--Spartan,
Aryan--had seen his twenty fights, but never a fight like this. And the
Persians--those that knew Greek--heard words flung through their foemen's
helmets that made each Hellene fight as ten.

"Remember Leonidas! Remember Thermopylae!"

Orders there were none; the trumpets were drowned in the tumult. Each man
fought as he stood, knowing only he must slay the man before him, while
slowly, as though by a cord tighter and ever tighter drawn, the Persian
shield wall was bending back before the unrelenting thrusting of the
Spartans. Then as a cord snaps so broke the barrier. One instant down and
the Hellenes were sweeping the light-armed Asiatic footmen before them, as
the scythe sweeps down the standing grain. So with the Persian infantry,
for their scanty armour and short spears were at terrible disadvantage,
but the strength of the Barbarian was not spent. Many times Mardonius led
the cavalry in headlong charge, each repulse the prelude to a fiercer
shock.

"For Mazda, for Eran, for the king!"

The call of the Prince was a call that turned his wild horsemen into
demons, but demons who strove with gods. The phalanx was shaken, halted
even, broken never; and foot by foot, fathom by fathom, it brushed the
Barbarian horde back across the blood-bathed plain,--and to Mardonius's
shout, a more terrible always answered:--

"Remember Leonidas! Remember Thermopylae!"

The Prince seemed to bear a charmed life as he fought. He was in the
thickest fray. He sent the white Nisaean against the Laconian spears and
beat down a dozen lance-points with his sword. If one man's valour could
have turned the tide, his would have wrought the miracle. And always
behind, almost in reach of the Grecian sling-stones, rode that other,--the
page in the silvered mail,--nor did any harm come to this rider. But after
the fight had raged so long that men sank unwounded,--gasping, stricken by
the heat and press,--the Prince drew back a little from the fray to a
rising in the plain, where close by a rural temple of Demeter he could
watch the drifting fight, and he saw the Aryans yielding ground finger by
finger, yet yielding, and the phalanx impregnable as ever. Then he sent an
aide with an urgent message.

"To Artabazus and the reserve. Bid him take from the camp all the guards,
every man, every eunuch that can lift a spear, and come with speed, or the
day is lost."

The adjutant's spurs grew red as he pricked away, while Mardonius wheeled
the Nisaean and plunged back into the thickest fight.

"For Mazda, for Eran, for the king!"

His battle-call pealed even above the hellish din. The Persian nobles who
had never ridden to aught save victory turned again. Their last charge was
their fiercest. They bent the phalanx back like an inverted bow. Their
footmen, reckless of self, plunged on the Greeks and snapped off the
spear-points with their naked hands. Mardonius was never prouder of his
host than in that hour. Proud--but the charge was vain. As the tide swept
back, as the files of the Spartans locked once more, he knew his men had
done their uttermost. They had fought since dawn. Their shield wall was
broken. Their quivers were empty. Was not Mazda turning against them? Had
not enough been dared for that king who lounged at ease in Sardis?

"For Mazda, for Eran, for the king!"

Mardonius's shout had no answer. Here, there, he saw horsemen and footmen,
now singly, now in small companies, drifting backward across the plain to
the last refuge of the defeated, the stockaded camp by the Asopus. The
Prince called on his cavalry, so few about him now.

"Shall we die as scared dogs? Remember the Aryan glory. Another charge!"

His bravest seemed never to hear him. The onward thrust of the phalanx
quickened. It was gaining ground swiftly at last. Then the Spartans were
dashing forward like men possessed.

"The Athenians have vanquished the Thebans. They come to join us. On, men
of Lacedaemon, ours alone must be this victory!"

The shout of Pausanias was echoed by his captains. To the left and not far
off charged a second phalanx,--five thousand nodding crests and gleaming
points,--Aristeides bringing his whole array to his allies' succour. But
his help was not needed. The sight of his coming dashed out the last
courage of the Barbarians. Before the redoubled shock of the Spartans the
Asiatics crumbled like sand. Even whilst these broke once more, the
adjutant drew rein beside Mardonius.

"Lord, Artabazus is coward or traitor. Believing the battle lost, he has
fled. There is no help to bring."

The Prince bowed his head an instant, while the flight surged round him.
The Nisaean was covered with blood, but his rider spurred him across the
path of a squadron of flying Medians.

"Turn! Are you grown women!" Mardonius smote the nearest with his sword.
"If we cannot as Aryans conquer, let us at least as Aryans die!"

"_Ai! ai!_ Mithra deserts us. Artabazus is fled. Save who can!"

They swept past him. He flung himself before a band of Tartars. He had
better pleaded with the north wind to stay its course. Horse, foot,
Babylonians, Ethiopians, Persians, Medes, were huddled in fleeing rout.
"To the camp," their cry, but Mardonius, looking on the onrushing
phalanxes knew there was no refuge there....

And now sing it, O mountains and rivers of Hellas. Sing it, Asopus, to
Spartan Eurotas, and you to hill-girt Alphaeus. And let the maidens,
white-robed and poppy-crowned, sweep in thanksgiving up to the welcoming
temples,--honouring Zeus of the Thunders, Poseidon the Earth-Shaker, Athena
the Mighty in War. The Barbarian is vanquished. The ordeal is ended.
Thermopylae was not in vain, nor Salamis. Hellas is saved, and with her
saved the world.

                              * * * * * * *

Again on the knoll by the temple, apart from the rushing fugitives,
Mardonius reined. His companion was once more beside him. He leaned that
she might hear him through the tumult.

"The battle is lost. The camp is defenceless. What shall we do?"

Artazostra flung back the gold-laced cap and let the sun play over her
face and hair.

"We are Aryans," was all her answer.

He understood, but even whilst he was reaching out to catch her bridle
that their horses might run together, he saw her lithe form bend. The
arrow from a Laconian helot had smitten through the silvered mail. He saw
the red spring out over her breast. With a quick grasp he swung her before
him on the white horse. She smiled up in his face, never lovelier.

"Glaucon was right," she said,--their lips were very close,--"Zeus and
Athena are greater than Mazda and Mithra. The future belongs to Hellas.
But we have naught for shame. We have fought as Aryans, as the children of
conquerors and kings. We shall be glad together in Garonmana the Blessed,
and what is left to dread?"

A quiver passed through her. The Spartan spear-line was close. Mardonius
looked once across the field. His men were fleeing like sheep. And so it
passed,--the dream of a satrapy of Hellas, of wider conquests, of an empire
of the world. He kissed the face of Artazostra and pressed her still form
against his breast.

"For Mazda, for Eran, for the king!" he shouted, and threw away his sword.
Then he turned the head of his wounded steed and rode on the Spartan
lances.




                                CHAPTER XL


                          THE SONG OF THE FURIES


Themistocles had started from Oropus with Simonides, a small guard of
mariners, and a fettered prisoner, as soon as the _Nausicaae's_ people were
a little rested. Half the night they themselves were plodding on wearily.
At Tanagra the following afternoon a runner with a palm branch met them.

"Mardonius is slain. Artabazus with the rear-guard has fled northward. The
Athenians aided by the Spartans stormed the camp. Glory to Athena, who
gives us victory!"

"And the traitors?" Themistocles showed surprisingly little joy.

"Lycon's body was found drifting in the Asopus. Democrates lies fettered
by Aristeides's tents."

Then the other Athenians broke forth into paeans, but Themistocles bowed
his head and was still, though the messenger told how Pausanias and his
allies had taken countless treasure, and now were making ready to attack
disloyal Thebes. So the admiral and his escort went at leisure across
Boeotia, till they reached the Hellenic host still camped near the
battle-field. There Themistocles was long in conference with Aristeides
and Pausanias. After midnight he left Aristeides's tent.

"Where is the prisoner?" he asked of the sentinel before the headquarters.

"Your Excellency means the traitor?"

"I do."

"I will guide you." The soldier took a torch and led the way. The two went
down dark avenues of tents, and halted at one where five hoplites stood
guard with their spears ready, five more slept before the entrance.

"We watch him closely, _kyrie_," explained the decarch, saluting.
"Naturally we fear suicide as well as escape. Two more are within the
tent."

"Withdraw them. Do you all stand at distance. For what happens I will be
responsible."

The two guards inside emerged yawning. Themistocles took the torch and
entered the squalid hair-cloth pavilion. The sentries noticed he had a
casket under his cloak.

"The prisoner sleeps," said a hoplite, "in spite of his fetters."

Themistocles set down the casket and carefully drew the tent-flap. With
silent tread he approached the slumberer. The face was upturned; white it
was, but it showed the same winsome features that had won the clappings a
hundred times in the Pnyx. The sleep seemed heavy, dreamless.

Themistocles's own lips tightened as he stood in contemplation, then he
bent to touch the other's shoulder.

"Democrates,"--no answer. "Democrates,"--still silence. "Democrates,"--a
stirring, a clanking of metal. The eyes opened,--for one instant a smile.

"_Ei_, Themistocles, it is you?" to be succeeded by a flash of unspeakable
horror. "O Zeus, the gyves! That I should come to this!"

The prisoner rose to a sitting posture upon his truss of straw. His
fettered hands seized his head.

"Peace," ordered the admiral, gently. "Do not rave. I have sent the
sentries away. No one will hear us."

Democrates grew calmer. "You are merciful. You do not know how I was
tempted. You will save me."

"I will do all I can." Themistocles's voice was solemn as an aeolian harp,
but the prisoner caught at everything eagerly.

"Ah, you can do so much. Pausanias fought the battle, but they call you
the true saviour of Hellas. They will do anything you say."

"I am glad." Themistocles's face was impenetrable as the sphinx's.
Democrates seized the admiral's red chlamys with his fettered hands.

"You will save me! I will fly to Sicily, Carthage, the Tin Isles, as you
wish. Have you forgotten our old-time friendship?"

"I loved you," spoke the admiral, tremulously.

"Ah, recall that love to-night!"

"I do."

"O piteous Zeus, why then is your face so awful? If you will aid me to
escape--"

"I will aid you."

"Blessings, blessings, but quick! I fear to be stoned to death by the
soldiers in the morning. They threaten to crucify--"

"They shall not."

"Blessings, blessings,--can I escape to-night?"

"Yes," but Themistocles's tone made the prisoner's blood run chill. He
cowered helplessly. The admiral stood, his own fine face covered with a
mingling of pity, contempt, pain.

"Democrates, hearken,"--his voice was hard as flint. "We have seized your
camp chest, found the key to your ciphers, and know all your
correspondence with Lycon. We have discovered your fearful power of
forgery. Hermes the Trickster gave it you for your own destruction. We
have brought Hiram hither from the ship. This night he has ridden the
'Little Horse.'(17) He has howled out everything. We have seized Bias and
heard his story. There is nothing to conceal. From the beginning of your
peculation of the public money, till the moment when, the prisoners say,
you were in Mardonius's camp, all is known to us. You need not confess.
There is nothing worth confessing."

"I am glad,"--great beads were on the prisoner's brow,--"but you do not
realize the temptation. Have you never yourself been betwixt Scylla and
Charybdis? Have I not vowed every false step should be the last? I fought
against Lycon. I fought against Mardonius. They were too strong. Athena
knoweth I did not crave the tyranny of Athens! It was not that which drove
me to betray Hellas."

"I believe you. But why did you not trust me at the first?"

"I hardly understand."

"When first your need of money drove you to crime, why did you not come to
me? You knew I loved you. You knew I looked on you as my political son and
heir in the great work of making Athens the light of Hellas. I would have
given you the gold,--yes, fifty talents."

"_Ai, ai_, if I had only dared! I thought of it. I was afraid."

"Right." Themistocles's lip was curling. "You are more coward than knave
or traitor. Phobos, Black Fear, has been your leading god, not Hermes. And
now--"

"But you have promised I shall escape."

"You shall."

"To-night? What is that you have?" Themistocles was opening the casket.

"The papers seized in your chest. They implicate many noble Hellenes in
Corinth, Sicyon, Sparta. Behold--" Themistocles held one papyrus after
another in the torch-flame,--"here is crumbling to ashes the evidence that
would destroy them all as Medizers. Mardonius is dead. Let the war die
with him. Hellas is safe."

"Blessings, blessings! Help me to escape. You have a sword. Pry off these
gyves. How easy for you to let me fly!"

"Wait!" The admiral's peremptory voice silenced the prisoner. Themistocles
finished his task. Suddenly, however, Democrates howled with animal fear.

"What are you taking now--a goblet?"

"Wait." Themistocles was indeed holding a silver cup and flask. "Have I
not said you should escape this captivity--to-night?"

"Be quick, then, the night wanes fast."

The admiral strode over beside the creature who plucked at his hem.

"Give ear again, Democrates. Your crimes against Athens and Hellas were
wrought under sore temptation. The money you stole from the public chest,
if not returned already, I will myself make good. So much is forgiven."

"You are a true friend, Themistocles." The prisoner's voice was husky, but
the admiral's eyes flashed like flint-stones struck by the steel.

"Friend!" he echoed. "Yes, by Zeus Orcios, guardian of oaths and
friendship, you had a friend. Where is he now?"

Democrates lay on the turf floor of the tent, not even groaning.

"You had a friend,"--the admiral's intensity was awful. "You blasted his
good name, you sought his life, you sought his wife, you broke every bond,
human or divine, to destroy him. At last, to silence conscience' sting,
you thought you did a deed of mercy in sending him in captivity to a death
in life. Fool! Nemesis is not mocked. Glaucon has lain at death's door. He
has saved Hellas, but at a price. The surgeons say he will live, but that
his foot is crippled. Glaucon can never run again. You have brought him
misery. You have brought anguish to Hermione, the noblest woman in Hellas,
whom you--ah! mockery--professed to hold in love! You have done worse than
murder. Yet I have promised you shall escape this night. Rise up."

Democrates staggered to his feet clumsily, only half knowing what he did.
Themistocles was extending the silver cup. "Escape. Drink!"

"What is this cup?" The prisoner had turned gray.

"Hemlock, coward! Did you not bid Glaucon to take his life that night in
Colonus? The death you proffered him in his innocency I proffer you now in
your guilt. Drink!"

"You have called me friend. You have said you loved me. I dare not die. A
little time! Pity! Mercy! What god can I invoke?"

"None. Cerberus himself would not hearken to such as you. Drink."

"Pity, by our old-time friendship!"

The admiral's tall form straightened.

"Themistocles the Friend is dead; Themistocles the Just is here,--drink."

"But you promised escape?" The prisoner's whisper was just audible.

"Ay, truly, from the court-martial before the roaring camp in the morning,
the unmasking of all your accomplices, the deeper shame of every one-time
friend, the blazoning of your infamy in public evidence through Hellas,
the soldiers howling for your blood, the stoning, perchance the plucking
in pieces. By the gods Olympian, by the gods Infernal, do your past lovers
one last service--drink!"

That was not all Themistocles said, that was all Democrates heard. In his
ears sounded, even once again, the song of the Furies,--never so clearly as
now.

    "With scourge and with ban
    We prostrate the man
    Who with smooth-woven wile
    And a fair-faced smile
  Hath planted a snare for his friend!
    Though fleet, we shall find him,
    Though strong, we shall bind him,
  Who planted a snare for his friend!"

Nemesis--Nemesis, the implacable goddess, had come for her own at last.

Democrates took the cup.




                               CHAPTER XLI


                         THE BRIGHTNESS OF HELIOS


The day that disloyal Thebes surrendered came the tidings of the crowning
of the Hellenes' victories. At Mycale by Samos the Greek fleets had
disembarked their crews and defeated the Persians almost at the doors of
the Great King in Sardis. Artabazus had escaped through Thrace to Asia in
caitiff flight. The war--at least the perilous part thereof--was at end.
There might be more battles with the Barbarian, but no second Salamis or
Plataea.

The Spartans had found the body of Mardonius pierced with five lances--all
in front. Pausanias had honoured the brave dead,--the Persian had been
carried from the battle-ground on a shield, and covered by the red cloak
of a Laconian general. But the body mysteriously disappeared. Its fate was
never known. Perhaps the curious would have gladly heard what Glaucon on
his sick-bed told Themistocles, and what Sicinnus did afterward. Certain
it is that the shrewd Asiatic later displayed a costly ring which the
satrap Zariaspes, Mardonius's cousin, sent him "for a great service to the
house of Gobryas."

                              * * * * * * *

On the same day that Thebes capitulated the household of Hermippus left
Troezene to return to Athens. When they had told Hermione all that had
befallen,--the great good, the little ill,--she had not fainted, though
Cleopis had been sure thereof. The colour had risen to her cheeks, the
love-light to her eyes. She went to the cradle where Phoenix cooed and
tossed his baby feet.

"Little one, little one," she said, while he beamed up at her, "you have
not to avenge your father now. You have a better, greater task, to be as
fair in body and still more in mind as he."

Then came the rush of tears, the sobbing, the laughter, and Lysistra and
Cleopis, who feared the shock of too much joy, were glad.

The _Nausicaae_ bore them to Peiraeus. The harbour towns were in black
ruins, for Mardonius had wasted everything before retiring to Boeotia for
his last battle. In Athens, as they entered it, the houses were roofless,
the streets scattered with rubbish. But Hermione did not think of these
things. The Agora at last,--the porticos were only shattered, fire-scarred
pillars,--and everywhere were tents and booths and bustle,--the brisk
Athenians wasting no time in lamentation, but busy rebuilding and making
good the loss. Above Hermione's head rose a few blackened columns,--all
that was left of the holy house of Athena,--but the crystalline air and the
red Rock of the Acropolis no Persian had been able to take away.

And even as Hermione crossed the Agora she heard a shouting, a word
running from lip to lip as a wave leaps over the sea.

In the centre of the buzzing mart she stopped. All the blood sprang to her
face, then left it. She passed her fingers over her hair, and waited with
twitching, upturned face. Through the hucksters' booths, amid the
clamouring buyers and sellers, went a runner, striking left and right with
his staff, for the people were packing close, and he had much ado to clear
the way. Horsemen next, prancing chargers, the prizes from the Barbarian,
and after them a litter. Noble youths bore it, sons of the Eupatrid houses
of Athens. At sight of the litter the buzz of the Agora became a roar.

"The beautiful! The fortunate! The deliverer! _Io! Io, paean!_"

Hermione stood; only her eyes followed the litter. Its curtains were flung
back; she saw some one within, lying on purple cushions. She saw the
features, beautiful as Pentelic marble and as pale. She cared not for the
people. She cared not that Phoenix, frighted by the shouting, had begun to
wail. The statue in the litter moved, rose on one elbow.

"Ah, dearest and best,"--his voice had the old-time ring, his head the
old-time poise,--"you need not fear to call me husband now!"

"Glaucon," she cried. "I am not fit to be your wife. I am not fit to kiss
your feet."

                              * * * * * * *

They set the litter down. Even little Simonides, though a king among the
curious, found the Acropolis peculiarly worthy of his study. Enough that
Hermione's hands were pressing her husband, and these two cared not
whether a thousand watched or only Helios on high. Penelope was greeting
the returning Odysseus:--

  "Welcome even as to shipmen
  On the swelling, raging sea;
  When Poseidon flings the whirlwind,
  When a thousand blasts roam free,
  Then at last the land appeareth;--
  E'en so welcome in her sight
  Was her lord, her arms long clasped him,
  And her eyes shone pure and bright."

After a long time Glaucon commanded, "Bring me our child," and Cleopis
gladly obeyed. Phoenix ceased weeping and thrust his red fists in his
father's face.

"_Ei_, pretty snail," said Glaucon, pressing him fast by one hand, whilst
he held his mother by the other, "if I say you are a merry wight, the
nurse will not marvel any more."

But Hermione had already heard from Niobe of the adventure in the
market-place at Troezene.

The young men were just taking up the litter, when the Agora again broke
into cheers. Themistocles, saviour of Hellas, had crossed to Glaucon. The
admiral--never more worshipped than now, when every plan he wove seemed
perfect as a god's--took Glaucon and Hermione, one by each hand.

"Ah, _philotatoi_," he said, "to all of us is given by the sisters above
so much bliss and so much sorrow. Some drink the bitter first, some the
sweet. And you have drained the bitter to the lees. Therefore look up at
the Sun-King boldly. He will not darken for you again."

"Where now?" asked Hermione, in all things looking to her husband.

"To the Acropolis," ordered Glaucon. "If the temple is desolate, the Rock
is still holy. Let us give thanks to Athena."

He even would have left the litter, had not Themistocles firmly forbidden.
In time the Alcmaeonid's strength would return, though never the speed that
had left the stadia behind whilst he raced to save Hellas.

They mounted the Rock. From above, in the old-time brightness, the noonday
light, the sunlight of Athens, sprang down to them. Hermione, looking on
Glaucon's face, saw him gaze eagerly upon her, his child, the sacred Rock,
and the glory from Helios. Then his face wore a strange smile she could
not understand. She did not know that he was saying in his heart:--

"And I thought for the rose vales of Bactria to forfeit--this!"

They were on the summit. The litter was set down on the projecting spur by
the southwest corner. The area of the Acropolis was desolation, ashes,
drums of overturned pillars, a few lone and scarred columns. The works of
man were in ruin, but the works of the god, of yesterday, to-day, and
forever were yet the same. They turned their backs on the ruin. Westward
they looked--across land and sea, beautiful always, most beautiful now, for
had they not been redeemed with blood and tears? The Barbarian was
vanquished; the impossible accomplished. Hellas and Athens were their own,
with none to take away.

They saw the blue bay of Phaleron. They saw the craggy height of Munychia,
Salamis with its strait of the victory, farther yet the brown dome of
Acro-Corinthus and the wide breast of the clear Saronian sea. To the left
was Hymettus the Shaggy, to right the long crest of Daphni, behind them
rose Pentelicus, home of the marble that should take the shape of the
gods. With one voice they fell to praising Athens and Hellas, wisely or
foolishly, according to their wit. Only Hermione and Glaucon kept silence,
hand within hand, and speaking fast,--not with their lips,--but with their
eyes.

Then at the end Themistocles spoke, and as always spoke the best.

"We have flung back the Barbarian. We have set our might against the
God-King and have conquered. Athens lies in ruins. We shall rebuild her.
We shall make her more truly than before the 'Beautiful,' the
'Violet-Crowned City,' worthy of the guardian Athena. The conquering of
the Persian was hard. The making of Athens immortal by the beauty of our
lives, and words, and deeds is harder. Yet in this also we shall conquer.
Yea, verily, for the day shall come that wherever the eye is charmed by
the beautiful, the heart is thrilled by the noble, or the soul yearns
after the perfect,--there in the spirit shall stand Athens."

                              * * * * * * *

After they had prayed to the goddess, they went down from the Rock and its
vision of beauty. Below a mule car met them. They set Glaucon and Hermione
with the babe therein, and these three were driven over the Sacred Way
toward the purple-bosomed hills, through the olive groves and the pine
trees, across the slope of Daphni, to rest and peace in
Eleusis-by-the-Sea.






                        STANDARD MACMILLAN FICTION


                              --------------

_By WILLIAM STEARNS DAVIS_

A Friend of Caesar

A TALE OF THE FALL OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC

"As a story ... there can be no question of its success.... While the
beautiful love of Cornelia and Drusus lies at the sound sweet heart of the
story, to say so is to give a most meagre idea of the large sustained
interest of the whole.... There are many incidents so vivid, so brilliant,
that they fix themselves in the memory."--_The Bookman._

                                                      _Cloth, 12mo, $1.50_

"God Wills It"

A TALE OF THE FIRST CRUSADE

"Not since Sir Walter Scott cast his spell over us with 'Ivanhoe,' 'Count
Robert of Paris,' and 'Quentin Durward' have we been so completely
captivated by a story as by 'God Wills It,' by William Stearns Davis. It
grips the attention of the reader in the first chapter and holds it till
the last.... It is a story of strenuous life, the spirit of which might
well be applied in some of our modern Crusades. While true to life in its
local coloring, it is sweet and pure, and leaves no after-taste of
bitterness. The author's first book, 'A Friend of Caesar,' revealed his
power, and 'God Wills It' confirms and deepens the impression
made."--_Christian Endeavor World._

                                       _With Illustrations by Louis Betts_

                                                      _Cloth, 12mo, $1.50_

Falaise of the Blessed Voice

A TALE OF THE YOUTH OF ST. LOUIS, KING OF FRANCE

The story of how his enemies plotted to separate him from his fair Queen
Margaret, and even from his throne itself; of how he grew from a pale lad
to a most manly king, and of the part played in his life by the blind
singer of Pontoise, the maid called "Falaise of the Blessed Voice."

                                                      _Cloth, 12mo, $1.50_

The Saint of the Dragon's Dale

(In the series of "LITTLE NOVELS BY FAVORITE AUTHORS")

                                  _Cloth, decorated cover, 16mo, 50 cents_




                         RECENT MACMILLAN NOVELS


                              --------------

                           _Each, cloth, $1.50_

The Long Road

By JOHN OXENHAM

"... It is a thrilling and an absorbing story. Through all the tragedy of
life ... there is a rarely sweet accompaniment of tender tones, of love
and heroism and intermittent, never quite lost hope. It is a touching and
beautiful story."--_Buffalo Evening News._

Coniston

By WINSTON CHURCHILL

"Coniston has a lighter, gayer spirit, and a deeper, tenderer touch than
Mr. Churchill has ever achieved before.... It is one of the finest and
truest transcripts of modern American life thus far achieved in our
fiction."--_Chicago Record-Herald._

                                                 Cloth, illustrated, $1.50

Lady Baltimore

By OWEN WISTER

"That the author of 'The Virginian' could deal deliciously with such a
rich field ... might be assumed. But with what charm and delicacy, fine
humor and insight, the work has been done, only a direct acquaintance with
the finished volume can justly show. The Southerner will certainly find
enchanting home touches in it, and every reader will feel the spell of the
quiet old southern town and all the tender, dainty, and humorous southern
life and atmosphere that hang about it."--_St. Louis Globe Democrat._

                                                              Cloth, $1.50

The Garden, You and I

By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

"Few books published in this country recently have been of a kind to make
an author so proud. Hers are immensely fine and sweet."--_St. Louis
Democrat._

The new book by the author of "The Garden of a Commuter's Wife" and
"People of the Whirlpool," is a story of new friends as charming in their
own way as "Barbara" herself. Their highly original vacation is described
from more than one point of view, each more deliciously funny than the
next.

                                                              Cloth, $1.50

A Lady of Rome

By F. MARION CRAWFORD

"His skill in making his portraits live before the reader's eyes is
unsurpassed; and in the production of story-value and prolonged suspense,
Mr. Crawford has no peer."--_Boston Herald._

                                                        Cloth, 12mo, $1.50

White Fang

By JACK LONDON

"Jack London is the apostle of strength and courage. In 'White Fang' he
has full play ... in his chosen field. He has done this work so well that
he makes the interest as intense as if he were telling the story of a
man."--_Globe Democrat._

                                       Illustrated in colors, cloth, $1.50

When Love Speaks

By WILL PAYNE

"One of the most interesting novels ever written on the conflict between
law and honesty on one side and the alliance of low politics and high
finance on the other. Stirring love story woven in with the fight against
an unscrupulous whiskey trust. A fine, clean American story, of interest
alike to men and women."--_Chicago Record-Herald._

                                                                     $1.50

If Youth But Knew

By AGNES and EGERTON CASTLE

"They should be the most delightful of comrades, for their writing is so
apt, so responsive, so saturated with the promptings and the glamour of
spring. It is because 'If Youth But Knew' has all these adorable qualities
that it is so fascinating."--_Cleveland Leader._

                                                              Cloth, $1.50

Disenchanted

By PIERRE LOTI

"Our romantic son of Hercules wields in defence of Liberty a slender,
aromatic sorcerer's wand. And his magic has lost nothing of its might. We
dare not begin quoting a book of which every page is a picture."--_The
London Times._

                                                        Cloth, 12mo, $1.50

The Sin of George Warrener

By Miss VAN VORST

"For acute comprehension of human nature both masculine and feminine, and
a keen apprehension of a phase of our social conditions, the book is a
piece of rare artistry."--_Phila. Evening Tel._

                                                                     $1.50

Her Majesty's Rebels

By SIDNEY R. LYSAGHT

"A story of Irish people that is neither prejudiced nor patronizing.... A
rare and charming novel ... racy and convincing."--_World._

                                                        Cloth, 12mo, $1.50

Listener's Lure

By E. V. LUCAS

"A Kensington Comedy" which proves that the delightful fellow-wanderer in
Holland and in London has a keen sense of humor and a gift for
semi-satirical portrait sketching.

                                                        Cloth, 12mo, $1.50

The Amulet

By CHARLES E. CRADDOCK

"... A little old-fashioned, perhaps, according to modern sensational
standards, but written with force and feeling, full of local color and
character, wholesome and interesting from cover to cover, and so far as
one can judge, a truthful picture of a most picturesque phase of pioneer
history that has not been exploited to the point of tiresomeness."--_The
New York Times._

                                                              Cloth, $1.50

The Romance of John Bainbridge

By HENRY GEORGE, Jr.

"Belongs to the large class of present-day novels in which a young man of
high ideals goes into politics in order to do battle with the dragons of
bribery and corruption. The particular demon in this case is a perpetual
street railway franchise. The love story betrays the apprentice hand, but
the description of the fight in the aldermanic council is a capital piece
of work."--_The Congregationalist._

                                                                     $1.50

The Way of the Gods

By JOHN LUTHER LONG

As the readers of "Madam Butterfly" know, there is no one, since the death
of Lafcadio Hearn, who can make Japanese life so charming as does Mr.
Long. This story of the little samurai, hardly big enough to be a soldier,
and of how the fair eta Hoshiko met his obligations for him, is very real
and appealing.

                                                              Cloth, $1.50

The Vine of Sibmah

By Dr. ANDREW MACPHAIL

"The book is taut with action and breathless climaxes. Its principal
character, a soldier, has for his friend a most engaging pirate. This
combination alone makes interesting reading."--_Chicago Evening Post._

                                                              Cloth, $1.50





                                FOOTNOTES


    1 A word conveying at once "welcome!" and "farewell!"

    2 The chief magistrate of an Attic commune.

    3 Attic law allowed a husband to will his wife to a friend.

    4 A kind of grasshopper peculiar to Greece.

    5 A kind of beetle common in Greece.

    6 "Give herself airs."

    7 The police magistrates of Athens.

    8 A number, of course, grossly exaggerated.

    9 A pottage peculiar to Sparta, made of lumps of meat, salt, and much
      vinegar.

   10 Equivalent to crying "Hound!" in English.

   11 The serfs of the Spartans.

   12 The Phoenician Hercules.

   13 Nearly two hundred miles.

   14 Approximately September.

   15 A division in the Spartan army.

   16 Who in full force had joined the Persians.

   17 The rack.





                            TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


The author's footnotes have been moved to the end of the volume.

Blackletter has been marked with asterisks.

The following typographical errors were corrected:

      page 6, "gridle" changed to "girdle"
      page 8, "seashore" changed to "sea-shore"
      page 23, "earthern" changed to "earthen"
      page 24, "Thacian" changed to "Thasian"
      page 29, "good humoredly" changed to "good-humouredly"
      page 31, "Mantineia" changed to "Mantinea"
      page 32, "honor" changed to "honour"
      page 63, "waterpots" changed to "water-pots"
      page 65, "humorous" changed to "humourous"
      page 90, "Nausicaea" changed to "Nausicaae"
      page 92, "pentaconters" changed to "penteconters"
      page 93, missing quote added before "We can say"
      page 95, "he" changed to "be"
      page 101, comma changed to period after "house was out"
      page 107, "fish-monger" changed to "fishmonger"
      page 117, added italics to "Ai!"
      page 133, "Baylonish" changed to "Babylonish"
      page 145, "Neverthless" changed to "Nevertheless"
      page 146, "haircloth" changed to "hair-cloth"
      page 157, "sailcloth" changed to "sail-cloth"
      page 173, semicolon added after "beautiful"
      page 176, single quote changed to double quote after "kings reign
      forever!"
      page 196, "intrust" changed to "entrust"
      page 229, "torchlight" changed to "torch-light"
      page 230, "goatskin" changed to "goat-skin"
      page 238, comma removed after "Themistocles"
      page 280, "Ameinas" changed to "Ameinias"
      page 283, "Ameinas's" changed to "Ameinias's"
      page 288, "renegadoes" changed to "renegades"
      page 301, "Phelgon's" changed to "Phlegon's"
      page 324, removed italics from "Artemisia"
      page 325, "maelstrom" changed to "maelstrom"
      page 327, "Psytalleia" changed to "Psyttaleia"
      page 368, "fagots" changed to "faggots"
      page 377, "warships" changed to "war-ships"
      page 396, "lieutenant" changed to "lieutenants"
      page 404, missing period added after "are great gods"
      page 419, "bowstring" changed to "bow-string"
      page 424, single quote removed after "Such as what?"
      page 432, "Pinatate" changed to "Pitanate"
      page 445, comma added after "Zariaspes", "Gobyras" changed to
      "Gobryas"
      page 451, "Caesar" changed to "Caesar"

Some variants in spelling, capitalization or hyphenation which cannot be
regarded as simple typographical errors have been retained.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VICTOR OF SALAMIS***



                                 CREDITS


December 22, 2008

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Mark C. Orton, Linda McKeown, Stefan Cramme, and
            the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
            <http://www.pgdp.net/c>.



                      A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 27587.txt or 27587.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/7/5/8/27587/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



                    THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


                                Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


                                   1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


                                   1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


                                   1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


                                   1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


                                   1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


                                  1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


                                  1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


                                  1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


                                  1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


                                  1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


                                  1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


                                  1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


                                  1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

      You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

      You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

      You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


                                  1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


                                   1.F.


                                  1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


                                  1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


                                  1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


                                  1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


                                  1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


                                  1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


                               Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


                                Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


                                Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


                                Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***
