The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mrs. Hungerford, by Helen C. Black

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Mrs. Hungerford
       Notable Women Authors of the Day

Author: Helen C. Black

Release Date: December 25, 2008 [EBook #27620]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. HUNGERFORD ***




Produced by Daniel Fromont









[Transcriber's note: Helen C. BLACK, article "Mrs. Hungerford"
in _Notable women authors of the day_ (1893) 1906 edition]






NOTABLE

WOMEN AUTHORS

OF THE DAY, By

HELEN C. BLACK



_WITH PORTRAITS_



LONDON: MACLAREN AND COMPANY

WAITHMAN STREET, PILGRIM STREET, E.C.

1906



CONTENTS



(...)



_MRS. HUNGERFORD_



(...)



It is well worth encountering the perils of the sea, even in the middle
of winter, and in the teeth of a north-east wind, if only to experience
the absolute comfort and ease with which, in these space-annihilating
days, the once-dreaded journey from England to the Emerald Isle can be
made. You have resolved to accept a hospitable invitation from Mrs.
Hungerford, the well-known author of _Molly Bawn_, etc., to visit her
at her lovely house, St. Brenda's, Bandon, co. Cork, where a 'hearty
Irish welcome' is promised, and though circumstances prevent your
availing yourself of the 'month's holiday' so kindly offered, and limit
an absence from home to but four days, it is delightful to find that,
travelling by the best of all possible routes--the Irish Mail--it
is to be accomplished easily and without any fatiguing haste.

Having given due notice of your intentions, you arrive at Euston just
in time for the 7.15 a.m. express, and find that by the kindness of the
station-master a compartment is reserved, and every arrangement,
including an excellent meal, is made for your comfort. The carriages
are lighted by electricity, and run so smoothly that it is possible to
get a couple of hours' good sleep, which the very early start has made
so desirable. On reaching Holyhead at 1.30 p.m. to the minute, you are
met by the courteous and attentive marine superintendant Captain Cay,
R.N., who takes you straight on board the _Ireland_, the newest
addition to the fleet of fine ships, owned by the City of Dublin Steam
Packet Company. She is a magnificent vessel, 380 feet long, 38 feet in
beam, 2,589 tons, and 6,000 horse-power; her fine, broad bridge,
handsome deck-houses, and brass work glisten in the bright sunlight.
She carries electric light; and the many airy private cabins indicate
that, though built for speed, the comfort of her passengers has been a
matter of much consideration. She is well captained, well officered,
well manned, and well navigated. The good-looking, weather-beaten
Captain Kendall is indeed the commodore of the company, and has made
the passage for nearly thirty years. There is an unusually large number
of passengers to-day, for it is the first week of the accelerated
speed, and it is amusing to notice the rapidity with which the mails
are shipped, on men's backs, which plan is found quicker than any
appliance. Captain Cay remarks that it is no uncommon thing to ship
seven hundred sacks on foreign mail days; he says, too, that never
since these vessels were started has there been a single accident to
life or limb. But the last bag is on board, steam is up, and away goes
the ship past the South Stack lighthouse, built on an island under
precipitous cliffs, from which a gun is fired when foggy, and in about
an hour the Irish coast becomes visible, Howth and Bray Head. The sea
gets pretty rough, but luckily does not interfere with your excellent
appetite for the first-class refreshments supplied. The swift-revolving
paddles churn the big waves into a thick foam as the good ship
_Ireland_ ploughs her way through at the rate of twenty knots an hour,
'making good weather of it', and actually accomplishes the voyage in
three hours and fifteen minutes--one of the shortest runs on record.
The punctuality with which these mail packets make the passage in all
weathers is indeed truly wonderful--a fact which is experienced a few
days later on the return journey. Kingstown is reached at 6.10 p.m.
(Irish time), where the mail train is waiting to convey passengers by
the new loop line that runs in a curve right through 'dear dirty
Dublin', as it is popularly called, to Kingsbridge, and so on to Cork,
where you put up for the night at the Imperial Hotel.

Another bright sunshiny morning opens, and shows old Cork at her best.
Cork! the old city of Father Prout's poem, 'The Bells of Shandon',
which begins thus: With deep affection and recollection

  I often think of Shandon bells,
  Whose sounds so wild would in days of childhood
  Fling round my cradle their magic spells,
  On this I ponder where'er I wander,
  And thus grow fonder, sweet Cork, of thee;
  With the bells of Shandon
  That sound so grand on, etc. etc.

The river Lee runs through the handsome little city, and has often been
favourably compared with the Rhine. But Bandon must be reached, which
is easily managed in an hour by rail, and there you are met by your
host with a neat dog-cart, and good grey mare; being in light marching
order, your kit is quickly stowed away by a smart-looking groom, and
soon you find yourself tearing along at a spanking pace through the
'most Protestant' town of Bandon, where Mr. Hungerford pulls up for a
moment to point out the spot where once the old gates stood, whereon
was written the legend, 'Let no Papist enter here'. Years after, a
priest in the dead of night added to it. He wrote:

Whoever wrote this, wrote it _well_

The same is written on the gates of _Hell_.

Then up the hill past Ballymoden Church, in through the gates of Castle
Bernard, past Lord Bandon's beautiful old castle covered with exquisite
ivy, out through a second gate, over the railway, a drive of twenty
minutes in all, and so up to the gates of St. Brenda's. A private road
of about half a mile long, hedged on either side by privet and hawthorn
and golden furze, leads to the avenue proper, the entrance gate which
is flanked by two handsome deodars. It takes a few minutes more to
arrive at a large, square, ivy-clad house, and ere there is time to
take in an idea of its gardens and surroundings, the great hall door is
flung open, a little form trips down the stone steps, and almost before
the horse has come to a standstill, Mrs. Hungerford gives you indeed
the 'hearty Irish welcome' she promised.

It is now about four o'clock, and the day is growing dark. Your hostess
draws you in hastily out of the cold, into a spacious hall lighted by a
hanging Eastern lamp, and by two other lamps let into the wide circular
staircase at the lower end of it. The drawing-room door is open, and a
stream of ruddy light from half-a-dozen crimson shaded lamps, rushing
out, seems to welcome you too. It is a large, handsome room, very
lofty, and charmingly furnished, with a Persian carpet, tiny tables,
low lounging chairs, innumerable knick-knacks of all kinds, ferns,
winter flowers of every sort, screens and palms. A great fire of pine-logs
is roaring up the chimney. The piano is draped with Bokhara plush,
and everywhere the latest magazines, novels, and papers are scattered.

Mrs. Hungerford is a very tiny woman, but slight and well-proportioned.
Her large hazel eyes, sparkling with fun and merriment, are shaded by
thick, curly lashes. She has a small, determined mouth, and the chin
slightly upturned, gives a _piquante_ expression to the intelligent
face--so bright and vivacious. Her hair is of a fair-brown colour, a
little lighter than her eyelashes, and is piled up high on the top of
her head, breaking away into natural curls over her brow. She is clad
in an exquisite tea-gown of dark blue plush, with a soft, hanging,
loose front of a lighter shade of silk. Some old lace ruffles finish
off the wrists and throat, and she wears a pair of little high-heeled
_Louis quinze_ shoes, which display her small and pretty feet. She
looks the embodiment of good temper, merry wit, and _espieglerie_.

It is difficult to realize that she is the mother of the six children
who are grouped in the background. One lovely little fairy, 'Vera',
ages three and a half, runs clinging up to her skirts, and peeps out
shyly. Her delicate colouring suggests a bit of dainty Dresden china.
Later on, you discover that this is actually the pet name by which she
is known, being indeed quite famous here as a small beauty. 'Master
Tom', a splendid roly-poly fellow, aged sixteen months is playing with
a heap of toys on the rug near the fire and is carefully watched over
by a young brother of five. The three other girls are charming little
maidens. The eldest, though but in her early teens, is intellectual and
studious; the second has a decided talent for painting, whilst the
third, says her mother, laughing, 'is a consummate idler, but witty and
clever'.

By and bye your hostess takes you into what she calls her 'den', for a
long, undisturbed chat, and this room also bears the stamp of her taste
and love of study. A big log fire burns merrily here, too, in the huge
grate, and lights up a splendid old oak cabinet, reaching from floor to
ceiling, which, with four more bookcases, seems literally crammed with
dictionaries, books of reference, novels, and other light literature;
but the picturesque is not wanting, and there are plenty of other
decorations, such as paintings, flowers, and valuable old china to be
seen. Here the clever little author passes three hours every morning.
She is, as usual, over-full of work, sells as fast as she can write,
and has at the present time more commissions than she can get through
during the next few years. Everything is very orderly--each big or
little bundle of MSS. is neatly tied together and duly labelled. She
opens one drawer of a great knee-hole writing table, which discloses
hundreds of half sheets of paper. 'Yes', she says, with a laugh; 'I
scribble my notes on these: they are the backs of my friends' letters;
how astonished many of them would be if they knew that the last half
sheet they write me becomes on the spot a medium for the latest
full-blown accounts of a murder, or a laugh, or a swindle, perhaps, more
frequently, a flirtation! I am a bad sleeper', she adds, 'I think my
brain is too active, for I always plan out my best scenes at night, and
write them out in the morning without any trouble'. She finds, too,
that driving has a curious effect upon her; the action of the air seems
to stimulate her. She dislikes talking, or being talked to, when
driving, but loves to think, and to watch the lovely variations of the
world around her, and often comes home filled with fresh ideas, scenes,
and conversations, which she scribbles down without even waiting to
throw off her furs. Asking her how she goes to work about her plot, she
answers with a reproachful little laugh--'That is unkind! You know I
never _have_ a plot really, not the _bona fide_ plot one looks for in a
novel. An idea comes to me, or I to it', she says, airily, 'a scene--a
situation--a young man, a young woman, and on that mental hint I
begin to build', but the question naturally arises, she must make a
beginning? 'Indeed, no', she replies; 'it has frequently happened to me
that I have written the last chapter first, and so, as it were, worked
backwards'.

'Phyllis' was the young author's first work. It was written before she
was nineteen, and was read by Mr. James Payn, who accepted it for
Messrs. Smith Elder & Co.

Mrs. Hungerford is the daughter of the late Rev. Canon Hamilton, rector
and vicar choral of St. Faughnan's cathedral in Ross Carberry, co.
Cork, one of the oldest churches in Ireland. Her grandfather was John
Hamilton, of Vesington, Dunboyne, a property thirteen miles out of
Dublin. The family is very old, very distinguished, and came over from
Scotland to Ireland in the reign of James I.

Most of her family are in the army; but of literary talent, she
remarks, it has but little to boast. Her principal works are _Phyllis_,
_Molly Bawn_, _Mrs. Geoffrey_, _Portia_, _Rossmoyne_, _Undercurrents_,
_A Life's Remorse_, _A Born Coquette_, _A Conquering Heroine_. She has
written up to this time thirty-two novels, besides uncountable articles
for home and American papers. In the latter country she enjoys an
enormous popularity, and everything she writes is rapidly printed off.
First sheets of the novels in hand are bought from her for American
publications, months before there is any chance of their being
completed. In Australia, too, her books are eagerly looked for, whilst
every story she has ever written can be found in the Tauchnitz series.

She began to write when very young, at school taking always the prize
in composition. As a mere child she could always keep other children
spellbound whilst telling them fairy stories of her own invention. 'I
remember', she says, turning round with a laugh, 'when I was about ten
years old, writing a ghost story which so frightened myself, that when
I went to bed that night, I couldn't sleep till I had tucked my head
under the bedclothes'. 'This', she adds, 'I have always considered my
_chef d'oeuvre_, as I don't believe I have ever succeeded in
frightening anyone ever since'. At eighteen she gave herself up
seriously, or rather, gaily, to literary work. All her books teem with
wit and humor. One of her last creations, the delightful old butler,
Murphy, in _A Born Coquette_, is equal to anything ever written by her
compatriot, Charles Lever. Not that she has devoted herself entirely to
mirth-moving situations. The delicacy of her love scenes, the lightness
of touch that distinguishes her numerous flirtations can only be
equalled by the pathos she has thrown into her work every now and then,
as if to temper her brightness with a little shade. Her descriptions of
scenery are specially vivid and delightful, and very often full of
poetry. She is never didactic or goody-goody, neither does she revel in
risky situations, nor give the world stories which, to quote the
well-known saying of a popular playwright, 'no nice girl would allow her
mother to read'.

Mrs. Hungerford married first when very young, but her husband died in
less than six years, leaving her with three little girls. In 1883 she
married Mr. Henry Hungerford. He also is Irish, and his father's place,
Cahirmore, of about eleven thousand acres, lies nearly twenty miles to
the west of Bandon. 'It may interest you', she says, 'to hear that my
husband was at the same school as Mr. Rider Haggard. I remember when we
were all much younger than we are now, the two boys came over for their
holidays to Cahirmore, and one day in my old home "Milleen" we all went
down to the kitchen to cast bullets. We little thought then that the
quiet, shy schoolboy, was destined to be the author of "King Solomon's
Mines"'.

Nothing less than a genius is Mrs. Hungerford at gardening. Her dress
protected by a pretty holland apron, her hands encased in brown leather
gloves, she digs and delves. Followed by many children, each armed with
one of 'mother's own' implements--for she has her own little spade
and hoe, and rake, and trowel, and fork--she plants her own seeds,
and pricks her own seedlings, prunes, grafts, and watches with the
deepest eagerness to see them grow. In springtime, her interest is
alike divided between the opening buds of her daffodils, and the
breaking of the eggs of the first little chickens, for she has a fine
poultry yard too, and is very successful in her management of it. She
is full of vitality, and is the pivot on which every member of the
house turns. Blessed with an adoring husband, and healthy, handsome,
obedient children, who come to her for everything and tell her
anything, her life seems idyllic.

'Now and then', she remarks laughing, 'I really have great difficulty
in securing two quiet hours for my work'; but everything is done in
such method and order, the writing included, there is little wonder
that so much is got through. It is a full, happy, complete life. 'I
think', she adds, 'my one great dread and anxiety is a review. I never
yet have got over my terror of it, and as each one arrives, I tremble
and quake afresh ere reading'.

_April's Lady_ is one of the author's lately published works. It is in
the three volumes, and ran previously as a serial in _Belgravia_. _Lady
Patty_, a society sketch drawn from life, has a most favourable
reception from the critics and public alike, but in her last novel,
very cleverly entitled _Nor Wife Nor Maid_, Mrs. Hungerford is to be
seen, or rather read, at her best. This charming book, so full of
pathos, so replete with tenderness, ran into a second edition in about
ten days. In it the author has taken somewhat of a departure from her
usual lively style. Here she has indeed given 'sorrow words'. The third
volume is so especially powerful and dramatic, that it keeps the
attention chained. The description indeed of poor Mary's grief and
despair are hardly to be outdone. The plot contains a delicate
situation, most delicately worked out. Not a word or suspicion of a
word jars upon the reader. It is not however all gloom. There is in it
a second pair of lovers who help to lift the clouds, and bring a smile
to the lips of the reader.

Mrs. Hungerford does not often leave her pretty Irish home. What with
her incessant literary work, her manifold domestic occupations, and the
cares of her large family, she can seldom be induced to quit what she
calls, 'an out and out country life', even to pay visits to her English
friends. Mrs. Hungerford unhesitatingly declares that everything in the
house seems wrong, and there is a howl of dismay from the children when
the presiding genius even suggests a few days' leave of absence. Last
year, however, she determined to go over London at the pressing
invitation of a friend, in order to make the acquaintance of some of
her distinguished brothers and sisters of the pen, and she speaks of
how thoroughly she enjoyed that visit, with an eager delight. 'Everyone
was so kind', she says, 'so flattering, far, far too flattering. They
all seemed to have some pretty thing to say to me. I have felt a little
spoilt ever since. However, I am going to try what a little more
flattery will do for me, so Mr. Hungerford and I hope to accept, next
Spring, a second invitation from the same friend, who wants us to go to
a large ball she is going to give some time in May for some charitable
institution--a Cottage Hospital I believe; but come', she adds,
suddenly springing up, 'we have spent quite too much time over my
stupid self. Come back to the drawing-room and the chicks, I am sure
they must be wondering where we are, and the tea and the cakes are
growing cold'.

At this moment the door opens, and her husband, gun in hand, with muddy
boots and gaiters, nods to you from the threshold; he says he dare not
enter the 'den' in this state, and hurries up to change before joining
the tea table. 'He is a great athlete', says his wife, 'good at
cricket, football, and hockey, and equally fond of shooting, fishing,
and riding'. That he is a capital whip, you have already found out.

In the morning you see from the library window a flower garden and
shrubbery, with rose trees galore, and after breakfast a stroll round
the place is proposed. A brisk walk down the avenue first, and then
back to the beech trees standing on the lawn, which slopes away from
the house down to a river running at the bottom of a deep valley, up
the long gravelled walk by the hall door, and you turn into a handsome
walled kitchen garden, where fruit trees abound--apple and pear trees
laden with fruit, a quarter of an acre of strawberry beds, and currant
and raspberry bushes in plenty.

But time and tide, trains and steamers, wait to for no man, or woman
either. A few hours later you regretfully bid adieu to the charming
little author, and watch her until the bend of the road hides her from
your sight. Mr. Hungerford sees you through the first stage of the
journey, which is all accomplished satisfactorily, and you reach home
to find that whilst you have been luxuriating in fresh sea and country
air, London has been wrapped in four days of gloom and darkness."




Complement:



Helen C. BLACK, _In memoriam The late Mrs. Hungerford_ from _The
Englishwoman_ April 1897 pp. 102-105

"The sad news of the death of the popular and well-known author, Mrs.
Hungerford, has caused a universal thrill of sorrow, no less to her
many friends than to the large section of the reading public, in every
part of the globe where the English tongue is spoken, who delight in
her simple but bright and witty love-stories, so full of pathos, so
replete with tenderness and human interest. The melancholy event took
place on Sunday morning, the 24th January, after many weeks' illness
from typhoid fever, and has deprived what the beloved little writer was
wont to call 'a perfectly happy and idyllic Irish home' of its chiefest
treasure.

The late Mrs. Hungerford came before the public at the early age of
eighteen, when she made an immediate success with her first novel,
_Phyllis_, which was read and accepted by Mr. James Payn, then reader
for Messrs. Smith Elder & Co. Her natural bent towards literature had,
however, manifested itself in childhood, when she took at school all
the prizes in composition, and used to keep her playfellows enthralled
by the stories and fairy-tales she invented and wrote for them. On
leaving school she at once decided to adopt the pen as a profession, in
which she has had so successful a career. The tone of _Phyllis_ was so
fresh and ingenuous that it soon found favour with the public, and was
shortly followed by the far-famed _Molly Bawn_--a title which was
peculiarly associated with her, inasmuch as it was the name by which
many friends called her--and a long series, numbering over forty
novels, besides countless short stories for home and American
magazines, where, together with Australia and India, she enjoyed a vast
popularity. In America everything she wrote was rapidly printed off,
first sheets of novels in hand being bought from her for Transatlantic
publications long before there was any chance of their being completed,
while every story she ever wrote can be found in the Tauchnitz series.
Among her earlier works are _Portia_, _Mrs. Geoffrey_, _Airy Fairy
Lilian_, _Rossmoyne_, etc., which were followed as years rolled on, by
_Undercurrents_, _A Life's Remorse_, _A Born Coquette_--where her
creation of the delightful old butler, Murphy, is equal to anything
ever written by her compatriot Charles Lever--, _Nor Wife, nor Maid_,
_The Professor's Experiment_, etc. The latest work that she lived to
see published is a collection of clever, crisp stories, entitled _An
Anxious Moment_, which, with a strange and pathetic significance,
terminates with a brief paper called 'How I Write my Novels'. Two
posthumous works were left completed, bearing the names, respectively,
of _Lovice_, just issued, and _The Coming of Chloe_, which will shortly
be brought out.

Thoroughly wholesome in tone, bright and sparkling in style, the
delicacy of here love-scenes and the lightness of touch that
distinguishes her character sketches can only be equalled by the
pathos, which every now and then she has thrown in, as if to temper her
vivacity with a little shade. Here and there, as in the case of _Nor
Wife, nor Maid_, she has struck a powerfully dramatic note, while her
descriptions of scenery are especially vivid and delightful, and very
often full of poetry.

The late Mrs. Hungerford was the daughter of the late Rev. Canon
Hamilton, Rector and Vicar Choral of St. Faughman's Cathedral, Ross
Carberry, co. Cork, one of the oldest churches in Ireland. Her
grandfather was John Hamilton, of Vesington, Dunboyne, a property
thirteen miles out of Dublin. The family is very old, very
distinguished, and came over from Scotland to Ireland in the Reign of
James I. She was first married when very young, but her husband died
five and a half years later, leaving her with three little girls. In
1882, _en secondes noces_, she married Mr. Thomas Henry Hungerford, of
St. Brenda's, Bandon, co. Cork, whose father's estate Cahirmore, of
about eleven thousand acres, lies nearly twenty miles to the west of
Bandon. By this most happy union, she has left three children--two
sons and a daughter.

Thoroughly domestic in all her tastes, with a love of gardening, and a
practical knowledge of all the details of country life, which tend to
make the home so comfortable, her unfailing sweet temper, ready wit and
_espieglerie_, her powers of sympathy and strong common sense, caused
her to be the life and center of her large household. Tenderly attached
to her husband and family, by all of whom she was adored, she used
often to say, with joy and pride, 'They came to her for everything, and
told her everything, and it was a union of perfect love, confidence,
and peace'. In social life she numbered a large circle of friends, to
whom she was deservedly endeared by her many engaging qualities; she
possessed, indeed, a magnetism which drew all hearts towards her. But
seldom could Mrs. Hungerford be induced to leave her picturesque Irish
home, even to pay visits to her friends in England. Her manifold
duties, the cares of a large family, and her incessant literary work
filled up a life that was complete, useful, and congenial, and leaves
behind an irreparable blank.

A brief description of the well-beloved little author and her pretty
home will be interesting to those who knew her not, save through her
works. She was a very tiny woman, but slight and well-proportioned,
with baby hands and feet. The large hazel eyes, that sparkled with fun
and merriment, were shaded by thick curly lashes; a small, determined
mouth and slightly upturned chin gave a piquant expression to the
intelligent face--so bright and vivacious. Her hair, of a fair brown
colour, a little lighter than the eyelashes, was worn piled up on the
top of her head, and broke away into natural curls over a broad and
intellectual brow.

Driving up the hill, past Ballymoden Church, in through the gates of
Castle Barnard, Lord Bandon's beautiful old place covered with ivy, out
through a second gate and over the railway, the gates of St. Brenda are
reached. A private road, about half a mile long, hedged on either side
with privet, hawthorn and golden furze, leads to the avenue proper, the
entrance gate of which is flanked by two handsome deodars. It takes a
few minutes more to arrive at the large square ivy-clad house an
grounds, where beech trees stand on the lawn sloping away down to a
river running at the bottom of a deep valley. The long gravelled walk
by the hall door turns into a handsome walled kitchen garden, where
apple and pear trees abound, together with a quarter of an acre of
strawberry beds, currant, gooseberry, and raspberry bushes in plenty.
From the library window can be seen the flower garden and shrubbery and
a large variety of rose trees. Close by is her own special plot where
she delighted to work with her own little implements, spade, trowel,
hoe, and rake, planting her seeds, pricking her seedlings, pruning,
grafting, and watching with deepest eagerness to see them grow. In
spring-time her interest was alike divided between the opening buds of
her daffodils and the breaking of the eggs of the first little chickens
in the fine poultry yard, in the management of which she was so
successful. But among all these multifarious and healthy outdoor
occupations in which she delighted, Mrs. Hungerford invariably secured
three hours daily for her literary pursuits, when everything was done
with such method and order, the writing included, that there was little
wonder that she got through so much.

Her own writing-room bears the stamp of her taste and her love of
study, where the big log-fire burned in the huge grate, and lighted up
a splendid old oak cabinet that reaches from floor to ceiling, which,
together with four other bookcases, are literally crammed to
overflowing, while the picturesque is not wanting, as the many
paintings, old china, ferns, plants and winter flowers can testify.

On the great knee-hole writing table lies the now silent pen where last
she used it, with each big or little bundle of MSS. methodically
labelled, and a long list of engagements for work, extending into
future years, now, alas! destined to remain unfulfilled!

With so active a brain she was a bad sleeper, and always planned out
her best schemes during the night, and wrote them out in the morning
without difficulty. Driving, too, had a curious effect upon her; the
action of the air seemed to stimulate her, and she disliked talking, or
being talked to, when driving. She loved to think and to watch the
lovely variations of the world around her, and would often come home
filled with fresh ideas, scenes, and conversations, which she used to
note down without even waiting to throw off her furs. If questioned how
she went to work about a plot she would reply, with a reproachful
little laugh, 'I never have a plot really, not the _bona fide_ plot one
looks for in a novel. An idea comes to me, or I to it--a scene, a
situation, a young man or a young woman--and on that mental hint I
begin to build, and it has frequently happened to me that I have
written the last chapter first, and so, as it were, worked backwards'.

But in whatsoever form the gifted writer composed her novels the result
was the same, and she will be widely mourned by the many, who in hours
of sickness, of carking care or sorrow, owed a temporary respite from
heavy thought, or the laugh that banishes ennui, to her ready pen--grave
and gay by turns, but in every mood bewitching. During her long
illness, with its constant relapses, its alternations of now hope, now
despair, her patience and unselfishness were exhibited to a remarkable
degree. Ever fearful to give trouble, hopeful and wishing to encourage
the loved ones around her, she maintained a gentle cheerfulness and
resignation, and finally passed away so peacefully that her sorrowing
husband and children scarcely realised the moment when her spirit
winged its flight to the better land, whence she, being dead, 'yet
speaketh', for 'to live in hearts we leave behind is not to die'."







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mrs. Hungerford, by Helen C. Black

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. HUNGERFORD ***

***** This file should be named 27620.txt or 27620.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/6/2/27620/

Produced by Daniel Fromont

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
