The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Book Without A Title, by George Jean Nathan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Book Without A Title

Author: George Jean Nathan

Release Date: December 30, 2008 [EBook #27660]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BOOK WITHOUT A TITLE ***




Produced by David Edwards, Carla Foust and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's note


Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice. Printer
errors have been changed and are listed at the end. All other
inconsistencies are as in the original.




A BOOK WITHOUT A TITLE




BY THE SAME AUTHOR

   Another Book on the Theater

   Europe After 8.15 (_in collaboration
   with H. L. Mencken_)

   Bottoms Up

   Mr. George Jean Nathan Presents

   _In Preparation_:

   The Democratic Theatre

   I Love You: A Reminiscence




   A
   BOOK WITHOUT
   A TITLE

   BY
   GEORGE JEAN NATHAN


   PHILIP GOODMAN COMPANY
   NEW YORK NINETEEN EIGHTEEN




   COPYRIGHT 1918 BY
   PHILIP GOODMAN COMPANY




Titles of books: Decoys to catch purchasers--_Chatfield._




A

Mademoiselle Ex




CONTENTS


         I  The Atheist                                 7

        II  Allies                                      8

       III  Viewpoint                                   9

        IV  The Mistake                                10

         V  Tempora Mutantur                           11

        VI  Love                                       12

       VII  Flippancy                                  13

      VIII  The Gift                                   14

        IX  Sic Transit--                              15

         X  The Intruder                               16

        XI  Memory                                     17

       XII  Maxim                                      18

      XIII  The Greater Love                           19

       XIV  The Public Taste                           20

        XV  The Future                                 21

       XVI  Sic Passim                                 22

      XVII  The Severer Sentence                       23

     XVIII  Rache                                      24

       XIX  Sic Semper Tyrannis                        25

        XX  Respect                                    26

       XXI  Temperament                                27

      XXII  Immortality                                28

     XXIII  Inspiration                                29

      XXIV  Recipe                                     30

       XXV  Transmigration                             31

      XXVI  The Savant                                 32

     XXVII  Companion                                  33

    XXVIII  Good Fairy                                 34

      XXIX  The External Feminine                      35

       XXX  Fraternite                                 36

      XXXI  Reputation                                 37

     XXXII  The Lariat                                 38

    XXXIII  The Analyst                                39

     XXXIV  Couplet                                    40

      XXXV  The Philosopher                            41

     XXXVI  Rosemary                                   42

    XXXVII  Strategy                                   43

   XXXVIII  A Work of Art                              44

     XXXIX  Offspring                                  45

        XL  V. C.                                      46

       XLI  But--                                      47

      XLII  Conjecture                                 48

     XLIII  The Judgment of Solomon                    49

      XLIV  The Supernatural                           50

       XLV  Curiosity                                  51

      XLVI  The Mirror                                 52

     XLVII  Patria                                     53

    XLVIII  The Lover                                  54

      XLIX  The Public                                 55

         L  The Scholar                                56

        LI  Grotesquerie                               57

       LII  Contretemps                                58

      LIII  Dramatic Criticism                         59

       LIV  Nepenthe                                   60

        LV  Ecce Homo                                  61

       LVI  The Actor                                  62

      LVII  Vade Mecum                                 63

     LVIII  Butterflies                                64

       LIX  Boomerang                                  65

        LX  Advice                                     66

       LXI  Pastel                                     67

      LXII  Imitations                                 68

     LXIII  The Coquette                               69

      LXIV  Moonlight                                  70

       LXV  The Eternal Masculine                      71

      LXVI  Satire                                     72

     LXVII  Glory                                      73

    LXVIII  Romance                                    74

      LXIX  The Spider and the Fly                     75

       LXX  Veritas                                    76

      LXXI  The Reformer                               78

     LXXII  Fatalism                                   79

    LXXIII  Technique                                  80

     LXXIV  Finis                                      81




I

THE ATHEIST


"I worship no one," cried the atheist. "Divinities are senseless,
useless, barriers to progress and ambition, a curse to man. Gods,
fetiches, graven images, idols--faugh!"

On the atheist's work-table stood the photograph of a beautiful girl.




II

ALLIES


The Devil, finishing his seidel of Wuerzburger, eyed the young man
quizzically.

"What would you of me?" he said.

"I would ask," bade the young man, "how one may know the women who serve
you as allies?"

"Find those who smile at themselves in their mirrors," said the Devil.




III

VIEWPOINT


In a rapidly ascending balloon were two men.

One watched the earth getting farther and farther away.

One watched the stars getting nearer and nearer.




IV

THE MISTAKE


He was the happiest man in the world, and the most successful in all
things. In his eyes was ever a smile; on his lips ever a song.

For the gods had made an awful mistake when they bore him into the
world. They had placed his heart in his head, where his brain should
have been, and his brain in his bosom, where his heart should have
been.




V

TEMPORA MUTANTUR


They couldn't understand why he married her, but the ironic little gods
who have such matters in hand knew it was because she had a little way
of swallowing before speaking, because she had a little way, when she
came to him and saw him standing there with arms open to clasp her tight
and kiss her, of sweeping her hat off and sailing it across the room,
because she had a way of twining her little fingers in his.

They couldn't understand why he divorced her, but the ironic little gods
who have such matters in hand knew it was because she had a little way
of swallowing before speaking, because....




VI

LOVE


They showed her a nest swarming with impostures, deceits, lies,
affectations, bitternesses, low desires, simulations, suspicions,
distrusts, cheatings, hates, delusions, distortions, evasions. And she
shrank from the sight of it as she looked close. But presently, when she
turned from a distance of a dozen paces and looked back, she saw a
brilliant-hued, beautiful bird soar from the nest and alight among the
flowers.

"What is that gorgeous bird?" she asked.

"Love," they told her.




VII

FLIPPANCY


The scholar spoke to the mob in his own language and the mob heard him
not.

The scholar, that he might make himself understood to the mob, expressed
himself then in rune and jingle.

"A wise man and one who speaks the truth," quoth the mob, "but it is a
pity he is so flippant."




VIII

THE GIFT


All women avoided him; no woman loved him.

The mischievous gods had given him, as the one gift they give at birth
to each child on earth, great eloquence.




IX

SIC TRANSIT--


"Everyone likes me," said the man.

"That is Popularity," whispered the little star.

"Everyone likes me and envies me," said the man, a year later.

"That is Fame," whispered the little star.

"Everyone despises me," said the man, a year later still.

"That is Time," whispered the little star.




X

THE INTRUDER


It was moonlight in the court yard where languished among the flowers a
lover and his mistress.

The lover, presently, and for the first time since he had known his fair
lady, felt Wit flying close to his lips.

The little god of Love who had dwelt with the lovers in the court yard
since first they had come there, sensing the flutter of the intruder's
wings, took to his heels and slid between the bars of the great bronze
gate into a neighbouring garden.




XI

MEMORY


Memory, wandering back over the great highway of the years, paused by
the wayside to gather some of the flowers that embroidered the road.
While Memory so bent himself, there confronted him suddenly a young
woman, and Memory saw there were tears in her eyes. "Who are you?" asked
Memory, for though about the young woman there was something vaguely he
knew, he could not recall her.

Through her tears the young woman looked at him and said, "Of all of us
you knew, me alone you have forgotten and do not remember. I am the
woman who truly loved you."




XII

MAXIM


The young man, sitting at the feet of a philosopher, noticed a cynic
smile tugging at the silence of the philosopher's lips.

"I was thinking," observed with an alas presently the philosopher, "that
one is always a woman's second lover."




XIII

THE GREATER LOVE


"I love you," said the wife to her husband, looking up from the book she
was reading, "because you are a successful man."

"I love you," said she to her lover, drawing his head close to hers,
"because--because you are a failure."




XIV

THE PUBLIC TASTE


A number of jackasses were sent to pasture in a meadow that was all
green grass and dandelions and buttercups and daisies. At the far end of
the meadow was a large billboard upon which was pasted the flaming
lithograph of a moving-picture actor standing on his head on the top of
an upright piano. The jackasses, immediately they entered the meadow,
made a bee-line for billboard and began omnivorously to pasture off the
lithograph.




XV

THE FUTURE


Time snatched the roses from the girdle of a man's Past and tore her
gown of silvered chiffon and brought her thus before him.

"And who is this, pray?" bade the man.

"This," replied Time, "is your Future."




XVI

SIC PASSIM


"For what qualities in a man," asked the youth, "does a woman most
ardently love him?"

"For those qualities in him," replied the old tutor, "which his mother
most ardently hates."




XVII

THE SEVERER SENTENCE


He had done a great wrong to a good woman, and the congress of the gods
sat upon his punishment.

"Be it decreed by us," spoke the god at the far end of the table, "that
he be compelled to walk, with the pace of a tortoise, through Hell."

"Be it decreed rather by us," spoke the god at the head of the
table--and all the gods, hearing him, nodded grimly their
approval--"that he be compelled to race, with the pace of a hare,
through Paradise."




XVIII

RACHE


"I hate my enemy with a hate as bitter as the hate he bears me, and I
would do that to him that would for all time weaken both him and his
power against me," muttered the man.

"That is easy," whispered Revenge in the man's ear. "Flatter him
extravagantly for the qualities he knows he doesn't possess."




XIX

SIC SEMPER TYRANNIS


An anarchist threw a bomb at the equipage of a king, and missed him.

A dancer threw a kiss to his box....




XX

RESPECT


The mistress of the man on trial for bigamy was in tears.

"What is it, dear?" the man asked of her, tenderly.

The woman's frame shook under her sobs. "You don't respect me," she
wailed. "Because if you did, you'd marry me."




XXI

TEMPERAMENT


The rage of the artiste knew no bounds. That she should be thus annoyed
just before her appearance in the great scene! She stamped about her
dressing-room; she threw her arms heavenward; she brushed the vase of
roses from her table; she slapped her maid for venturing at such a
moment to speak to her; she sank exhausted into an armchair, a bottle of
salts pressed to her nostril.

It was full fifteen minutes before she recovered.

Then she went out upon the stage and began her famous interpretation of
the great scene in which she chloroforms the detective, breaks open the
safe, shoots the policeman who attempts to handcuff her, smashes the
glass in the window with the piano stool and makes her getaway by
sliding down the railing of the fire-escape.




XXII

IMMORTALITY


The little son of the reverend man of God stood at his father's knee and
bade him speak to him of immortality.

And the reverend man of God, his father, spoke to him of immortality,
eloquently, impressively, convincingly.

But what he spoke to him of immortality we need not here repeat, for the
while he spoke out of the romantic eloquence of his heart, his
matter-of-fact mind kept incorrigibly whispering to him that immortality
is the theory that life is a rough ocean voyage and the soul a club
breakfast.




XXIII

INSPIRATION


A poet, searching for Inspiration, looked into the hearts of all the
women he knew. But all the hearts of these were empty and he found it
not. And then, presently, in the heart of one woman whom he had
forgotten, at the edge of a deep forest, he found what he sought for.
For the heart of this woman was full. And as he looked at this heart, it
seemed to him strangely familiar, as if, long ago, he had seen it
before. And as he looked, the truth dawned fair upon him. The heart was
his own.




XXIV

RECIPE


A young fellow, with something of the climber to him, took himself to
the arbiter of manners and urged the latter instruct him how best he
might learn effectively to pass himself off for a gentleman.

"Practise insulting persons in such wise that they shall not feel
insulted," the arbiter of manners advised him.




XXV

TRANSMIGRATION


A great love faded and died.

Its soul passed into the body of a cobra.




XXVI

THE SAVANT


There lived in Boeotia a lout who was even more empty-headed than his
most empty-headed neighbour and who yet, throughout the domain, was
looked on as a shrewd and wise and sapient fellow.

Whenever any one spoke to him of a thing he did not understand, he
vouchsafed no reply, but merely smiled a bit, and winked.




XXVII

COMPANION


Modesty left his mistress to fare forth into the world alone. But,
turning in his flight, he saw someone at his heels.

In despair, Modesty sought still another mistress and this mistress one
night he likewise left to fare forth into the world alone. But, turning
in his flight, he saw again someone at his heels.

Modesty, sitting sadly on a rock by the wayside, realized then that his
wish for a lonely adventure was never to be fulfilled. For he must
always, when he sallied forth from his mistress, take with him his
mistress' lover.




XXVIII

THE GOOD FAIRY


A fairy, in the form of a beautiful woman, came to a young man and
whispered, "One wish will I grant you."

The young man gazed into the deep eyes of the beautiful woman and, with
thoughts playing upon her rare loveliness, breathed, "I wish for perfect
happiness for all time!"

And the fairy in the form of the beautiful woman granted him his wish.

She left him.




XXIX

THE EXTERNAL FEMININE


As the blonde young woman stepped from the swimming pool of the Turkish
Bath, the attendant thought that never had she seen so fair and golden
and beautiful a creature. Unable to contain her admiration, she spoke
her thought. The beautiful blonde thanked her and said, "But you should
have seen me at the Mi-Careme Ball as an African slave girl!"




XXX

FRATERNITE


A woman, lying in the arms of her lover and who until now had spoken of
many things but never of her husband, presently mentioned his name, and
jested of him, and laughed.

Her lover, who adored her, laughed with her and bending to her, kissed
her passionately--hating her.




XXXI

REPUTATION


The famous comedienne, suffering a sudden cramp, made a face.

"How wonderfully she expresses the feeling of homesickness," observed
the gentleman seated in E 10.

"How wonderfully she expresses the feeling of wanderlust," observed the
gentleman seated in M 7.




XXXII

THE LARIAT


A lonely dreamer, dreaming under the poplars of a far hill, saw Love
dancing in the bright valley and casting promiscuously about her a
lariat of silk and roses. That he, too, might feel the soft caress of
the lariat about him, the dreamer clambered down into the gay valley and
there made eyes at Love. And Love, seeing, whirled her lariat high above
her and deftly twirled it 'round the dreamer. And as in Love's hand the
lariat of silk and roses fell about him and drew tighter and tighter
about his arms and legs, the dreamer saw it slowly turn before his eyes
into a band of solid steel.




XXXIII

THE ANALYST


A little girl loved her doll dearly: it was to her very real and very
human.

One day a little girl living next door told her the doll was only filled
with cotton. And the little girl cried.

When the other little girl had gone, the little girl got out a scissors
and determined to find out if her doll was, after all, not real and
human, but only filled with cotton, as the little neighbour girl had
said.

The little girl cut her doll open, and found that it was filled with
sawdust.




XXXIV

COUPLET


Again Mephisto chuckled in anticipation.

Somewhere, a little country girl, for the first time, was powdering her
nose.




XXXV

THE PHILOSOPHER


They had quarrelled.

Suddenly, her eyes flashing, she turned on him. "You think you are sure
of me, don't you?" she cried. And in her tone at once were defiance and
irony.

But the man vouchsafed nothing in reply. For he well enough knew that
when a woman flings that question at a man, the woman herself already
knows deep in her heart that the man is--perfectly.




XXXVI

ROSEMARY


In the still of the late December twilight, the old bachelor fumbled his
way to the far corner of the great attic and from an old trunk drew
falteringly forth a packet of letters. And pressing the letters tenderly
in his hands, sighed. For, anyway, _she_ had loved him in those years
ago, the years when youth was at its noontide and the stars seemed
always near. Memory, sweet and faithful mistress....

The old bachelor fumbled for his spectacles. Alas, he had left them
below. And without them he could not read the words she had written. But
he kissed the little packet ... and sighed.

He could not see it was his little nephew's school trunk he had opened
by mistake, and that the packet which he held reverently in his
reminiscent clasp was merely a bundle of blank, empty envelopes.




XXXVII

STRATEGY


One woman read up on everything and put on silks and jewels and perfumes
and dimmed the lamps and set liqueurs and cigarettes upon the tabourette
and caused the flames to dance low in the open hearth.

And one woman merely put a bit of soft lace about her throat and every
once in a while prefaced a word with a sudden little intake of breath.




XXXVIII

A WORK OF ART


A poet, unknown and unsung, wrote a beautiful play. Those who read the
play felt strange tears creep into their eyes and odd little pullings at
the strings of their hearts.

"This," they said, "is art."

And the news of the poet's beautiful play spread far. And it came in
time to be produced upon the great highway of a city with a company of
actors the very least of whom received as weekly emolument some nuggets
nine hundred and more. And citizens traveled from ulterior Haarlm and
the far reaches of Brukkelhyn and counties beyond the Duchy of Nhuyohrk
to see the costly actors play the poet's work. And the citizens looked
at one another sorely perplexed, for they felt no strange tears creep
into their eyes nor odd pullings at the strings of their hearts.

"Art hell!" they said.




XXXIX

OFFSPRING


Egotism and Carnality married and gave birth to a child.

They named it Love.




XL

V. C.


The child, entering the dark room at night, hummed a tune to hide his
fear and frightened a mouse who was playing in a far corner. The mouse
ran blindly under the child's foot and the child, believing the mouse
was his grandmother's ball of wool, gave it a vigorous kick and killed
it.




XLI

BUT--


"But----" interposed the young woman.

A gleam came into the eyes of the man who coveted and who had long and
vainly laid subtle siege against her.

He appreciated now that it was merely a matter of time.




XLII

CONJECTURE


The pretty girl looked up at the stars, wondering....

The stars looked down at the pretty girl, wondering....




XLIII

THE JUDGMENT OF SOLOMON


To his court spake Solomon: "I seek another woman for wife. But I have
at length learned wisdom in these matters. So go you bring before me
fifty or more you deem most suitable. And from these I shall select with
deliberation and care and wisdom that one that will best be fitted for
my throne-side and the bearing of children." And they went forth into
the kingdom and brought before Solomon women who were strong and women
who were wise and women who were gentle and women who were serious with
the grave problems of life--the pick of the women of all the great
kingdom who best were suited to the king.... Solomon, weighing
studiously the merits of each and pondering the one whom he might most
appropriately take unto him as best fitted for wife and mother, suddenly
caught sight, on the far edge of the crowd, of a little flower girl with
a cunning dimple in her ear....




XLIV

THE SUPERNATURAL


"What is my name?" asked August Kraut of the Ouija board, as his hands
guided the apparatus hither and thither.

"August Kraut," responded the Ouija board.




XLV

CURIOSITY


A young woman, not content with delighting in the exquisite beauty of a
magnolia bloom at a distance, came close to it and, coming close,
touched it to make certain of its reality and, touching it, turned its
fragile white petals to an ugly brown.

A young woman decided to analyze her lover's affections....




XLVI

THE MIRROR


In a great lonely house on a far lonely roadway lived in seclusion among
her waxen flowers and cracking walls and faded relics of a far
yesterday, a hateful and withered and bitter old woman. To the lonely
house on the lonely roadway came one day out of the world to live with
the old woman her young and beautiful and very lovely granddaughter. And
one day--it was not so long afterward--the very lovely girl, rummaging
about the great house, came upon a tall mirror, the mirror that the
withered and bitter old woman had long been wont to use and that for all
these many lonely years had seen and reflected naught but acrimony and
decay and despair and ugliness. And the very lovely girl looked into the
mirror--and suddenly cried out. For what the mirror reflected was not
her very lovely self, but something hateful and withered and bitter....




XLVII

PATRIA


The young man lay dying on the field of battle. "Tell them I am proud to
have died for my glorious country!" he breathed to the comrade who bent
beside him.

They printed the young man's noble last words in all the leading papers
of the country, conspicuously, where all the nation might see and read
and therefrom take pride and inspiration, right next to the cartoons of
the Katzenjammer Kids.




XLVIII

THE LOVER


"Three brilliant men are my suitors," said the beautiful young woman.
"And I would marry the one who loves me most. Tell me how I may know
that one."

"Pick the one who, when he is with you, is the most stupid," replied her
old nurse.




XLIX

THE PUBLIC


The hurdy-gurdy man's monkey, cap in hand, clambered to the sill of the
mediocre artist's window. And the mediocre artist tossed into his cap a
peanut. The monkey, putting the peanut in his mouth, swallowed it, and
grinned.

The hurdy-gurdy man's monkey, cap in hand, clambered to the neighbouring
sill of the great artist's window. And the great artist tossed into his
cap a sou. The monkey, putting the sou in his mouth, swallowed it, and
grinned. But presently a great discomfort instituted itself in the
monkey's abdomen. Whereupon the monkey immediately concluded that the
sou was a counterfeit.




L

THE SCHOLAR


The scholar laid in solemn reverence a wreath upon the tomb of
Beethoven.

"I place this wreath not upon the tomb of Beethoven," he exclaimed, "but
upon the grave of music."

But no one heard what he said, because the robins were singing too
loudly.




LI

GROTESQUERIE


The small boy's ambition was to grow up and be an iceman.

The small boy grew up and became a famous vaudeville clog dancer.

The great man now often thinks back and smiles to himself at the
grotesque absurdity of a small boy's idea of a career.




LII

CONTRETEMPS


An artist, wandering along the highway of a city, with his eyes on the
stars, tripped over something, fell and was crippled.

It was a purse of gold.




LIII

DRAMATIC CRITICISM


Two gentlemen of the assizes met one evening upon the highway with a
dog. The dog, a friendly creature, barked amiably at the gentlemen,
whereupon the twain smiled and bent to pat the dog. Stooping thus, one
of the gentlemen issued suddenly a cry of alarm.

"Fie!" he cried to his colleague, "I see upon the creature's hide a
flea!"

The other adjusted his glass and scrutinized the beast closely.

"That," he observed, with the mien of one not to be contradicted, "that,
sir, is not a flea. That is a louse!"




LIV

NEPENTHE


"I think I'll take a few drinks to make me forget my troubles," said the
poor man.

The drinks made the poor man forget his troubles and filled him instead
with delightful visions of sunny lands and blue skies and red poppies
and fair women and languorous luxury.

And the poor man, now unhappier than before, had to expend his last
three sous for spirits of ammonia wherewith to recapture the nepenthe of
his first troubles.




LV

ECCE HOMO


A homely woman smiled at a man. And the man, puzzled and speculating
what was wrong with him, slouched on.

A pretty woman smiled at a man. And the man, with the mien of a cock,
threw out his chest and strutted on.




LVI

THE ACTOR


A poet, poor and neglected, lived up under the dusty eaves, with for
sole companion a parrot. One day, the poet evolved a particularly lovely
line and, in his happiness, repeated it to himself aloud, and time upon
time.

A week later, some portly persons, passing beneath the lofty window,
espied the parrot perched upon the sill and heard it speak the poet's
line. Breathless with amazement, they stopped and cried out: "What a
_wonderful_ bird!"




LVII

VADE MECUM


An infatuated young man sought counsel at the bazaar of an ancient and
prayed the ancient tell him how he might learn of his fair lady's
faults.

"Go forth among her women friends," spake the venerable one, "and praise
her in their hearing."




LVIII

BUTTERFLIES


A man beheld a butterfly and, catching her, held her in his hands and
feasted his eyes upon her prettiness. But as he held her so, the pollen
rubbed off her wings and she fluttered, a pitiable thing, weakly from
his grasp.

A man beheld a butterfly and, catching her, held her in his arms and
feasted his eyes upon her prettiness. But as he held her so, the powder
rubbed off her nose and....




LIX

BOOMERANG


There was a critic--a sincere and art-loving man--who flouted the mob's
taste, who inveighed against the popular, who protested vigorously
against the low, mean art form that in dramatic shape packed nightly the
playhouses of the great city with the unesthetic, artistically depraved
and vulgar bourgeoisie. That things should come to so unholy a pass, he
sighed.

The critic never stopped to consider that the journal which he graced
had in the great city a daily circulation of half a million.




LX

ADVICE


"Beware," warned the Mind, solemnly.

The Heart, whistling a gay tune, cocked its hat upon one ear, gave a
twist to its cravat, and kicked the old savant down stairs.




LXI

PASTEL


"If only I had his youth!" sighed the old gentleman looking out of the
window of his halted limousine at the young man standing in the roadway.

"If only I had his experience!" sighed the young man standing in the
crowded roadway looking at the old gentleman through the window of the
halted limousine.

"If only they'd get a move on and let a man do his work!" said the
middle-aged street-sweep, smacking his lips over the fine flavour of his
chewing tobacco and taking a deep breath of the keen autumn air.




LXII

IMITATIONS


Resplendent in silks and furs and a marvelous necklace of diamonds, she
sat with superior mien in an opera box. Now and again, with an air of
infinite ennui and disdain, she glanced coolly aloft through her
lorgnette at the eager poor in the steep, high altitudes of the
galleries.

The people in the great opera house whispered to one another that the
marvelous necklace of diamonds was unquestionably an imitation.
"Somehow," they said, "it looks like one." But they were wrong. The
necklace of diamonds was quite genuine. It was not the necklace of
diamonds, but the lady that was the imitation.




LXIII

THE COQUETTE


A rose, an orchid and a little white clover were pressed between the
leaves of a coquette's diary.

"She loves me more than she loves either of you," cried the rose,
"because I am the first flower my master ever gave her!"

"She loves me more than she loves either of you," protested the orchid,
"because I am the last flower _my_ master ever gave her!"

The little white clover smiled to itself and said nothing. For the
little white clover knew that its mistress had picked it herself.




LXIV

MOONLIGHT


It was in the late Springtime. And they were very young.

The young man sighed, "Ah, if the night were only fair, that we might
sit close together, you and I, in the moonlight."

It was in the late Springtime. And they were very young.

The young moth sighed, "Ah, if the night were only fair, that they might
go out into the moonlight and leave the screen doors open that we might
play close together, you and I, in the gaslight."




LXV

THE ETERNAL MASCULINE


"Whatever happens, wherever I go, wherever I am, I shall think of you,"
he said as he drew her to him and kissed her goodbye.

Three days out at sea he met another. And that night on the silver
hurricane deck, under shelter of the life boats, true to his word and
promise, he thought of her. He thought how cold her kisses were compared
with those of this lovely creature.




LXVI

SATIRE


The new battleship trembled in the ways, ready to glide into the sea.

The girl cracked a bottle of champagne over its bow and said in measured
and serious tones: "I christen thee--'_Kansas_'!"




LXVII

GLORY


The young private, dreaming dreams of valour and glory, awaited eagerly
his chance.

The enemy was daily coming nearer, nearer, and the dreams of the young
private grew vivid and rosier still.

One morning, before dawn, the General telegraphed the Lieutenant-General
to telegraph the Brigadier-General to telegraph the Colonel to telegraph
the Lieutenant-Colonel to telegraph the Major to heliograph the Captain
to telephone the First-Lieutenant to telephone the Second-Lieutenant to
signal the Sergeant to tell the Corporal to command the private to
charge!

The young private, at the order, dashed forward and was among the
thousands who fell, still adream, in the capture of the hill that won
for the General his nineteenth successive imperial cross.




LXVIII

ROMANCE


There were many ardent suitors for her hand. And they sent her orchids
and violets and lilies and roses. All save one, a poor young fellow, who
sent her but a simple little bunch of daisies.

She married the man who sent orchids.




LXIX

THE SPIDER AND THE FLY


"Won't you come into my parlour?" said the spider to the fly.

"What nice hair you have," said the woman to the man.




LXX

VERITAS


The king was desirous of obtaining the most truthful man of his court
for Lord of the domain's Exchequer. One by one the king had tested the
aspirants and one by one had consigned each in his turn to the headsman;
for they had all proved themselves liars. Three, and three only,
remained.

Said the king to the first of these, "Have, you ever in all your life
written, or tried to write, a poem?"

"No, your majesty," replied the fellow.

Whereupon the king signaled promptly the headsman.

Said the king to the second of these, "Can you sit in a rocking-chair
without rocking?"

"Yes, your majesty," replied the fellow.

Whereupon the king signaled promptly the headsman.

Said the king to the third of these, "Have you ever used a hair tonic of
any kind?"

"No, your majesty, never!" replied the fellow.

Whereupon the king signaled promptly the headsman.

And to this day the post of Lord of the Exchequer is vacant.




LXXI

THE REFORMER


The Great Uplifter died and stood before Saint Peter.

"Alas," said Saint Peter, "I cannot let you in."

"But why?" demanded the Great Uplifter. "For surely I have been a good
and striving man."

"Just so," answered Saint Peter. "You have been a good and striving man
and you must be rewarded with happiness. Here, where all are happy, you
would be unhappy, for here would be no work for your hands to do."

And that is how the Great Uplifter happened to go to hell.




LXXII

FATALISM


The stock-broker's wife, mother of six children and portly, was a
fatalist. "Why worry?" she was wont to say. "When the time comes for me
to die, it will come properly enough, and that's all there is to it."

That afternoon, she was run over by a brewery wagon while on her way to
see a singing teacher about having her voice cultivated.




LXXIII

TECHNIQUE


The star actor, unable to restrain his mirth at the astounding satin
decollete worn by his leading woman in the scene where she, a street
waif, pleads with him to give her a farthing that she and her widowed
mother may not starve, turned his back to the audience. So
uncontrollable were his chuckles that his shoulders heaved up and down,
and his head shook, and his neck got red, and his eyes watered.

"A master of the acting technique," thought the audience. "How
wonderfully he expresses the emotional outburst of grief!"




LXXIV

FINIS


Somewhere, a funeral bell was tolling.

Somewhere, a thousand and one miles away, a woman was asking her lover
for the third time in five minutes if he really loved her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's note


The following changes have been made to the text:

Page 5: "Immorality" changed to "Immortality".

Page 6: "Scholar" changed to "The Scholar".

Page 6: "Grotesqueries" changed to "Grotesquerie".

Page 78: "stood be fore" changed to "stood before".






End of Project Gutenberg's A Book Without A Title, by George Jean Nathan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BOOK WITHOUT A TITLE ***

***** This file should be named 27660.txt or 27660.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/6/6/27660/

Produced by David Edwards, Carla Foust and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
