The Project Gutenberg EBook of Through Siberia and Manchuria By Rail, by
Oliver George Ready

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Through Siberia and Manchuria By Rail

Author: Oliver George Ready

Release Date: January 7, 2009 [EBook #27733]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIBERIA, MANCHURIA BY RAIL ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









Through Siberia and Manchuria By Rail

BY

OLIVER G. READY

    AUTHOR OF
    "_Life and Sport in China_"




NOTE


    _This short account of my journey from London to Shanghai by way
    of the Siberian Railway was at first intended for private
    circulation only, in order to meet the enquiries of numerous
    personal friends.

    Now, however, that war has broken out between Russia and Japan,
    and that it may be years before this, the longest railway in the
    world, is again open to international traffic, I feel that any
    information, however slight, concerning so stupendous an
    undertaking, as well as about the remote region which it
    traverses, may be of interest to the general public.

    I wish to emphasize that much of what is herein described was
    seen only from the windows of a moving train, and must therefore
    be lacking in that accuracy and detail which closer inspection
    could alone insure.

    The Russian words on the cover_ [Russian: KTO IDET'?] _signify
    "who goes there"?, and the Chinese characters represent my
    surname. The Russian cross at the end, is that of the original
    Greek Church._

        _Shanghai, 29th February, 1904._




EASTWARD HO!


I left Charing Cross on the _15th October, 1903_, by the 10 a.m.
boat-train for Dover. As we glided on I mentally said good-bye to
familiar scenes, for I was outward bound, to put in another five years'
service under the dragon flag.

At Dover we went aboard the Belgian _rapide_ "Ville de Douvres" and in
ten minutes were streaming at twenty miles an hour through the shipping
on our way across Channel.

It was a lovely day with fair wind and smooth sea, and had only the
vessel's bows been pointed in the opposite direction, I should have been
perfectly happy, but they were not, so I had to make the best of things,
which consisted in watching over the stern Old England's chalk cliffs,
gleaming white in the brilliant sunshine, slowly sink and disappear into
the heaving main. . . . . . . Good-bye. Eastward ho!

The Belgian coast was sighted at about 3 p.m., and shortly after 4 we
landed at Ostende, and I was soon installed in a first-class coupe of
the weekly _Nord-Express_, which was to carry me without change as far
as Warsaw.

This _train de luxe_, consisting of an engine and five or six cars, was
as replete with comfort and luxury as it was possible to compress within
so limited a space.

That night we passed through Belgium by way of Brussels, and at 7.30
next morning, the _16th October_, arrived at Berlin, but only stopped
for half-an-hour, when we were again _en route_.

The day was fine and the country pretty, without being beautiful. In
places it was well wooded with firs and silver birches. For many miles I
noticed sorrel growing alongside the line almost as thickly as grass.

Shortly before arriving at the Russian frontier that afternoon, I saw
many truck-loads of parsnips, and _heard_ a train-load of geese, which
were coming from the "merry green fields of Poland" to make _pate de
foie gras_ for the Germans.

The frontier town of Alexandrowo was reached at 3 o'clock, and there we
passed from German to Russian control. At the German end of the long
platform officials and porters were wearing the German uniform. At the
Russian end of the platform, all porters were clad in long, white cotton
smocks with leather girdles, while officials wore the uniform of the
Czar. As the two nationalities were here contrasted, I think the
Russians showed to greater advantage, being generally taller and having
a more natural bearing than the over-drilled Teuton.

Our luggage was examined by the Customs officers, and our passports
taken away, vised, and returned, before the train was allowed to
proceed.

It was getting dark as we steamed into Russia, so that not much of the
country could be seen, but as far as I could make out, it looked flat
and gloomy enough.

We reached Warsaw at about 8 o'clock, and as the train stopped here, it
being a terminus, I drove to the Hotel Bristol.

The general impression I had received while on this rapid journey across
half of Europe in little more than 24 hours, was that in Belgium things
looked slip-shod, in Germany organized, and in Russia potential.

The hotel I found to be first-class and up-to-date in every way, while
prices were moderate (six roubles a day) and the cuisine excellent.

The dining room was a perfect blaze, being illuminated by more than
1,000 electric lights, let into the walls and screened by round, opaque
glasses, so that the effect was something like that of so many
bull's-eye lanterns.

As soon as I had been shown to my room, my passport was again demanded
by a police agent, and again taken off to be vised. I subsequently
learnt that _everyone_ in Russia--not only travellers but also all
Russians--must have a passport, without which it is impossible to get
even a night's lodging, so that the entire population comes directly and
constantly under the eye of the police. This must at times be rather
galling, but on the other hand, it is a great protection, especially to
strangers.

_17th October._--Warsaw is an interesting town for many reasons, also,
it is well laid out, having several large boulevards flanked with grass
and trees, though the back streets are dirty, and badly paved with
large, uneven blocks of stone.

Many beautiful churches raise their lofty spires and oriental domes,
painted green or gilded with gold and surmounted by crosses, for
Russians are of the Greek faith. The principal streets were crowded with
fine soldiers in gay uniforms, the slums were packed with repulsive
looking Jews, who, in long black coats and little peaked caps, sneaked
about as though in constant dread of persecution, their hooked noses,
pale faces and black beards giving them that furtive and crafty
appearance for which the Polish Jew is so well known. Objects of pity,
their history is written on their faces.

The horses, though fine-drawn, looked strong, well-bred and good goers.

Cigars were very dear--about eighteen pence for a medium one--and each
separate cigar was sold in a kind of glass or gelatine air-tight tube.

_18th October._--Left Warsaw at 9.30 a.m., and the train was so crowded
that although holding a first-class ticket, I was obliged to travel in a
second-class sleeping-car, in company with a Pole, a Russian, and a
German and his little three-year-old daughter, to say nothing of piles
of luggage. Passed through fine open country, quite flat, with woods of
fir, pine and silver birch at intervals, marshy plains and cultivated
ground (like Fens) alternating. Flocks of sheep and geese, herds of
cattle and horses. Very few birds of any kind--only saw some crows and
linnets.

Roads were wretched, being mere tracks a foot deep in mud, and looked as
though they had never been repaired, or even made.

Houses built low with no upper storey, walls of wooden beams and roofs
of thatch. Men mostly clad in sheep skins, and women in red dresses with
a red cloth over the head, bare legs and sandals. Winter wheat well
grown.

_19th October._--Passed a good night, despite five in the compartment.
This morning much colder, and at 10 o'clock saw snow, at first lying in
drifts, but gradually increasing as the day wore on until everything was
covered, while ponds were frozen.

Hardly any good houses. Peasants with hair four or five inches long and
wearing sheep skin coats and knee-boots, came to stations to look at the
train. The women had shawls over their heads, and squelched through the
mud and slush with bare feet. All looked cold and dejected, while the
landscape was most depressing.

With the exception of a few wild and tame pigeons, saw hardly any birds,
but turkeys at a farm.

Arrived in Moscow at 4 p.m., and drove in a droski (four-wheel cab) to
the Slavianski Hotel, where my passport was again required.

In the evening, after an excellent dinner, I went to a first-class
variety entertainment at the Aquarium theatre.

My bedroom at the hotel was warmed in a curious manner. There was
neither stove nor hot-water-pipe, but in one of the walls at some seven
feet from the floor was a round hole about three inches in diameter.

Being curious to know what this hole could be for, I put my hand up to
it, and was greatly surprised to find a current of hot air pouring into
the room, which was thereby kept at a most comfortable temperature both
by day and night.

_20th October._--It was a miserable day with rain and snow, so that
while the streets, which are wretchedly paved with big blocks of stone,
were bad for wheeled traffic, there was not sufficient snow for
sleighing.

In the morning I went to the Kremlin, which comprises the new and old
Imperial palaces, churches, treasury, etc., all grouped within a lofty
wall, pierced here and there by gateways, one of which being holy, it
behoves every good Russian to remove his hat on passing through. In the
vast courtyard are ranged in long tiers the many hundreds of cannon
which the Russians took from Napoleon I. It is impossible in this brief
diary to deal with the splendours of the Kremlin. Nothing I have ever
seen in Europe, Asia, Africa or America, can in any way compare with its
semi-barbaric magnificence.

The ball-room in the new palace is of immense size and of most majestic
proportions, the walls being entirely of mirrors and gold gilt, and the
floor richly inlaid with many kinds of beautiful woods. Columns built of
malachite, crystal, and precious stones. Stairways of marble and jade,
while countless ornaments of pure gold adorned the various apartments.
The old palace, which adjoins the new, is smaller, less magnificent,
being of cloister like build, but intensely interesting. Here I saw the
bedroom and the bed in which Napoleon slept for a few nights before
Moscow was laid in ashes by her own inhabitants, and the French invaders
driven out to die like flies in the snow.

In the afternoon I visited several beautiful churches, a museum, and an
exhibition of Verestchagin's famous war pictures.

On the _21st October_ I returned to the Kremlin and visited its
churches, which are stored with priceless icons, golden vessels,
gem-studded crucifixes, and silken vestures stiff with gold and precious
stones. In striking contrast to such wealth, some of the chapels had
dirty, uneven brick floors, and were horribly dark. Afterwards I passed
through the Treasury, until I was weary of looking on diamond-studied
saddles, bejewelled swords and guns, thrones, crowns, the regalia and
coronation robes of all the Russian Czars, etc., etc. Altogether the
wealth of the Kremlin must represent scores of millions of pounds in
value.

The bazaars of Moscow are far-famed, though more so in Asia than in
Europe. I passed through the newest and largest. It struck me as being
more extensive than the Crystal Palace, though not so lofty, and I was
told that it contained under its roof a thousand shops of the best
class.

At 10 p.m. that night I left the hotel in pouring rain and drove to the
station, where I was soon on board the trans-Siberian express, which
started at 11 p.m. In my coupe were two Russian Officers and a
Japanese--all hurrying eastward in anticipation of a Russo-Japanese war.
The most interesting part of my journey now commenced. I was about to go
where but comparatively few Englishmen have ever been, and to pass
through a region chiefly known to the civilized world as a place of
exile, a place of horror, a dreary wilderness of frost and snow and
wind, a place to which the words "ye who enter here must leave all hope
behind" were ever applicable. The greater part of this journey of over
5,000 miles from Moscow to the Far East, which I was about to make in a
few days in a _train de luxe_, was, until recently, made by the wretched
exiles on foot, taking from one to two years.

_22nd October._--Passed through flat, uninteresting country. Much wheat
cultivated. No trees, no hedges, no ditches and but little grass. Cloudy
and depressing. Inhabitants ill-clad and poverty stricken. Miserable
houses with mud or wooden walls and thatch roofs. Some were built
partly below ground for warmth, while earth heaped up round the walls
and over the roofs, gave them the appearance of enormous potato heaps,
having a door, chimney, and two or three windows. Churches were the only
substantial buildings.

_23rd October._--Same kind of country as yesterday. In afternoon more
hilly on approaching the Ural mountains. Dining-car far too small and
had often to wait hours for meals. General Wogack, a prominent Russian
Officer on his way to the Far East, seeing that I could not get a seat,
very kindly invited me to lunch at his table, which had been reserved
for him and his _aide-de-camp_. Both the General and his _aide_ spoke
English perfectly.

Another passenger was a Chinese Secretary of Legation from Rome, who,
not being able to speak anything but his own language, hailed me with
delight, and we had long conversations in Mandarin.

Grouped round towns and villages were enormous stack-yards, representing
what must have been the entire wheat crop of the surrounding country,
for I saw no other stacks in the fields. It seemed to me a very
dangerous plan, for if one stack caught fire, the others would be almost
sure to go too. There may have been as many as a thousand stacks close
together. I saw numerous turkeys at the farms.

_24th October._--This morning we were in the Ural mountains, and at
about 10 o'clock stopped at Zlataoust, which is the last town in Europe,
and where I bought two platinum candlesticks and a small model of a
sledge as mementoes. Here also much cutlery was for sale at very low
prices, being evidently manufactured in the neighbourhood, while
precious stones were offered in the rough state, as taken from the
mines, but it was necessary to be a connoisseur before venturing to buy.
At Miasse, the next stopping place and the first station in Asia, saw
many natives clad in skins, with very yellow and Asiatic looking faces,
dirty. Here I bought two crystal eggs as paper-weights. In a booth at
one end of the platform saw several stuffed specimens of game found in
this neighbourhood. Wapiti, lynx, deer, wolf, fox, etc. Highest point
reached by railway about 3,000 feet. Many nice views. Ground covered
with snow. Country very thinly populated.

_25th October._--Lovely day, no snow but sharp frost. Ponds and streams
frozen and a few people skating. At Omsk saw numbers of Asiatics clad in
skins, they were ugly, dirty and many pitted with small-pox. Country was
level plain, with clumps of silver birch at intervals. Some cultivation,
numerous herds of cattle, and a few ponies. Land mostly covered with dry
grass about a foot high, like our Norfolk marsh grass. The station at
Omsk was on outskirts of town, which looked to be of great size, with
many pretentious buildings. Few inhabitants in country.

_26th October._--This morning passed Obi, a town of considerable
importance. The air was delicious. Snow on ground, with hard frost. Sun
bright and warm. Country much nicer--more undulating. Saw men carrying
stones for building purposes on a kind of tray with two handles at each
end, as fishermen carry nets. China ponies were numerous here. Women and
men very ugly and dirty. Sledges in use for carrying litter, hay, wood,
etc. To many stations the most delicious milk and cream I have ever
tasted were brought in bottles by women and girls, for sale to the
passengers, and at very cheap rates. Occasionally also, a few pears and
apples of fair quality could be purchased, but the amount of fruit grown
seemed to be small.

_27th October._--Much warmer, there being a good deal of snow, with
bright sun. At about 2 o'clock reached Krasnoiarsk, a considerable town.
Shortly after this crossed the river Yenesei on a magnificent iron
bridge of several spans. The scenery became very fine in the afternoon,
with pleasant hills and trees, all covered with snow. Several China
ponies in droves. Sledges. More cultivation. At sundown slowly climbing
a range of mountains. Saw many houses built underground with roof and
entrance just appearing above snow. Country more pleasing than any seen
since entering Russia.

_28th October._--Perfect weather--same as yesterday. Country very hilly
and beautiful in the snow. Passing up a valley between lofty hills,
noticed a corduroy road made of transverse trunks of trees, as seen in
Canada. Well built water-towers about 30 feet high at all stations for
watering engines. Country looked more thriving here than in European
Russia. Better houses, and bright skies instead of lowering ones. Silver
birch, pines and firs. At various places en route have seen the old
Siberian Road, of bitter memories.

_29th October._--Lovely morning with sharp frost. Saw many small houses
with only roofs above ground. Many tame pigeons and a few magpies, but
hardly any other bird-life. Horses, or rather, ponies, small and poor.
Skirted the river Angara for a long distance in early morning. View
lovely. Water, where not frozen, clear as crystal. Swift current, which,
breaking over boulders, showed that there was no great depth. Saw three
small boys clad in furs fishing through a hole made in the snow-covered
ice. At 11 o'clock reached Irkoutsk, but saw very little of it as the
station is two miles out of the town. At about two o'clock arrived at
Lake Baikal, where we left the train and went on board the ferry boat
"Baikal," a remarkable craft with four funnels and twenty windsails,
three screws aft and one forrard. It was said that she could plough her
way through ice two feet thick at eight miles an hour. I judged her to
be about 260 feet long by 50 wide. She has a good saloon wherein
refreshments of all kinds can be obtained. The bows of this vessel, from
about six feet above the water-line, are wide open, so that as she lay
at the wharf trains can steam into her hold, the metals on board and
those on shore connecting. She has three lines of metals in the hold, so
that three trains, each of about 240 feet in length, can stand abreast.
There were twenty or twenty-one trucks aboard to-day, in three rows of
six or seven trucks each, but no engines. Most of these trucks were
laden with twenty railway metals each, though three or four of them
carried merchandize.

No ice on lake. We cast off at a quarter to three in the afternoon and
reached Missovaia on the other side at 5.35, a distance of only 40
miles, this being the narrowest part of the lake, the length of which
exceeds 300 miles.

The water was clear and of a steel-gray colour. Hills of perhaps 2,000
feet lined either shore as far as the eye could reach. Presently the
setting sun lit up the snow on these mountains with every colour of the
rainbow, and we steamed along, as it were, between walls of flaming
brilliancy. Soon the placid waters took on the colouring as reflected
from the hills, and we were indeed moving in a basin of liquid fire.
Many seagulls, appearing as quite old Norfolk friends, followed in our
wake.

At Missovaia we found another _train de luxe_ awaiting us, and it was
here, from the warmth of a saloon car, that I first saw a batch of
Siberian exiles, although I had previously seen the cars with caged
windows wherein they are now transported, instead of having to undergo
that weary tramp of 4,000 miles.

It was already dark and the train had not yet started, when I saw a band
of armed soldiers surrounding some thirty people carrying bundles,
coming along the dimly-lighted platform, and then form up at one end of
it, the people being always surrounded by the soldiers. What had
especially attracted my attention, or I might not have noticed in the
uncertain light of what the band consisted, was a little boy of about 10
or 12 years of age, who was carrying a large bundle which looked like
clothing, trying to pass on the wrong side of some palings, when he was
roughly seized by the ear by one of the Cossack guards and quickly
brought back.

Wishing to post some letters, I tried to pass along that end of the
platform in search of the pillar-box, but was at once stopped by the
guard. The steam from our engine, congealed by the sharp post, fell in a
fine snow about this luckless band, and glistened white on their clothes
in the station lights, and it almost seemed to add an uncalled-for
insult to the misery of their lot. I could not help wondering as to what
their thoughts might be as they watched our waiting train, replete with
every comfort and blazing with electric light. I have never before seen
the extremes of misery and captivity on the one hand, and the extremes
of freedom and luxury on the other, brought into such close and striking
contrast, and I hope never to see it again. Subsequently the dejected
looking throng, in which I fancied I saw women, were marched through a
doorway into a darkened passage in the station, and so disappeared from
sight.

Probably they were all criminals who deserved their fate. Possibly not.
Preconceived ideas and old tradition, however, stirred one's sympathies,
and left an unpleasant feeling in the mind for some time. I was
constrained to compare our lots, and be thankful for mine. I, free to go
my way in every comfort. They .............................. ?

After crossing the Ural mountains I noticed numbers of magpies, through
in European Russia I also saw a few.

_30th October._--Another beautiful day. In the morning we passed
Petrovski Zavod, a place historical in Russian annals as being the penal
settlement of the conspirators who early in the nineteenth century tried
to overthrow the ruling dynasty, and where numbers of the Russian
aristocracy died in exile. It is now a large village of log houses, with
wide, mud streets. Hills surround this spot, so that it could be easily
guarded, and escape made very difficult. A large, black Russian cross,
conspicuous on the highest peak, overlooks the valley. It marks the
burial place of one of the most noble exiles.

The scenery to-day has been very good, having at times a park-like
appearance, with rolling downs and scattered fir trees. In the
afternoon we climbed the Nertchinsk mountains, and by dark had reached a
considerable altitude, the air being very keen. At Khilok station, where
we stopped for a few minutes, I got out and ran up and down for
exercise, but found the cold so great that I was glad to get on board
again for fear of having my ears frost bitten, they having become
perfectly numb.

Since leaving Irkoutsk the houses have been better built, and the
country has looked far more pleasing than in European Russia. I saw
great piles of sleepers stacked alongside the line, and heavy metals
lying by the track for many miles, so that the present light rails are
apparently to be replaced, but so far, very few men at work. To-day we
passed a waggon-church in a siding at a small village. This
waggon-church moves about up and down the line to places where there are
no churches, and there it is stopped, and mass said for the inhabitants
by a Russian priest.

A few fat-tailed sheep were also seen. These animals have enormous tails
of solid fat, about as large, and of much the same shape, as a small
ham. During winter when the frozen ground is covered with snow and no
pasturage is to be found, it is said that they live on the fat stored in
these tails, in the same manner as camels exist for considerable periods
on their humps, seals on their blubber, and bears by sucking their paws.

Here and there I observed mobs of China ponies, some nondescript dogs
and a few ordinary-looking cattle.

Between Lake Baikal and Manchuria all food was much dearer, while only
American beer could be obtained and that at the exorbitant price of one
rouble and a quarter, say half-a-crown, the bottle, which was because of
excessive import duty. We crossed many streams, the waters of which were
clear, although generally frozen. The Buriat population of this region
looked of a low type, fairly large in stature but hideous, and generally
badly marked with small-pox. Saw one boy on skates. Bought postage
stamps for 40 kopeks at a small station, but had to give another 10
kopeks as commission. Saw a Mongol with pigtail at one of the stations,
which showed that we were approaching the borders of the Chinese Empire.

_31st October._--Lovely day, air like champagne. Descended mountains at
a good pace, having two engines, one in front and one behind. Were now
in country of the nomad Bactrians. No cultivation. Saw mobs of ponies
and flocks of black and white sheep, cattle much resembling Scotch
breeds, having long, thick hair, and a good many two-humped camels.
Observed one man shooting with a gun, another riding with bow and arrows
slung on his back. The houses, or wigwams, were square in shape with
arching roofs, and looked to be constructed of wicker-work and skins. In
many places noticed irregular, flat stones set up on edge and varying in
height from three to six feet, forming circles about twenty feet in
diameter, in which, presumably, were graves.

At Buriatskaia, which means capital of the Buriats, were two typical
Mongols with pigtails and clad in skins. One of them was wearing an
official tassel attached to his skin hood, but no official button to
show his rank. To-day saw a flock of larks, a hawk and a magpie. From
daylight till dark, during which time we travelled a distance of perhaps
300 miles, there was no vestige of either trees, shrubs, banks or
hedges, and no cultivation, only the rolling grass lands slightly
whitened with snow. Reached the town of Manchuria, which is on the
Manchurian frontier, at 8 p.m., and changed one of the 1st Class cars,
something having gone wrong with the axles.

_1st November._--A bright morning, but more snow on ground and not so
cold. Saw many Mongols and Chinese. The country was hilly and sparsely
wooded with silver birch and bushes. At Irekte the Russians have quite a
colony, and the line apparently has a branch running South. From Irekte
to Boukhedou, a distance of about 25 miles, the line passed over some
very steep hills. Two engines to haul us up, and coming down the descent
was made in gradients, the train first running a mile or so one way,
then stopping, when the engines were shunted to the other end, when we
ran about a mile in the opposite direction, and so on, so that we
described a perfect zigzag. A tunnel through this range of hills is
being bored, and a colony of 150 Italian mechanics, together with their
wives, has been imported to do it. Boukhedou is already quite a large
place with numbers of substantial Russian houses built of wood, and many
more, as well as a station, in course of construction. Sentries armed
with rifle and revolver were stationed every here and there along the
line. A fair amount of rolling-stock. Saw several long-haired goats,
also some Chinese pedlars. Evidently a good deal of ground game in this
locality, judging from traces in the snow.

_2nd November._--We arrived at Harbin (or Kharbine) towards noon. I
could see tall factory chimneys for some time previously, and then we
crossed by a fine iron bridge over the Sungari River, whereon I saw
about a dozen river-steamers, of say 1,000 to 1,500 tons, laid up for
the winter, and a score or so of barges of perhaps 400 to 600 tons. A
large paddle steamer was towing a barge under the bridge against the
swift current as we passed over.

This large town, which has entirely sprung up since advent of the
railway, looked almost wholly Russian, there being a population of about
64,000 Russians and not so many Chinese. Russians here were even working
as labourers, drivers of droskies, etc. Many European houses and several
large brick-built factories in course of construction. The Russians are
here with the intention of staying, and are making good their hold as
quickly as possible.

The station is perhaps a mile from the river and of considerable size,
though still in a rough stage, for Harbin is the junction of the line to
Vladivostock and the line to Dalny and Port Arthur. Here was a great
deal of rolling-stock--scores of cars and many engines.

After leaving Harbin armed guards along the line were more numerous,
while every few miles were brick-built block-houses surrounded by
loop-holed walls.

The country looked fertile and well cultivated, and the Manchu and
Chinese inhabitants more prosperous. Rolling hills and a few trees.
Much warmer. No snow.

_3rd November._--Lovely day, bright and warm. No trace of snow.
At Tienline saw some rickshas, also good, brick European houses
being built. Chinese navvies working on the line, a good deal of
rolling-stock, and truck-loads of superior looking bricks. Chinese
were _wheeling_ barrow-loads of mud instead of, as is usual,
carrying it in baskets, owing, probably, to Muscovite persuasion.
Country looked rich, well cultivated and well peopled; the women,
being nearly all Manchus, having large feet. Chinese carpenters,
bricklayers and joiners at work on many new stations and houses.
Pigs, cattle and fowls. Few birds. Thinly wooded. A pleasant
looking country. Donkeys, ponies, goats and mules.

At Moukden, which is the capital of Manchuria, the train only stopped
for a few minutes, and as the station was outside the city walls, I
could get no idea of what the place was like. From Moukden to Dalny I
saw many and substantial traces of Russian occupation. At one point a
mud fort crowned with guns, at another a large camp with half a dozen
field-pieces, and so on.

The line all through seemed to be well laid, though rails far too light,
which forbade running at high speeds. There appeared to be too few
sidings. On one of the cars I saw the number 2,741, which may be some
indication as to the amount of rolling-stock. Along entire length of the
line I noticed overhead telegraph wires, which sometimes numbered six or
seven and occasionally two or three.

For the whole journey the food on train was good, but owing to the large
number of passengers, after giving the order one had oftentimes to wait
from an hour to an hour and a half before getting served. After Baikal
this considerably improved, there then being two restaurants, one for
smokers and one for non-smokers, whereas before, men smoked without
restraint while women and children were eating their meals. This
dining-car was a perfect babel of tongues, for there were collected
Russians, English, French, Japanese, Germans, Swiss, Chinese and
Italians, generally all talking at once.

On the whole we rubbed along fairly well, although where so many
nationalities were closely packed together for a fortnight, a certain
amount of racial antipathy was occasionally bound to appear. When no
Russians were about both the Japanese and Chinese would eagerly question
me on the chances of war. When a Russian appeared, they immediately
seemed to lose all interest in the subject. The Germans affected to
despise the Russians, and the Russians said they hated the Germans,
while they both suspected the English.

_4th November._--We reached Dalny at 7 a.m., and I drove in a droski
from the station to the wharves, a distance of perhaps one mile and a
half, and there went on board the Railway Company's steamer "Amour"
which was to convey us to Shanghai. It is truly wonderful to what a
large European town Dalny has grown from absolutely nothing, in about
five years. Good private residences, factories, hotels, shops, public
buildings, the beginnings of botanical and zoological gardens, a dry
dock measuring, I judged, about 350 feet by 70, wharves, breakwaters,
dredgers, tugs, steamers ... everything except the one thing needful,
trade. Of the half-dozen fine steamers in port, and others either
arriving or preparing to depart, all were practically light. Money has
been poured out like water by the Russians in constructing the Railway
and in building Dalny, and it is very doubtful if this gigantic
enterprise will ever be made to pay. It is said that Dalny, which is
identical with Talienwan, can never thrive unless Newchwang be closed to
foreign trade. The harbour has a depth of 28 feet and is being dredged.
The Railway Company's line of superb steamers carrying mails, passengers
and a little cargo between Dalny and Shanghai, is being run at a heavy
loss. The naval fortress of Port Arthur, at the extremity of the
Liaotung peninsular, is thirty miles by rail from Dalny.

The impression left on me by my journey through Siberia is that Russia
has advanced her outposts into Manchuria far beyond range of effective
communication, that is, communication by the Siberian railway alone,
which is only a single line of light metals some 5,375 miles in length.

Travelling over this line day and night for fourteen consecutive days,
passing continuously through bleak, barren and almost unpopulated
regions, crossing numerous wide rivers, an enormous lake and several
mountain ranges, waiting sometimes for hours in sidings to allow
homeward bound trains to pass, and seeing enough snow, even before
winter had actually begun, to understand what difficulties heavy falls
must occasion, I cannot help feeling that Russia's position in the Far
East is unnatural and even precarious.

The railway in its entirety is flimsy and liable to collapse almost
everywhere, and I am certain it could never sustain a large volume of
rapid traffic. Even, however, supposing that it did not break down, but
was worked successfully to its utmost capacity, what would that capacity
be--the capacity of a single light line of over 5,000 miles in length?
Could a town of 100,000 inhabitants rely _solely_ on it for supplies?
Can a Russian army of even 100,000 men rely on it?

The S.S. "Amour" cast off from her wharf at noon on 4th November, and
after a quick and calm passage arrived in Shanghai at noon on 6th
November, 1903.

This fine vessel, measuring about 2,000 tons, steaming 14 knots, fitted
up with every comfort and kept scrupulously clean, was commanded by
Russian officers and manned by a mixed crew of Russian and Chinese
sailors. Since the outbreak of hostilities, however, she has been
transformed into a hospital ship at Port-Arthur.

    Approximate Cost of Journey
                                                         _L s. d._
    Passport vised at Russian Consulate in London            4 10
    Ticket from London to Moscow, 1st Class              14  4  9
    Freight and Insurance on heavy luggage from
        London to Shanghai by P. & O. steamer             4  0  0
    Cab hire at Warsaw and Moscow                         1  0  0
    Ticket from Moscow to Shanghai                       34 10  0
    Maintenance _en route_ (including hotels) for
        22 days at ten shillings a day                   11  0  0
    Sundries                                              5  0  0
                                                        ---------
    Total from London to Shanghai                        69 19  7
                                                        =========

    Length of Journey
                                                         _Miles_
    From London to Moscow                             about 1,600
      "  Moscow to Dalny                                "   5,375
      "  Dalny to Shanghai (by sea)                     "     550
                                                            -----
    Total distance from London to Shanghai                  7,525
                                                            =====

    Time Occupied

                                                      _Days_ _hours_

    From 10 a.m. on 15th October to noon on
        6th November, 1903                              22      2

    Less 3 days 19 hours stay at Warsaw and
        Moscow                                           3     19
                                                        ---------
    Time spent in actual travelling                     18      7
                                                        =========

The rate of travelling was therefore rather more
than seventeen miles an hour, inclusive of all stoppages
and delays.

Between Moscow and Dalny the train stopped at 151 stations, thereby
losing almost 37 hours.

The rouble is equivalent to about two shillings and a penny. There are
100 kopeks to the rouble.

German is the most useful foreign language for travelling in Russia.

[Illustration]


FINIS




SECOND EDITION.

"Life and Sport in China."

(ILLUSTRATED.)

BY OLIVER G. READY, B.A.

PRESS COMMENTS.

    _Times_--"A bright popular account of Anglo-Chinese life, and
        of the characteristics and customs of the Chinese."

    _Spectator_--"A very bright contribution to the aspect of animal
        nature and domestication in the Far East. Is full of keen
        observation, and lightened by a very pleasant sense of
        humour." (Topics of the day).

    _Standard_--"Of life in China the author has much to tell us. He
        is a keen and often sympathetic observer." (Leading
        article).

    _Yorkshire Post_--"This book is 'alive' and interesting, and far
        in advance of the ordinary record of travel."

    _Scotsman_--"Entertaining and fair-minded."

    _Glasgow Herald_--"Certain to excite the interest and the envy
        of young men at home."

    _Birmingham Gazette_--"One of the Books of the Day. Is
        pleasantly written, immensely entertaining, and full of
        information."

    _Dundee Advertiser_--"The chapters on Shooting, Riding and
        Sailing will prove specially interesting to sportsmen and
        athletes."

    (Chapman and Hall, London, 10s. 6d. net).




ERRATA

This type was set up by Chinese compositors.

_Second_ proofs contained 268 errors!

    Page 11 for hehind read behind

      "  14  "  cheep read cheap

      "  18  "  exhorbitant read exorbitant

      "  21  "  navies read navvies




    Transcriber's Note:

    The items mentioned in the errata have been changed,
    along with the following:

    Page  7 general inpression
            general impression

            to strangers,
            to strangers.

    Page 10 gem-studied
            gem-studded

    Page 15 length of whch
            length of which

            300 miles
            300 miles.

    Page 16 in the the station
            in the station

    Page 17 Petrovski zavod
            Petrovski Zavod

            conspiritors
            conspirators

    Page 19 clad in skins
            clad in skins.

    Page 20 and Chinese
            and Chinese.

    Page 21 chimnies
            chimneys

            we passed over
            we passed over.

            trace of show
            trace of snow

    Page 22 Few birds
            Few birds.

    Page 24 even precarious,
            even precarious.

    Page 25 P & O. steamer
            P. & O. steamer





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Through Siberia and Manchuria By Rail, by
Oliver George Ready

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIBERIA, MANCHURIA BY RAIL ***

***** This file should be named 27733.txt or 27733.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/7/3/27733/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
