The Project Gutenberg EBook of Schedule of Salaries for Teachers, members
of the Supervising staff and others., by Boston (Mass.). School  Committee

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Schedule of Salaries for Teachers, members of the Supervising staff and others.
       January 1-August 31, 1920, inclusive

Author: Boston (Mass.). School  Committee

Release Date: January 8, 2009 [EBook #27746]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALARIES FOR TEACHERS ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









[Secretary's Circular No. 7--1919-20.]




SCHEDULE OF SALARIES FOR TEACHERS, MEMBERS OF THE SUPERVISING STAFF
AND OTHERS.

JANUARY 1--AUGUST 31, 1920, INCLUSIVE.


                              Boston School Committee,
                                  Secretary's Office, January 20, 1920.


                    In School Committee,
                              January 5, 1920.

1. ORDERED, That the salaries of teachers, members of the supervising
staff, and others in the public schools are hereby established for the
period January 1 to August 31, 1920, inclusive, in accordance with the
following schedules and subject to the following restrictions:

1A. ORDERED, That the salaries of teachers, members of the supervising
staff, and others who receive annual salaries, which have been fixed by
Order 1A of the salary schedule for the year ending August 31, 1919,
shall, during the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, inclusive, be
fixed and advanced in accordance with the provisions of said order;
provided, that the salaries of such persons in those ranks in which the
minimum and maximum salaries in the following schedules have been
increased over the minimum and maximum provided in the existing
schedules by the same amount, be advanced by said amount on January 1,
1920, and the salaries of such persons shall thereafter be advanced on
their several anniversaries by the annual increment provided in the
following schedules; and provided further, that the final increment
shall be such amount as shall place the teacher on the maximum salary of
the rank.

1B. ORDERED, That the salaries of teachers, members of the supervising
staff, and others who receive annual salaries, which have been fixed by
Order 1A of the salary schedule for the year ending August 31, 1919,
shall, during the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, inclusive, be
fixed and advanced in accordance with the provisions of said order;
provided, that the salaries of such persons in those ranks in which the
minimum and maximum salaries have been increased over the minimum and
maximum provided in the existing schedules by unequal amounts, shall be
advanced in the following manner:

(a) The salaries of those teachers, members of the supervising staff,
and others who have not reached the maximum salary of the existing
schedule or who have not served one year on said maximum salary, shall,
on January 1, 1920, be advanced by the amount of the increase in the
minimum of their respective schedules over the minimum of the existing
schedules; and the salaries of such persons shall thereafter be advanced
upon their respective anniversaries by the annual increment provided in
the following schedules until the new maximum of their ranks is reached;
provided, that the final increment shall be such amount as shall place
the teacher upon the maximum salary of the rank.

(b) The salaries of those teachers, members of the supervising staff,
and others who on December 31, 1919, have reached the maximum salary of
the existing schedules, and who have served one full year thereon, shall
on January 1, 1920, be advanced by the amount of the increase in the
maximum of the following schedule over the maximum of the existing
schedule.

1C. ORDERED, That the salaries of masters of day elementary and day
intermediate schools which have been fixed by Order 1B of the existing
salary schedule shall, during the period January 1 to August 31, 1920,
inclusive, be fixed and advanced in accordance with the provisions of
said order; provided, that the salaries of such masters shall on January
1, 1920, be advanced by the amount of two hundred forty dollars ($240)
per annum, and the salaries of such masters shall thereafter be advanced
upon their respective anniversaries by the annual increment provided in
the following schedule until the new maximum of their rank is reached;
and provided further, that the salaries of those masters who have
reached the maximum of the existing schedule on December 31, 1919,
shall, on January 1, 1920, be advanced by the receipt of one hundred
twenty dollars ($120) per annum to the new maximum of their rank in the
following schedule:


  NORMAL SCHOOL.

  Head master, first year $3636,
    annual increase $144, maximum    $4,500
  Master, Director of Model
    School, first year $2916,
    annual increase $144, maximum     4,068
  Masters, first year $2484, annual
    increase $144, maximum            3,492
  Junior Masters, first year $1620,
    annual increase $144, maximum     3,060
  First Assistants, first year $1812,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,484
  Assistants, first year $1668,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,340
  Clerical Assistant, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  LATIN AND DAY HIGH SCHOOLS.

  Head Masters, first year $3636,
    annual increase $144, maximum    $4,500
  Masters, Heads of Departments,
    first year $2484, annual
    increase $144, maximum            3,492
  Junior Masters, appointed before
    June 1, 1906, who have
    attained the rank of Master       3,204
  Junior Masters, appointed after
    June 1, 1906, first year $1764,
    annual increase $144, maximum     3,060
  Assistant Principals, first year
    $2004, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,484
    The rank of assistant principal shall be abolished as the
    position becomes vacant by the retirement of the present
    incumbents.
  First Assistants, first year
    $1,812, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,484
  Industrial Instructors, Heads
    of Departments (High School of
    Practical Arts), first year
    $1,812, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,484
  Assistants, first year $1,452,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,316
  Junior Assistants, first year
    $1,008, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,200
  Instructors in Mechanical
    Department (Mechanic Arts
    High School), first year
    $1,764, annual increase $144,
    maximum                           2,772
  Co-ordinator, first year $2,412,
    annual increase $96, maximum      3,180
  Co-operative Instructors
    (Brighton, Charlestown,
    Dorchester, East Boston and
    Hyde Park High Schools),
    first year $1,884, annual
    increase $144, maximum            3,036
  Industrial Instructors
    (Dorchester, East Boston, and
    Hyde Park High Schools and
    High School of Practical
    Arts), first year $1,500,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,932
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Clerical Assistants, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  INSTRUCTORS--LATIN AND DAY HIGH SCHOOLS.

  Commercial Branches

  Instructors, first year $1764,
    annual increase $144, maximum     2,772
  Assistant Instructors, first year
    $1452, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932

  Manual Arts

  Instructors, first year $1764,
    annual increase $144, maximum     2,772
  Assistant Instructors, first year
    $1452, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932

  Salesmanship

  Assistant Instructors, first year
    $1452, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932


  BOSTON CLERICAL SCHOOL

  Head Master, first year $3636,
    annual increase $144, maximum     4,500
  Head Instructors in Bookkeeping
    and Head Instructors in
    Stenography, first year $2484,
    annual increase $144, maximum,    3,492
  Clerical Instructors, first year
    $1728, annual increase $144,
    maximum                           2,736
  Clerical Assistants, first year
    $1440, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,208
  Teachers of English, first year
    $1440, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,016
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)


  DAY ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS AND DAY INTERMEDIATE SCHOOLS

  Masters, first year $3060, annual
    increase $120, maximum            3,660
  Sub-Masters in charge, in addition
    to the regular salary
    of their rank                       240
  Sub-Masters, first year $1,740,
    annual increase $120, maximum     2,820
  Masters' Assistants in charge,
    in addition to the regular
    salary of their rank                240
  Masters' Assistants, first year
    $1,788, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,076
  First Assistants, Grammar
    School, first year $1,788,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,980
  First Assistant, Primary School     1,752
    The rank of First Assistant, Primary School, shall be abolished
    on the retirement or promotion of the present incumbent.
  First Assistants in Charge, first
    year $1,788, annual increase
    $96, maximum                      2,076
  Assistants, first year $1,080,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,752
  Prevocational Assistants, first
    year $1,380, annual increase
    $96, maximum                      1,956
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Clerical Assistants, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  KINDERGARTENS.

  Director, first year $2,100,
    annual increase $120, maximum     3,060
  Assistant Director, first year
    $1,788, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,980
  First Assistants, first year
    $1,416, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,608
  Assistants, first year $960,
    annual increase $96, maximum     $1,344
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)


  TRADE SCHOOL FOR GIRLS.

  Master (including regular,
    Summer and evening terms),
    first year $3060, annual
    increase $120, maximum            3,660
  Heads of Departments, first
    year $1956, annual increase
    $96, maximum                      2,340
  Trade Assistants, first year
    $1512, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,896
  Helpers, first year $1164,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,452
  Vocational Assistants, first year
    $1428, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,004
  Instructor in personal and shop
    hygiene, first year $1452,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,740
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Bookkeeper (including evening
    and Summer terms), first
    year $984, annual increase
    $96, maximum                      1,428
  Clerical Assistant (including
    evening and Summer terms),
    first year $984, annual
    increase $96, maximum             1,332


  BOSTON TRADE SCHOOL.

  Master (including day, evening
    trade, Summer, continuation
    and trade extension
    classes), first year $3468,
    annual increase $144, maximum     4,332
  Vice-Principal (including day,
    evening trade, Summer,
    continuation and trade
    extension classes), first year
    $2412, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           3,180
  Division Heads, first year
    $2172, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,844
  Shop Foreman, first year $1836,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,028
  Shop Instructors, first year
    $1548, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932
  Instructors in Academic and
    Technical Branches, first
    year $1860, annual increase
    $120, maximum                     2,700
  Instructors, first year $1548,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,028
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Bookkeeper (including evening
    term), first year $984, annual
    increase $96, maximum             1,368
  Clerical Assistant, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  EVENING CLASSES

  Assistants in Charge, per evening   $5.50
  Assistants, per evening              4.50
  Second Assistants, per evening       3.00
  Toolkeeper, per evening              1.00


  HORACE MANN SCHOOL FOR THE DEAF

  Principal, first year $3,060,
    annual increase $120, maximum     3,660
  Assistants, first year $1,260,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,836
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)


  EVENING SCHOOLS

  Director, first year $2,940,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,900
  Supervisors of Divisions in
    Evening Elementary Schools,
    per evening                       $4.00

  High

  Principals, per evening              7.00
  Assistants, per evening              4.50
  Typewriting Assistants, per evening  3.00
  Laboratory Assistants, per evening   2.50
  Clerical Assistants, per evening     3.00
  Temporary Clerical Assistants,
    per evening                        2.00

  Elementary.

  Principals, per evening             $5.50
  First Assistants, per evening        3.50
  Assistants, per evening              3.00
  Assistants, Classes in Lip Reading,
    per evening                        4.00
  Clerical Assistants, per evening     2.00


  DAY SCHOOL FOR IMMIGRANTS.

  Instructors, first year, $1,428,
    annual increase $96, maximum     $2,004
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)


  CONTINUATION SCHOOL.

  Principal, first year $3,636,
    annual increase $144, maximum    $4,500
  Heads of Divisions, first year
    $2,004, annual increase $120,
    maximum                           2,844
  Division Foremen, first year
    $1,932, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,316
  Shop Foremen, first year $1,836,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,028
  Shop Instructors, first year
    $1,548, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932
  Trade Assistants, first year
    $1,512, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,896
  Helpers, first year $1,164,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,452
  Instructors, Boys' Classes,
    first year $1716, annual
    increase $26, maximum             2,388
  Assistants, first year $1428,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,004
  Vocational Assistant, first year
    $1428, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,004
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Clerical assistants, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  SUMMER REVIEW SCHOOLS.

  High School.

  Principal, per session              $7.00
  Assistants, per session              4.00

  Elementary Schools.

  Principal, per session               5.00
  Assistants in charge of branches,
    per session                        3.50
  Assistants, per session              3.00


  EDUCATIONAL INVESTIGATION AND MEASUREMENT.

  Assistant Director, first year
    $2340, annual increase $120,
    maximum                          $3,060


  DEPARTMENT OF HOUSEHOLD SCIENCE AND ARTS.

  Director, first year $2220,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,180
  Assistant Director, first year
    $1596, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,980
  Teachers of Cookery, first year
    $1080, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,752
  Teachers of Sewing, first year
    $1080, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,752


  DEPARTMENT OF MANUAL ARTS.

  Director, first year $3420,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,780
  First Assistant Director, first
    year $2100, annual increase
    $120, maximum                     3,420
  Assistant Directors, first year
    $1908, annual increase $120,
    maximum                           3,108
  First Assistants in Manual Arts,
    first year $1812, annual
    increase $96, maximum             2,484
  Assistants in Manual Arts, first
    year $1692, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,172
  Shop Foremen, first year $1,836,
    annual increase, $96, maximum     2,028
  Shop Instructors, first year $1548,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,932
  Foremen, Shop Work, first year
    $1836, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,028
  Instructors, Shop Work, first year
    $1548, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932
  Instructors in Manual Training,
    Elementary Schools, first year
    $1632, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,920
  Assistant Instructors in Manual
    Training, Elementary Schools,
    first year $1332, annual
    increase $96, maximum             1,812


  MEDICAL INSPECTION.

  Director                           $3,300
  School Physicians                     804
  School Physician assigned to
    Certificating Office              1,200


  NURSES

  Supervising Nurse, first year
    $1,740, annual increase $120,
    maximum                          $1,980
  School Nurses, first year $1,080,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,368


  DEPARTMENT OF MUSIC

  Director, first year $3,420,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,780
  Assistant Directors, first year
    $2,292, annual increase $120,
    maximum                           3,012
  Assistants in Music, first year
    $1,620, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,908


  PENMANSHIP

  Director                           $2,124


  PHYSICAL TRAINING

  Director, first year $3,420,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,780
  Instructors in Physical Training,
    first year $1,812, annual
    increase $96, maximum             2,100
  Assistant Instructors in Physical
    Training, first year $1,452,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,740
  Instructor of Military Drill,
    first year $2,004, annual
    increase $120, maximum            2,484
  Assistant Instructors of Military
    Drill                             2,040
  Armorer, first year $1,200, annual
    increase $120, maximum            1,680


  PLAYGROUNDS.

  Play Teachers--
    One Session                       $2.00
    Two Sessions                       4.00
  Supervisors--
    One Session                        2.50
    Two Sessions                       5.00
  First Assistants--
    One Session                        1.75
    Two Sessions                       3.50
  Assistants--
    One Session                        1.50
    Two Sessions                       3.00
  Assistants in Sand Gardens--
    One Session                        1.10
    Two Sessions                       2.20

"One Session" in this schedule for playgrounds shall mean from the close
of school on afternoons and Saturday mornings during the school weeks,
and one-half day during the summer season.

"Two Sessions" shall mean forenoon and afternoon.


  GARDENING.

  Supervisors of Gardening--
    One Session                       $2.50
    Two Sessions                       5.00
  Instructors in Gardening--
    One Session                        1.75
    Two Sessions                       3.50
  First Assistants in Gardening--
    One Session                        1.50
    Two Sessions                       3.00
  Assistants in Gardening--
    One Session                        1.25
    Two Sessions                       2.50
  Assistants in School Gardens--
    One Session                         .75
    Two Sessions                       1.50

"One session" means from the close of school on afternoons, Saturday
mornings during school weeks, and one-half day during the Summer term.


  DEPARTMENT OF PRACTICE AND TRAINING.

  First Assistant Director, first
    year $2,244, annual increase
    $120, maximum                    $2,844
  Assistant Directors, first year
    $2,004, annual increase $120,
    maximum                           2,484


  SPECIAL CLASSES.

  Director, first year $2,220,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $2,700
  Medical Inspector                   2,328
  First Assistants in Charge,
    first year $1,932, annual
    increase $96, maximum             2,124
  Instructors, first year $1,260,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,836


  SPEECH IMPROVEMENT CLASSES AND CLASSES FOR CONSERVATION
  OF EYESIGHT.

  Instructor in Charge of Speech
    Improvement Classes              $2,160
  Instructors, first year $1,260,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,836

Teachers promoted to the rank of instructor from the rank of assistant,
day elementary schools, shall be placed upon that year of the schedule
for the rank of instructor that is at least $72 higher than the rate
they are on in the rank of assistant, day elementary schools, at the
time of their promotion.


  VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE.

  Director, first year $2412,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $2,652


  EXTENDED USE OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

  Director                           $3,000


  SCHOOL CENTERS.

  Managers (per hour)                 $1.00
    (All School Centers not to exceed 800 hours per year.)
  Associate Managers (See Orders Nos. 22 and 23.)
  Conductors, per session              4.50
  Special Leaders, per session         3.50
  Leaders, per session                 2.50
  Special Helpers, per session         2.00
  Doormen, per session                 1.50
  Pianists, per session                1.50
  Helpers, per session                 1.00
  Matrons, per session                 1.00
  Lecturers for public lectures
    not illustrated, English or
    non-English, per lecture, not
    more than                          5.00
  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with uncolored
    slides, when lantern and
    operator are furnished by the
    School Committee, per lecture,
    not more than                     10.00
  Per lecture (colored or uncolored
    slides) for non-English
    speaking people, not more than     7.00
  (Slides furnished by School Committee.)

  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with colored slides
    when lantern and operator
    are furnished by the School
    Committee, per lecture, not
    more than                         15.00
  Per Lecture (colored or uncolored
    slides) for non-English
    speaking people, not more than     8.00
  (Slides furnished by lecturer.)

  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with uncolored
    slides when lantern and operator
    are furnished by the lecturer,
    per lecture, not more than        12.00
  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with colored slides
    when lantern and operator
    are furnished by the lecturer,
    per lecture, not more than        20.00
  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with both colored
    slides and motion pictures
    furnished by the lecturer or
    lectures illustrated with songs
    or picture plays, character dramas
    or dramatic impersonations,
    per lecture, not more than        25.00
  Stereopticon lantern operators,
    per session                        1.50
  Motion picture operators, per
    session                            2.50


  TEACHERS SPECIALLY ASSIGNED.

  To the Model School Sub-Master,
    in addition to the
    regular salary of his rank      $240.00
  To the Model School, Master's
    Assistant, First Assistant in
    Charge, Assistants in Grades,
    First Assistant in Kindergarten
    and Assistant Kindergarten,
    in addition to the regular
    salary of their rank             192.00
  To Teachers in Day High Schools,
    assigned to afternoon Industrial
    Classes, per two-hour period       3.00
  To Assistants, Day Elementary
    Schools, assigned to Latin or
    Day High Schools or to a
    special department, in addition
    to the regular salary of their
    rank                             192.00
  To Assistants, Day Elementary
    Schools, and Assistants, Day
    Intermediate Schools, assigned
    to the Continuation School, if
    employed six hours per day, in
    addition to the regular salary
    of their rank                       192
  To Assistants, Day Elementary
    Schools, and Assistants, Day
    Intermediate Schools, assigned
    to prevocational classes if
    employed six hours per day, in
    addition to the regular salary
    of their rank                       192
  To Assistants, Day Elementary
    Schools, and Assistants, Day
    Intermediate Schools, assigned
    to Boston Disciplinary Day
    School, in addition to the
    regular salary of their rank        144
  To Teachers of Cookery or Sewing,
    assigned to Prevocational Classes
    for Girls, in addition to the
    regular salary of their rank         96

The additional compensation above provided for teachers specially
assigned shall cease upon the return of said teachers to their former
positions and shall not be taken into consideration in determining the
compensation to which they may be entitled upon appointment to any other
rank or grade.


2. ORDERED, That the compensation of substitute and temporary teachers
is hereby fixed for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, inclusive,
at the following rates for each day of actual service, one-session days
being reckoned as whole days:

  NORMAL, LATIN AND DAY HIGH SCHOOLS.

  Master and Junior Masters,
    Normal, Latin and Day High
    Schools                           $6.00
  First Assistants and Assistants,
    Normal, Latin and Day High
    Schools                            5.00
  Junior Assistants, Latin and
    Day High Schools                   5.00
  Instructors and Assistant
    Instructors in Commercial
    branches or Physical Training,
    Latin and Day High Schools         4.50
  Instructors in Manual Arts and
    Co-operative Instructors in
    Day High Schools                  10.00
  Assistant Instructors in Manual
    Arts, Latin and Day High Schools   6.00
  Industrial Instructors in Day
    High Schools                       4.00
  Instructors in Military Drill,
    Latin and Day High Schools         8.00
  Special Assistants in Mechanical
    Departments, per day:
      First year                       3.50
      Second year                      4.00
      Third and subsequent years       4.50
  Emergency Special Assistants
    in Mechanical Departments,
    per day                            2.00
  Special Assistants, Industrial
    Departments, per day:
      First year                       2.50
      Second year                      3.00
      Third and subsequent years       3.50
  Teacher Coaches or Coaches in
    Latin, Day High Schools, and
    Boston Trade School, per day       4.00


  BOSTON CLERICAL SCHOOL.

  Teacher Assistants, per day          5.50
  Aids, per day                        3.00


  DAY ELEMENTARY AND DAY INTERMEDIATE SCHOOLS.

  Sub-Masters                         $5.00
  Masters' Assistants, First
    Assistants in Charge, and First
    Assistants Grammar                 4.50
  Assistants, per day                  4.00
  Assistants, Horace Mann School,
    per day                            4.00
  Special Assistants, Horace Mann
    School, per day                    4.00
  Special Assistants, in grades, per
    day                                4.00
  Special Assistants, Fort Strong
    School                             4.00
  Prevocational Assistants, per day    5.00
  First Assistants, Kindergarten--
    One Session                        2.75
    Two Sessions                       3.50
  First Assistants, Kindergarten
    for one session, and Assistants,
    Kindergarten, for one session
    during the same day                3.50
  Assistants, Kindergarten--
    One Session                        2.25
    Two Sessions                       3.00
  Special Assistants, Kindergarten--
    One Session                        2.25
    Two Sessions                       3.00
  Instructors, Special Classes         4.00
  Teachers of Cookery and Sewing,
    per day                            4.00
  Attendants, Open Air Classes, per
    day                                1.50
  Special Assistants, Day School for
    Immigrants, per half-day           3.00

  Continuation School and Industrial Schools and Classes.

  Instructors Academic and Technical
    Branches, Boston Trade School      6.00
  Vocational and Trade Assistants
    (Continuation School and Trade
    School for Girls)--
      Per hour                         1.25
      Not to exceed per day            5.00
  Aids (Continuation School and
    Trade School for Girls), per day:
      First year                       3.50
      Second year                      4.00
      Third and subsequent years       4.50
  Helpers (Continuation School
    and Trade School for Girls),
    per day                            4.50
  Toolkeepers (Continuation School and
    Boston Trade School), per day:
      First year                       3.00
      Second year                      3.50
      Third and subsequent years       4.00
  Special Instructors (Continuation
    School), per half-day              4.00
  Special Assistants (Continuation
    School), per half-day              2.00
    In this school, one two-hour session, together with such
    preparatory and follow-up work as may be required, shall
    constitute one-half day of service for teachers employed and
    paid on the basis of each half-day of service.
  Student Aids (Trade School for
    Girls), per day:
      First year                       2.00
      Second and subsequent years      2.50
  Apprentice Helpers (Boston Trade
    School), per day:
      First year                       4.00
      Second and subsequent years      5.00
  Special Shop Foremen and Foremen
    Shop Work, Department of
    Manual Arts, Boston Trade
    School, and Continuation School   10.00
  Instructors, Shop Work, and
    Shop Instructors, Department
    of Manual Arts, Boston Trade
    School, and Continuation School    8.00
  Shop Assistants, Department of
    Manual Arts, per day               6.00
  School Nurses                        4.00
  School Physicians                    4.00
  Temporary Clerical Assistants,
    Latin, Day High, Continuation,
    Trade Schools and Day
    Elementary Schools, per day        3.50

and that the compensation of substitute and temporary teachers of other
ranks than those enumerated herein shall be one four-hundredth part of
the minimum salary of the respective ranks for each day of actual
service.


3. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, any
teacher or member of the supervising staff who may be designated by the
Superintendent, in accordance with the regulations to fill a vacancy
caused by the death, disability or absence of a principal of a school or
district, or of a director, assistant director, supervisor or
supervising nurse, for a continuous period exceeding two weeks, shall
receive in addition to his or her regular salary one-half of the
difference between the said salary and the minimum salary of the higher
position during the time of such service, but not including the Summer
vacation. Teachers who may similarly be designated to fill the positions
of sub-master, master's assistant, first assistant in charge, first
assistant in charge, special classes, or first assistant, kindergarten,
shall be paid at the rate of ninety-six dollars ($96) per year in
addition to the regular salary of their rank.


4. ORDERED, That during the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, or
during such portion thereof as the Dorchester High School is conducted
on the two-platoon system, the head master of that school shall be paid
at the rate of three hundred dollars ($300) per annum in addition to the
regular salary of his rank.


5. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, high
school teachers designated to take charge of a branch or colony of a
high school in a separate building shall be paid at the rate of three
hundred dollars ($300) per year in addition to the regular salary of
their rank.


6. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, the
salaries of temporary teachers of salesmanship are hereby established in
accordance with the following schedule:

  Day High Schools, per period        $2.00
  Evening High Schools, per period    $2.00
  Continuation Schools, per half-day  $2.00

(The term "period" is a teaching unit accompanied by a definite
requirement of follow-up work.)


7. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, deductions
on account of absence of temporary teachers serving on an annual salary
shall be made on the same basis as that established for regular
teachers.


8. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, in
addition to the compensation provided for master's assistants, first
assistants in charge, and assistants, day elementary schools, those
assigned to classes attended exclusively by boys in grades above the
third in the Agassiz, Bigelow, Dudley, Dwight, Eliot, Frederic W.
Lincoln, Lawrence, Quincy, Sherwin, Thomas N. Hart and Wendell Phillips
Districts, shall be paid additional compensation at the rate of
forty-eight dollars ($48) per year, beginning with the second
anniversary of their assignments to such classes and continuing until
the expiration of such assignment.


9. ORDERED, That teachers who have been reappointed to the Boston Trade
School, Trade School for Girls, or the Continuation School following
service in either school ending not later than the close of the regular
term in the preceding year, or appointed to service in other parts of
the day school system following such service in such schools, shall be
paid for the period between August 31 and the date of the reopening of
the schools at the same rate for said period as they were paid during
the month of June last preceding.


10. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, Marie A.
Solano be paid at the rate of six hundred dollars ($600) per year in
addition to her regular salary as first assistant, head of department,
Normal School, during her special assignment to the supervision of the
foreign language work in intermediate schools and classes, and for
lectures and instruction to the teachers of foreign languages in
intermediate schools and classes.


11. ORDERED, That Ellen S. Bloomfield, assistant, day elementary
schools, assigned to special service as teacher of penmanship in the
Normal and day elementary schools, be paid at the rate of one hundred
forty-four dollars ($144) per year in addition to the regular salary of
her rank, for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


12. ORDERED, That the compensation of Sarah M. Lilley and Helen L.
Smith, teachers of classes for conservation of eyesight, is hereby
established at the rate of five dollars and seventy-five cents ($5.75)
per day of service for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


13. ORDERED, That the salary of Eleanor J. O'Brien, vocational
assistant, Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby established at
the rate of twenty-one hundred forty-eight dollars ($2,148) per year, to
take effect January 1, 1920.


14. ORDERED, That the salary of Irving O. Scott, vocational assistant,
Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby established at the rate of
two thousand fifty-two dollars ($2,052) per year, for the period January
1 to August 31, 1920.


15. ORDERED, That the salary of Margaret M. Sallaway, vocational
assistant, Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby established at
the rate of seventeen hundred forty dollars ($1,740) per year, for the
period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


16. ORDERED, That the salary of Ethel Fletcher, vocational assistant,
Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby established at the rate of
sixteen hundred forty-four dollars ($1,644) per year, for the period
January 1 to August 31, 1920.


17. ORDERED, That the employment of Frances McCormick as temporary
vocational assistant, Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby
authorized on six days a week, from January 1 to August 31, 1920, and
that she be paid during such employment at the rate of five dollars ($5)
per day.


18. ORDERED, That the compensation of Louis K. Hull, temporary
prevocational instructor, is hereby established at the rate of two
dollars and twenty cents ($2.20) per two-hour period of service for the
period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


19. ORDERED, That the compensation of pianists employed in connection
with physical training exercises in the Public Latin School is hereby
established at the rate of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per
session for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


20. ORDERED, That the compensation of the pianist in the Normal School
is hereby established at the rate of fifty cents (50c) per hour during
the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


21. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, Ethel D.
Hodson and Caroline A. Shay be paid at the rate of one hundred dollars
($100) per year in addition to their regular salaries as instructors,
Day School for Immigrants, during their special assignment to assist the
Director of Evening Schools in the organization and supervision of
classes in Americanization, provided that such additional compensation
shall not be taken into consideration in determining the compensation to
which said teachers may be entitled upon appointment to any other rank
or grade.


22. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, the
compensation of Margaret M. Higgins and Mary S. Keene, associate
managers in school centers, is hereby established at the rate of six
dollars and fifty cents ($6.50) per day, for service not more than the
equivalent of one hundred nineteen (119) days during said period.


23. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, the
compensation of Elizabeth W. Pigeon and Elizabeth R. Teaffe, associate
managers in school centers, is hereby established at the rate of five
dollars and fifty cents ($5.50) per day, for service not more than the
equivalent of one hundred thirty-nine (139) days during said period.


24. ORDERED, That Alice McNally be paid at the rate of fifty dollars
($50) per year in addition to her regular salary as assistant, Eliot
District, during her special assignment to the Fort Strong School for
the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


25. ORDERED, That the salary of the Chief Attendance Officer is hereby
established at the rate of thirty-one hundred twenty dollars ($3120) per
annum, to take effect January 1, 1920, and to continue until otherwise
ordered.


26. ORDERED, That the salary of Attendance Officers is hereby
established in accordance with the following schedule, to take effect
January 1, 1920, and to continue until otherwise ordered:

First year $1464, annual increase $108, maximum $2004.


27. ORDERED, That the salary of the Supervisor of Licensed Minors is
hereby established at the rate of twenty-two hundred twenty dollars
($2220) per annum, to take effect January 1, 1920, and to continue until
otherwise ordered.


28. ORDERED, That the salaries of permanent substitutes in the public
schools are hereby established at the rate of four hundred forty-four
dollars ($444) for the period January 1 to June 30, 1920, both included.


ORDERED, That for the year ending August 31, 1920, the salary of the
research assistant, department of educational investigation and
measurement, is hereby established at the following rate:

Minimum, $1,272; annual increase, $96; maximum, $1,944.


ORDERED, That for the year ending August 31, 1920, the salary of the
rank of examiner in penmanship is hereby established at the rate of
twelve hundred dollars ($1,200) per year.


ORDERED, That the Superintendent is authorized to fix the compensation
of lecturers employed in school centers and whose compensation is not
fixed in the salary schedule; provided, that such compensation,
including any service or other charges, shall in no case exceed forty
dollars ($40) per evening.


                    In School Committee,
                              January 19, 1920.

ORDERED, That the compensation of the rank of emergency assistant, day
elementary schools, is hereby established at the rate of three dollars
($3) per day of actual service, to take effect Jan. 1, 1920.


ORDERED, That the compensation of the rank of emergency kindergarten
assistant, day elementary schools, is hereby established at the rate of
two dollars ($2) for one session of actual service, and three dollars
($3) for two sessions of actual service during the same day, to take
effect Jan. 1, 1920.


                                        THORNTON D. APOLLONIO,
                                                      Secretary.




(2,500-1-20-'20.)

  [Illustration: Allied Printing
  Trades Union Council Label 21
  Boston, Mass.]




    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |
    | Transcriber's Note                                           |
    |                                                              |
    | Inconsistent punctuation of subheadings and currency has     |
    | been retained. Minor typographical corrections are           |
    | documented in the source of the associated html version.     |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Schedule of Salaries for Teachers,
members of the Supervising staff and others., by Boston (Mass.). School  Committee

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALARIES FOR TEACHERS ***

***** This file should be named 27746.txt or 27746.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/7/4/27746/

Produced by Bryan Ness, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
