The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Lost Hero, by Elizabeth Stuart Phelps
Ward and Herbert D. Ward, Illustrated by Frank T. Merrill


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Lost Hero


Author: Elizabeth Stuart Phelps Ward and Herbert D. Ward



Release Date: February 12, 2009  [eBook #28059]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LOST HERO***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Emmy, and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from digital material
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 28059-h.htm or 28059-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/8/0/5/28059/28059-h/28059-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/8/0/5/28059/28059-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/losthero00pheliala





A LOST HERO

[Illustration: A LOST HERO.]

A LOST HERO

by

ELIZABETH STUART PHELPS WARD and HERBERT D. WARD

Illustrated by Frank T. Merrill







Boston
Roberts Brothers
1893

Copyright, 1891,
by Roberts Brothers.

University Press:

John Wilson and Son, Cambridge, U.S.A.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                             PAGE
  A LOST HERO                                       _Frontispiece_
  THE EXPRESS FROM COLUMBIA                                    11
  THE ENTERPRISE OF THE SUMMERVILLE MERCHANT                   12
  IN THE GROUP AT THE STATION STOOD A WHITE BOY                13
  THE BOY TESTED THE HALTER, AND PATTED THE HORSE              15
  STRAY GOATS AND MULES GAZED EXPECTANTLY                      17
  AN OLD NEGRO CAME UP                                         19
  HE PLODDED SLOWLY UP THE TRACK                               21
  SNAPPED HIS HALTER, AND BROKE AWAY                           23
  HE GOT DOWN ON HIS HANDS AND KNEES AND CRAWLED               24
  BIRDS SEEMED TO SING THROUGH THE AIR                         25
  HAD THE END OF THE WORLD COME?                               27
  THEY RAN                                                     31
  THE PAUPER DOG                                               32
  THEY WERE ONLY COWS                                          33
  RUN FOR 'T! RUN!                                             37
  AS THEY CAME ABREAST OF THE SECOND LITTLE STATION            41
  I SOLE FOR TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS ONCT                         43
  THE RAGGED OLD ARM THAT FELLED IT DOWN                       45
  THE LITTLE ONE CLIMBED LIKE A MONKEY UPON A SHELF            47
  THE OLD MAN SEIZED THE TORPEDOES                             48
  THIS COMFORTED THE LAD INCREDIBLY                            49
  "I STUMP YE!"                                                53
  THE STRONG, BLACK FIST WAS CLINCHED                          55
  HE LAID ONE TORPEDO ON EACH RAIL                             57
  PAPAe! PAPAe!                                                  62
  A LITTLE HUDDLING FIGURE                                     63
  THE LOCALITY WHERE THE TRAIN STOOD WAS EXAMINED THOROUGHLY   67
  HAD THE CURIOSITY TO PICK UP THE RAGS                        72
  FINIS                                                        74




NOTE.


THE materials of heroism are everywhere; each day and all situations are
full of them. The power to recognize them and the will to use them make
the hero. He who saves life, no matter how obscure, how poor, how
ignorant he may be, has a value which can never belong to the spiller of
blood; and the crimson glories of war fade before the white honors of
peace.

This little story, which was originally contributed to the "Youth's
Companion," has sought to teach the young people of America something of
the grandeur which waits upon a brave deed, and something of the beauty
of supreme self-sacrifice.

                                                 E. S. P. W.
                                                 H. D. W.




[Illustration]




A LOST HERO.


The express from Columbia was due. It was almost nine o'clock on Tuesday
night, the 31st of August, 1886. It had been a hot day, sultry toward
night, and the loungers at the Summerville station were divided between
pitying and envying their neighbors on the excursion train. In such
weather, home seems either the most intolerable or the most comfortable
place in the world. It had not rained for six weeks, and South Carolina
panted.

[Illustration: "THE ENTERPRISE OF THE SUMMERVILLE MERCHANT."]

There was a larger crowd than usual at the little station to see the
Columbia excursionists come in. The enterprise of the Summerville
merchant who placarded the pine-trees of this forest village with
legends to the effect that his ice-cream would be found "Opp. the
depot," was well rewarded that scorching night. The streets thronged--if
Summerville streets can ever be said to throng--with warm and thirsty
loungers of both sexes and of every color. South Carolinians though they
were, they objected to the heat of that day.

[Illustration: "IN THE GROUP AT THE STATION STOOD A WHITE BOY."]

In the group at the station stood a white boy, about ten years old,--a
neatly dressed, well-behaved little fellow, with an expression of
crushing and delightful responsibility. He wandered back and forth
restlessly and proudly from the track to a tree in the square, where an
old horse and wagon were fastened with unnecessary security. The boy
tested the halter, and patted the horse continually.

It was a very important thing to drive two miles in the dark for one's
father and bring him home from the nine o'clock express. Add to this
situation the excitement of an excursion, and Donny de Mone felt that
life lacked nothing more to the position and the dignity of manhood.
Besides, Donny was very fond of his father, and had not seen him for two
weeks.

[Illustration: "THE BOY TESTED THE HALTER, AND PATTED THE HORSE."]

Now, there was one curious thing about this crowd which would have been
noticeable to a stranger, but had not as yet attracted the attention of
the residents. This was the extraordinary number of animals that
seemed to be waiting for this train. One would have thought that half
the dogs in the neighborhood had relatives coming from Columbia.

[Illustration: "STRAY GOATS AND MULES GAZED EXPECTANTLY."]

Stray goats and mules gazed expectantly up and down the track. Cats had
followed their owners from the houses and betrayed their devotion by
subdued squeals from under their masters' regardless heels. A
brindle-brown pig wriggled its way among the crowd, grunting with
persistent uneasiness; while a couple of wandering cows, unmolested by
the strangely restless dogs, passed and repassed the railroad crossing,
bellowing monotonously. The horses at the station exhibited curious
discomfort; and Donny de Mone's venerable nag "Ben Bow" astonished the
community by pulling at his halter.

While the boy stood valiantly holding the bridle, an old Negro came up
and pulled his sleeve. He was a shabby old Negro. His lean knees
protruded through his trousers,--a mass of patches from under which the
original material, like the jackknife in the mental philosophy problem,
had wholly disappeared. It was especially noticeable that tufts of white
hair found their way through the holes in his coon-skin cap. Across his
shoulder he carried a bundle knotted into an old red handkerchief with a
polka spot.

[Illustration: "AN OLD NEGRO CAME UP."]

"Say, boss, cud ye tell me whar a poah niggah cud fine a bit o' kivered
hay to sleep on, an' a moufful o' pone in de mauhnin? I'se footed it
clean from Charleston. I'se gwine to Branchville whar my dahter, Juno
Soo, is a dyin' ob fever. She ain't long foh dis wohl. I'se got money
'nuff foh de breffust."

He looked wistfully at the lad. Donny answered with the heartiness of a
child who has been brought up to think of others.

"My father will tell you when he comes in. I expect him every minute.
But why don't you go to Kittie's." He mentioned the name of a woman well
known in Summerville for strong character and wise benevolence. "She
lives up the track there. Anybody will show you. She'll help you; she's
the best colored woman in town."

[Illustration: "HE PLODDED SLOWLY UP THE TRACK."]

The old man turned away without answering. Perhaps he thought this a
pleasant device on the boy's part to get rid of him. Perhaps he meant
to follow his counsel. Who can say? He plodded slowly up the track and
disappeared in the darkness.




I.


[Illustration: "SNAPPED HIS HALTER AND BROKE AWAY."]

NOW, while Donny stood holding Ben Bow by the bridle, the old horse
reared, plunged violently, snapped his halter, and broke away. The boy,
at the same instant, was hurled to the ground. The ringing of hoofs and
whir of wheels made strange sensations in his ears. He thought what a
fool he was to be knocked down by old Ben Bow.

[Illustration: "HE GOT DOWN ON HIS HANDS AND KNEES AND CRAWLED."]

Then he tottered to his feet. Complete darkness had come. There was an
unearthly silence. Then a moan, then a howl and a shriek arose which
reached from group to group, from house to house, from square to forest.
Human and animal cries blended in one piteous appeal for mercy.

Again the unknown power smote the lad to the earth, which had become a
raging sea. It rocked--it rolled. Terrified, the child no longer
attempted to stand. He got down on his hands and knees and crawled.

[Illustration: "BIRDS SEEMED TO SING THROUGH THE AIR."]

The trees whistled overhead. Flocks of birds seemed to sing through the
air, striking against the telegraph wires. The atmosphere, which but a
few moments ago reeked with heat, took on a grave-like chill. Again the
earth heaved and swayed beneath the frightened youngster, who fell upon
his face, vainly clawing the ground for the support which it denied him.

The station was only twenty yards away. There, all the people were in a
turmoil. While endeavoring to regain their feet, some were violently
thrown upon the wooden platform. Others, holding to the side of the
building, felt with stupefaction the boards totter beneath their touch.
Was judgment at hand? Had the end of the world come? The terror of a
nameless danger unmanned the stoutest heart. Women shrieked and prayed.
Men cursed and groaned.

[Illustration: "HAD THE END OF THE WORLD COME?"]

Donny had now joined the stricken group. They huddled together until
another shock threw them one upon another. Delicate women became
nauseated as if in mid-ocean. Sturdy men who had faced bullets in the
Civil War without wincing, lost self-control. They surged; they fought;
they comforted each other; they cried aloud.

At this moment a frightful tremor shook the earth. The station building
gave sickening creaks; then it toppled with a crash.

Yell now followed yell. The crowd, that but now waited the joyous
greetings of friends, was battered by the bruises of the earth and
hurried by fright into a contagious state of mania. The bodies and faces
of the people changed almost beyond recognition. Maddened with fear,
stunned by the last concussion, they stampeded.

The cry rang from mouth to mouth: "To the woods! To the hill! Home!
Home!! Home!!!" They swayed; they rushed; they parted; they ran. Struck
as by an invisible enemy, they fell prostrate in the powdery dust. They
picked themselves up again and panted in their flight. A voice close to
Donny's side rang above the uproar: "Good Lord! _It is an earthquake!_"

Like birds before a tornado, the people scattered to the right, to the
left,--this way, that, and were gone. Donny found himself, dazed and
alone, upon the cross-ties, groping toward the oncoming train. He thrust
out his hands and stood a moment piteously crying, "Papae! Papae!" the
most bewildered little fellow in all that frightened town.

[Illustration: "THEY RAN."]

To crawl up the track, to meet the train, to board her, to shriek at
her, to get to his father, to cling to the cow-catcher, perhaps, till
the engineer stopped for sheer mercy,--this was the nearest approach to
a purpose that the child had, as he beat along the track, stumbling,
falling, up again, down again, shaken by the rolling earth, and blinded
by darkness more awful than he had ever seen or thought of.

[Illustration: "THE PAUPER DOG."]

A strange, thin dog, without a collar, whined at his feet as he pushed
on, and licked his hand and followed him like his own. Huge, dim forms
rushed alongside the embankment, making unearthly sounds. Dragons
could not have seemed more dreadful; but they were only cows. Huge
pine-trees bent to the earth with rapid, vibratory motion as if a
giant's hand clutched and shook them by the roots.

[Illustration: "THEY WERE ONLY COWS."]

All the time the awful rumbling of the earth went on; it sounded as if
the world were turning herself over, and thrashing to and fro in a fit
of anger; before every convulsion she uttered a roar which seemed as if
it came from a metal ball bowled along a giant alley beneath. It reached
its climax by trilling the letter _=R-r-r-r-r!=_ in a mighty voice. Then
came the shock.

Suddenly, as the child was making his way through the horror and
desolation of this scene, he felt himself clasped in the outstretched
arms of a figure hurrying from the opposite direction. The two came
together in the dark with a jolt, and recoiled.

"Goramercy!" said a quavering voice. It was the speech of the old Negro
track-walker, taking two days to get to his dying daughter because he
could not afford the railroad ticket that would have brought him to her
in two hours. Donny recognized the high, cracked, pathetic tones which
had addressed him at the station.

"De track's busted!" panted the Negro. "De rails is done gone twist wid
de shakes. Dey lays like er heap ob corn-shuck in de win' up yander. Dat
ar train don' know hit, an' she'll go to Day ob Jedgment, an' ebery soul
aboard ob her! I'se run like de nation fer to warn de town!"

[Illustration: "RUN FOR 'T! RUN!"]

"Oh, there isn't any town to warn!" cried Donny. "It's all run off!
There isn't anything left but the earthquake and me--and this pup--and
nobody to do anything--and my papae's aboard that train! Oh, what shall
we do? What shall we do?"

"Run, honey, run!" said the old man, more hopefully. "Mebbe we'll head
her off some ways or 'nuther. Run for 't! Run!"

The dirty old black hand clasped the tender little white one, which
nestled into it gratefully. What it meant at that awful time not to be
alone,--to feel a human touch, to know that a human heart beat beside
you,--one would have to be in the child's place to understand.




II.


[Illustration: "AS THEY CAME ABREAST OF THE SECOND LITTLE STATION."]

THE two ran, plunging up the distorted track which swelled and shook
beneath them, toward the coming train. As they came abreast of the
second little station, known as the West End station of Summerville, an
idea shot like hope itself through the confused brain of the hurrying
boy.

"I know where the torpedoes are!" he cried, shrilly. "The torpedoes they
put down to stop trains! I've seen 'em. I play with the superintendent's
boys sometimes. If I was bigger I could bu'st open the doors and windows
and find 'em."

"I'se an ole man," shouted the Negro, "but I'se been a tough one befo'
Freedom. I sole for two thousand dollars onct. I kin smash 'most
anythin' yer give me, honey, if hi'm put to 't. If der's anythin'
wantin' to be bu'sted to stop dat ar train, I reckon I kin bu'st."

[Illustration: "I SOLE FOR TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS ONCT."]

Whirling along, in the dark and the uproar, the two panting figures
rushed against the little station. It was very dark. In a lull of the
raging earth the distant whistle of the train could be distinctly heard.

[Illustration: "THE RAGGED OLD ARM THAT FELLED IT DOWN."]

"In there!" cried the boy. "There! _There!_ Oh, don't you think perhaps
my papae took some _other_ train? Oh, she's coming! I'll help. I can
help. Oh, the door's too big for me!"

But not too big for the ragged old arm that felled it down as an axe
fells the last rings of a stricken tree. Not too big for the remnant of
strength in the once muscular slave. Not too big for the fiery old heart
that trouble and toil and hunger and loneliness had never quenched.

The door went down--glass crashed--another door yielded--two wild
figures fell into the superintendent's private office. The little one
climbed like a monkey upon a shelf he knew of, and then the two rushed
out of the rocking building into the resounding air, on which human
shrieks smote steadily, as it was said they did all that awful night.
Again, the whistle of the train--near now--nearer--

[Illustration: "THE LITTLE ONE CLIMBED LIKE A MONKEY UPON A SHELF."]

As the pathetic couple ran up the torn and twisted track, Donny began to
sob aloud; but all he said was, "Papae! Papae! Papae!"

"Gib 'em to me, sonny," said the Negro, with the authority of age and
danger. "I kin run faster'n you, honey! Goramercy, _dar she am_!"

[Illustration: "THE OLD MAN SEIZED THE TORPEDOES."]

The old man seized the torpedoes, and rushing away with them, vanished
in the darkness. The unknown, collarless dog followed him. Donny,
sobbing and calling his father's name, pushed on as well as he could by
himself. As he ran he tried to say his prayers, but all he could
remember was, "Our Father who art in heaven."

[Illustration: "THIS COMFORTED THE LAD INCREDIBLY."]

Then he thought, how soon might his father on earth be father in
heaven, too? He could not say that prayer. The boy, like many an older
and wiser than Donny, only cried instead of praying. As he ran along in
this sad fashion, something hit against him, whinnying in the dark. It
was Ben Bow, the horse he had ridden ever since he was a baby. Now, this
comforted the lad incredibly, to have one of the family with him.




III.


THE old man and the train were now face to face. The locomotive came
cautiously, for the shocks had penetrated far up the road, but too
fast--far too fast. Where the track had gone to pieces, a mass of
twisted rails and tossing sleepers and furrowed earth, a bank--what is
called a high bank in Southern topography--raised itself just in the
turn of time to have sent the derailed train plunging down.

The old Negro watched the approaching flare of the head-light as he ran
on, with a grim, defiant eye.

"I stump ye!" he said aloud. He shook his trembling, black fist at the
locomotive. Stumbling along, his old bundle over one shoulder, and the
torpedoes clutched in the other arm, being thus encumbered--for it did
not occur to him that he could throw away his bundle, he was so poor--he
tripped and fell. His foot caught; it is unknown in what,--in a twisted
tie, or perhaps in a crevice of the cracking earth.

When he tried to rise, something held the hero down. He reached his
whole length forward flat upon the road-bed, and with great precision
and with a coolness that one cannot think of now without emotion, he
laid one torpedo on each rail, exactly where it needs must lie to give
the warning through the crushing wheel.

[Illustration: "I STUMP YE!"]

[Illustration: "THE STRONG, BLACK FIST WAS CLINCHED."]

Now for the second time the old man and the locomotive regarded each
other. Her fiery breath was close upon him. Above the uproar of the
reeling earth the shriek of the train sounded in his deafened ears.
Once again, the strong, black fist was clinched in the approaching
monster's face.

"I dare ye!" he cried. "Come on! I dare ye!" He pulled himself up with a
mighty wrench. But the unknown power held him. He felt the claws of the
cow-catcher. He gave one low cry:

"Lord, I'd like to got dar an' seen Juno Soo afore she died--"

Then he closed his eyes, that he might not see what would happen,
clasped his hands above his gray head, and gave his manly soul to God.

[Illustration: "HE LAID ONE TORPEDO ON EACH RAIL."]




IV.


THE anxious and bewildered passengers heard the snap! snap! of the
torpedoes, and half of them rushed to the platforms. The engineer
signalled "Down brakes!" and the train, with a mighty jolt, came to a
stop. A heavy shock shook the night at that instant. The smell of
sulphur was strong in the chilly air. The engineer got out with a
lantern. The crowd gathered in a moment. At the brink of the scattered
track, at the very edge of wreck and death, the train had come to a
stand.

"Who did it?" swept from lip to lip. No one was in sight.

"I thought we hit a man," said the engineer, swinging his lantern far
out into the darkness. But no sign, whether of the dead or of the
living, was in sight,--nothing except a half-starved, collarless dog,
who sat stupidly upon the grass, and who did not even wag his tail when
the stoker spoke to him.

"Who saved us? Who saved the train?"

Ask the disappointed vulture and the mouth of the muttering earth to
tell you, gentlemen passengers! There is no other lip to answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yes, there is one; a little, trembling, ashy lip--a child's--scarcely
able to articulate for grief or terror, and pouring forth confused cries
that nobody can understand. The passengers have left the train, and are
making their way cautiously homeward down the devastated road-bed, where
the track had lain. It is hurled now to every point of the compass in
the wild night.

They come to a halt suddenly, before a little huddling figure, with its
face hidden in its arms, crouched beside a crooked rail. An old horse,
with traces hanging and harness a wreck, stands snorting beside the boy.

"Donny! Donny! Why, my sonny boy!"

The crowd parts for a thin, white-faced man,--the passenger who had been
heard to say upon the way, "My little son is coming to meet me. I hope
these shocks do not extend to the Summerville station."

There is one other little wild call, "Papae! Papae!"--a tremendous effort
to be manly, and not cry before strangers--and the boy melts into his
father's arms, and wonders whose tears they are which rain upon his
cuddling face.

[Illustration: "PAPAe! PAPAe!"]

But who saved the train? Where is he? How did he do it? Who took that
noble risk? Where is the hero? Here?

"_You_, my lad?"

Then Donny raised his awestruck face from his father's quick-beating
heart, and standing among the strangers and the neighbors, told the
story,--all that he knew; all that he could tell.

[Illustration: "A LITTLE HUDDLING FIGURE."]

"I only remembered the torpedoes, sir. The old man did the rest."

"What old man? Where is he?"

"Why, the old colored man! Haven't you seen him? The old colored man who
ran ahead and put them on the track. _He_ saved the train."

The engineer took his lantern and silently went back and swung the spot
of fire in the black, cold air. It had not rained, as we have said, for
many weeks, but his feet splashed into deep pools and running rivulets,
and sank into crevices and gashes in the trembling earth.

A few of the passengers followed the engineer. The locality where the
train stood was examined thoroughly. Again, the same result,--no human
creature, dead or living, was to be seen. The pauper dog sat just where
they had left him. The engineer went up and patted him. At the touch he
fell over--dead of fright.

They returned to report what they had found. As they did so, they called
and shouted into the darkness, seeking for the brave life that had saved
their own. Only the roar of the earthquake answered them.

"But he _must_ be there!" cried the lad, "of course he's there. He's a
very shabby old Negro. He is all patches and his knees and hair stick
out. His hat looked like a coon-skin hat. His hair is gray hair. He
carries a little bundle on his shoulder. He's a very strong old Negro.
He smashed the station in like--like blocks. He was a slave, and he was
so strong he cost two thousand dollars. He's going to see his
daughter in Branchville. She's dying. He's so poor he had to walk from
Charleston all the way. _He_ saved the train. You just look and you'll
find him."

[Illustration: "THE LOCALITY WHERE THE TRAIN STOOD WAS EXAMINED
THOROUGHLY."]

A mighty shock drowned the boy's words at this moment, and seemed to
jeer at them. The people huddled together, and looked into each others'
appalled faces, and no man said a word. Instinctively they ranged
themselves into a mass, as if united humanity could defy aroused and
raging Nature,--then broke, and ran for their homes, and wives and
babes, and whatever fate had left to them.




V.


BUT where is the hero? Who saved the train? Summerville, to this day,
goes seeking him, and her search is a vain thing. Will he not break his
long, mysterious silence? Will he not come forth to take the blessing of
the grateful people? An obscure old Negro, poor, hungry, and homeless,
will he not accept the proffered reward? Where is the hero?

Like Moses of old, hath God buried him? The earth knows, which yawned
beside the track--and closed again--when the crushing wheels struck the
life from the unknown savior of the excursion train. The earth knows;
but she keeps her secret. Her awful lips are dumb.

[Illustration: "HAD THE CURIOSITY TO PICK UP THE RAGS."]

Some weeks after the shock of August 31, a section hand, setting a
sleeper, found an old bundle, soiled and wet, tied to a stick and
mouldering in the ground. He opened it carelessly, and threw it away,
and hardly thought to mention it to his overseer, who had the curiosity
to pick up the rags and examine them.

A handkerchief, once red, with polka spots, contained a ragged flannel
shirt and a stocking-heel tied with a piece of tape. That was all. This
stocking-heel, evidently the wallet of some poor traveller, held one
silver piece of the value of ten cents, two coppers, and a newspaper
clipping, old and faded. It was a copy of the Proclamation of
Emancipation to the Negro slaves of America, beginning, "I, Abraham
Lincoln," and bearing date Eighteen Hundred and Sixty-three.

[Illustration]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LOST HERO***


******* This file should be named 28059.txt or 28059.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/8/0/5/28059



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

