The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch or the London Charivari, Vol. 147,
October 7, 1914, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch or the London Charivari, Vol. 147, October 7, 1914

Author: Various

Release Date: February 15, 2009 [EBook #28092]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***




Produced by Neville Allen, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's note: In the article "THE HELPMEET", various words and
phrases have been struck through in the printed version. These passages
are marked thus:- ~Maybe love was~


  PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

  VOL. 147

  OCTOBER 7, 1914.


CHARIVARIA.

General VILLA has now declared war on President CARRANZA. Everybody's
doing it.

       * * *

Is there, we wonder, a single unfair weapon which the Germans have not
used? It is now said that not infrequently a German band is made to play
when the enemy's infantry advances to attack.

       * * *

A regrettable mistake is reported from South London. A thoroughly
patriotic man was sat upon by a Cockney crowd for declaring that the
KAISER was a Nero.

       * * *

Servia, _The Times_ announces, will in future be called Serbia in our
contemporary's columns. We would suggest that in the same way Bavaria
might be called Babaria.

       * * *

All German soldiers are close-cropped. To show, apparently, that they
have the courage of the conviction they deserve.

       * * *

The German officers in France are said to be extremely careful as to
what they eat, betraying a great fear of being poisoned. It is, of
course, a fact that one grain of vermin-killer would dispose of any one
of them.

       * * *

It has been suggested that the explanation of the KAISER may be that he
is a "throw-back." His parents were gentlefolk, but his ancestor,
FREDERICK WILLIAM I., was a well-known undesirable.

       * * *

It is now stated that the reason why the German troops destroyed the
historic edifices of Louvain and Rheims was the KAISER'S order that no
stone was to be left unturned to prove that the Germans are the apostles
of Culture.

       * * *

It has been decided, after all, that SHAKSPEARE may be played in
Germany; and the proposal that the name of the bard should be changed to
Wilhelm Saebelschuettler has been dropped in deference to the wishes of
the KAISER, who thought it might lead to confusion.

       * * *

It has, we are glad to see, been denied that CARPENTIER, the famous
boxer, has been wounded. This reminds us, by-the-by, of one more
miscalculation that the German War Party made. In choosing their date
for the outbreak of war they relied on the fact that CARPENTIER was not
yet liable for service.

       * * *

The Germans have had a bright new idea, and are calling us a nation of
shopkeepers. Certainly we have been fairly successful so far in
repelling their counter attacks.

       * * *

"GERMAN PIES SHOT." _Times._

Sound policy this. The enemy cannot fight without his commissariat.

       * * *

A well-known Floor Polish firm has issued a notice declaring that it is
entirely a British concern. However, we shall not complain of their
dealing with an alien enemy if they care to supply a little of it for
the benefit of German manners.

       * * *

Dr. KARL VOLLMOeLLER, who is chiefly notable for his spectacle "The
Miracle," has, _The Express_ tells us, been acting for the past month as
Germany's head Press agent in Rome, and has now sailed for New York. One
would have thought that there was greater need for him in Germany, where
only a miracle can save the situation.

       * * *

Publishers seem to be realising that books, to sell nowadays, must have
warlike titles. Mrs. KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN'S new volume is, we note,
called _A Summer in a Canon_.

       * * *

By the way, _The Price of Love_ is announced. It is six shillings.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: Hawker. "THIS AIN'T MY USUAL WAY O' GITTIN' A LIVIN',
LIDY; BUT, OWIN' TO THE WAR, I----"

_Housekeeper._ "THAT'S ALL NONSENSE! WHY, TO MY KNOWLEDGE YOU HAVE BEEN
ABOUT FOR THE PAST TEN YEARS."

Hawker. "YOU'LL PARDON ME, LIDY, BUT I'M REFERRIN' TO THE SOUF AFRIKIN
WAR."

       *       *       *       *       *

EPITHETS FOR ACTORS.

The dramatic critic of _The Daily Chronicle_, speaking of the first
performance of _Mameena_, observes, "Mr. Oscar Asche, jutting,
preponderant and softly corrugated, was a splendid Zulu chief."

Following this distinguished example, we have endeavoured to express the
histrionic inwardness of some of our leading actors and actresses on
similar lines:--

Sir GEORGE ALEXANDER, dolicocephalic, fimbriated and supra-lapsarian,
interpreted the _role_ of the archdeacon with consummate skill.

Sir HERBERT BEERBOHM TREE, goliardic, tarantulated and pontostomatous,
invested the character of the great financier with a fluorescent charm.

Mr. AINLEY, prognathous, salicylic and partially oxydised, made a superb
lover.

Miss GLADYS COOPER, lambent, pyramidal and turturine, fully realized the
polyphonic cajoleries of _Seraphina_.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Coincidence.

_Thursday._--The Kaiser distributes 30,000 iron crosses.

_Friday._--Great Britain declares pig-iron contraband of war.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Members of the Tooloona Rifle Club have collected 1,000 fat sheep
    as a gift to the British troops. The price of butter has been
    reduced to L4 per ton, and the wheels of the export trade will be
    immediately set in motion."

_Daily Chronicle._

How fortunate that the price of lubrication fell just in time.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANOTHER "SCRAP OF PAPER."

    [_"The Times" of October 1st vouches for the following Army Order
    issued by the German KAISER on August 19th: "It is my Royal and
    Imperial Command that you concentrate your energies, for the
    immediate present, upon one single purpose, and that is that you
    address all your skill and all the valour of my soldiers to
    exterminate first the treacherous English and walk over General
    French's contemptible little Army."_]

  WILHELM, I do not know your whereabouts.
    The gods elude us. When we would detect your
  Earthly address, 'tis veiled in misty doubts
          Of devious conjecture.

  At Nancy, in a moist trench, I am told
    That you performed an unrehearsed lustration;
  That there you linger, having caught a cold,
          Followed by inflammation.

  Others assert that your asbestos hut,
    Conveyed (with you inside) to Polish regions,
  Promises to afford a likely butt
          To Russia's winged legions.

  But, whether this or that (or both) be true,
    Or merely tales of which we have the air full,
  In any case I say, "O WILHELM, do,
          Do, if you can, be careful!"

  For if, by evil chance, upon your head,
    Your precious head, some impious shell alighted,
  I should regard my dearest hopes as dead,
          My occupation blighted.

  I want to save you for another scene,
    Having perused a certain Manifesto
  That stimulates an itching, very keen,
          In every Briton's best toe--

  An Order issued to your Army's flower,
    Giving instructions most precise and stringent
  For the immediate wiping out of our
          "Contemptible" contingent.

  Well, that's a reason why I'd see you spared;
    So take no risks, but rather heed my warning,
  Because I have a little plan prepared
          For Potsdam, one fine morning.

  I see you, ringed about with conquering foes--
    See you, in penitential robe (with taper),
  Invited to assume a bending pose
          And eat that scrap of paper!

  O. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

UNWRITTEN LETTERS TO THE KAISER.

No. III.

(_From the EMPEROR-KING OF AUSTRIA-HUNGARY._)

MY VERY DEAR BROTHER AND BEST FRIEND,--I seize a few moments of leisure
to write and congratulate you, as I congratulate myself, on this
constant succession of almost incredible victories that have brought new
laurels to your arms. Your presence in Paris at the head of the splendid
troops whom you have conducted from triumph to triumph places the
coping-stone on your life's work. Oh, that it had been possible for your
dear old grandfather--I did not always value him as he deserved--to have
lived to see this glory. But, then, I suppose your part in the work
would have been less brilliant and prominent, so, perhaps, all is for
the best as it is.

To have captured the whole French army; to have driven the English army
into the sea and drowned them in what they call their own element (by
the way, when are you going to make your triumphal entry into London?);
to have brought the ungrateful Belgians to recognise you not merely as
their conqueror but also as their benefactor--all this is really almost
enough of honour for one man. But in addition you have made the plans
which have kept so many of the disgraceful Russians cooped up in their
own country, and you will soon, I am sure, lead your troops to Moscow
and on to Petersburg. My own brave fellows shall march shoulder to
shoulder with them. Nothing will be impossible to these armies thus
united and thus led.

What my noble soldiers have hitherto done has been tremendous and
overwhelming. You have, of course, read the bulletins issued by our War
Office. These, however, give an inadequate idea of what has taken place,
and you will, I am sure, forgive me if with the natural pride of an old
man I relate to you these matters in their true proportions. We have
made a military promenade through Montenegro and Servia and have annexed
both these troublesome countries. Only ten Servians and four
Montenegrins have been left alive, so that in future, it may be hoped,
we shall not be vexed by any of their conspiracies. In the Adriatic, we
have made mincemeat of the combined British and French fleets, and have
thus removed from the wretched Italians any temptation to join in the
war against us. It was a magnificent victory, quite equal to that in
which your grand fleet sunk the whole of the British fleet in the North
Sea. Finally, as you know, we have driven the Russians before us like
chaff before the wind. Many hundred thousand Russians, with guns,
ammunition and battle flags, have been taken prisoners and are interned
here in Vienna. All these mighty deeds have been performed by our
soldiers and sailors at an infinitesimal cost. I doubt if we have had
two hundred men killed and wounded. Surely it is a great thing to be
alive in these glorious days.

What pleases me, I may say, as much as anything else, is the wonderful
example of generosity and humanity which your army and mine have been
able to offer to the world. I shudder to think what would have happened
to Belgium, to Germany and to ourselves, had the French, the Russians
and the English been victorious. Villages would have been burnt,
civilians with their women and children would have been massacred,
churches and cathedrals would have been laid in ruins, and whole
countries would have been devastated. It is to our glory that nothing of
this sort has happened; but, after all, we need not take credit for
having acted as Christians and gentlemen. We could do no other.

I am arranging for a _Te Deum_ in St. Stephen's church to thank God for
all the blessings He has vouchsafed to our arms. I wonder if you would
consent to attend. I would arrange the date to suit you. And I hope you
will bring with you some of those fine upstanding fellows of yours who
have fought through the war. Some foolish persons consider them stiff
and hard, but, for myself, I like to see their soldierly pride. Pray
give my regards to your gracious Empress, and my love to the little
princes. But, of course, they must be quite grown up by now.

Your devoted Brother and Friend,

FRANCIS JOSEPH.

P.S.--I have just heard that a large number of Russians are approaching
Vienna. No doubt they are sent to sue for peace.

       *       *       *       *       *

How to be Useful in War Time.

    "The usefulness of the map is increased by its giving weights in
    metres."--_Morning Post._

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: THE INCORRIGIBLES.

_New Arrival at the Front._ "WHAT'S THE PROGRAMME?"

_Old Hand._ "WELL, YOU LAY DOWN IN THIS WATER, AND YOU GET PEPPERED ALL
DAY AND NIGHT, AND YOU HAVE THE TIME OF YOUR LIFE!"

_New Arrival._ "SOUNDS LIKE A BIT OF ALL RIGHT. I'M ON IT!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _Very proper Cook_ (_horrified at reports of German
atrocities_). "REALLY, MUM, IT SEEMS AS IF THE GERMANS ARE NOT AT ALL
THE THING."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LAST LINE.

II.

I HAVE said that our motto is "Soldier and Civilian Too." That is our
strength and our weakness; our weakness because it leaves us a little
uncertain as to how we stand in matters of discipline.

I happened to be Corporal of the Guard the other evening--a delightful
position. For the first time I had a little authority. True I sometimes
give the man next to me a prod in the wind and whisper, "Form fours,
idiot," but it is an unofficial prod, designed to save him from the
official fury. Now for the first time I was in power, with the whole
strength of military law behind me. So of course I got busy. As soon as
the first guard had been set, and the rest of them, with their
distinguished corporal and commonplace sergeant, were in the guard tent,
I let myself go.

"Now then, my lad," I said to one, "look alive. Just clear this tent a
bit, and then fetch some straw for my bed to-night. When you've done
that, I'll think of something else for you. We've all got to work these
days. Bustle up."

Without looking up from the paper he was straining his eyes to read, he
murmured lazily, "Oh, go and boil your head," and bent still lower over
the news. The others sniggered.

For a moment I was taken aback. Then I saw that there was only one
dignified thing to do. I went out and consulted my solicitor.

"James," I said, as soon as I had found him, "I desire your advice.
Free," I added as an afterthought.

"Go on," said James, sitting up and putting the tips of his fingers
together.

"It is like this. I am Corporal of the Guard." James looked impressed.
"Corporal of the Guard," I repeated; "a responsible position.
Practically the whole safety of the camp depends upon me. In the
interests of that safety I found it necessary to give some orders just
now. The reply I received was, 'Go and boil your head.' What ought I to
do?"

James was thoughtful for a little.

"It depends," he said at last.

"How depends?" I asked indignantly. "He told me to go and boil my----"

"Exactly. So that it depends on who told you. If it was the Sergeant of
the Guard whom you accidentally addressed----"

"Help!" I murmured, struck by a horrible fear.

"In that case," went on James, "it would be your duty to obey orders.
Obtaining a large saucepan of fresh water, you would heat it to,
approximately, 212 degrees Fahrenheit, at which point bubbles would
begin to appear upon the surface of the pan. Then, immersing the head
until the countenance assumed a ripe beetroot colour, you would return
it to the Sergeant of the Guard, salute, and ask him if he had any
further instructions to give you ... No," added James, "I think I am
wrong there. It would not be necessary for you to salute. Only
commissioned officers are saluted in the British Army."

I had been thinking furiously while James was speaking.

"It _wasn't_ the sergeant," I said eagerly. "I'm sure it wasn't. I
noticed him particularly when we were forming up. No, James, it was an
ordinary private."

"In that case the position is more complicated. On the whole I think it
would be your duty to convene a court-martial and have the fellow shot."

I looked at my watch.

"How long does it take to convene a court martial?" I asked. "I've
never convened one before."

"What matter the time!" said James grandly. "The mills may grind slowly,
but they grind exceeding small."

"Quite so. But in about an hour and a quarter the guard is changed; and
if, as is probable, the man who insulted me is then on guard himself,
_he_ will have the rifle. And if he has the rifle, I don't quite see how
we are going to shoot him."

"You mean he mightn't give it up?"

"Yes. It would be rank insubordination, I admit, but in the
circumstances one would not be surprised at his attitude."

"That is a good point," said James. "It had escaped me." He was silent
again. "There's another thing, too, I was forgetting," he added. "If he
were shot, his wife might possibly object and make a fuss. The affair
would very likely get into the papers--you know what the Press is. It
might give the Corps a bad name."

We were both silent for a little.

"Suppose," I said, "the death penalty were not enforced, and he were
merely given three days in cells?"

"But he has to get back to his work on Monday."

"True. Really, it's very hard to see how discipline _can_ be maintained.
I almost wish now that I wasn't a temporary non-commissioned officer. As
a private one simply has the time of one's life, telling corporals all
day long to go and boil their heads. I wish I were a private again."

"There's one thing you can do," said James. "You can report him to the
Sergeant of the Guard."

"And what's the good of that?"

"Only that it's probably your duty," said James austerely. "And I should
think it's also your duty to get back to the guard-tent as soon as
possible."

I rose with dignity.

"I do not consult my solicitor simply to be told my duty," I said
stiffly. "All I want to know is, can I bring an action against him?"

"No," said James.

"In that case I will return. Good evening."

I went back to the guard-tent. The mutineer was still reading, but now
there was a light to read by. He looked up as I came in. I had had that
uneasy feeling all along, and now I knew. It _was_ the Sergeant.

I saluted. It may be wrong, as James says, but a salute or two thrown in
can't do any harm.

"May I speak to you, Sergeant?" I said respectfully, yet with an air
which implied that the Germans were upon us and that the news must be
kept from the others.

We went outside together.

"Awfully sorry," I said; "it was rather dark. I'm an ass."

"My dear man, that's all right," he said. "By the way you'd better see
about getting some straw in. I've got to see the Adjutant." He went off,
and I returned to the tent.

"I want one of you to help me get some straw," I said mildly.

Three of them jumped up at once. "You stay here," they said, "_we_'ll
get it."

So there you are; there's nothing wrong with the discipline. At the same
time if it _were_ necessary to shoot anybody, I am not quite sure how we
should proceed.

  A. A. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

A POSSIBLE SOURCE.

Dear Mr. Punch,--Having recently dropped into several London theatres
and halls of variety I have been struck by the numerical strength,
agility and apparently abounding vitality of the young men forming the
chorus. These gallant fellows sing and caper with the utmost spirit
throughout the whole evening, both in musical comedy or revue; and in
London alone, where revues are now being postponed at many of the
outlying halls, there must be more than a thousand of them. Now and then
they even go so far as to impersonate recruits--the chorus to the
recruiting songs which have crept into more than one programme--and they
make, I can assure you, Sir, a very brave show with their rifles and
their military paces, a little accelerated perhaps by the exigencies of
the tune, but a marvel of discipline none the less.

Watching these brisk and efficient male choruses at work, the thought
has come to me--in fact has often been forced upon me by the martial
nature of the musical number which they were engaged in rendering with
so much capability and cheerfulness--that at a time when England is
particularly in need of her young men in the field, the audiences of
London might consent to forgo a little of the pleasure that comes from
watching athletic youths covered with grease-paint and gyrating in the
limelight, and, by expressing their readiness to see those necessary
evolutions carried out by older men, liberate so much good material to
join the Army. Such is the power of the make-up (I am told) that a man
of fifty could easily be arranged to look sufficiently like a man of
half his age, at any rate without imperilling the success of the
entertainment from the point of view of the spectator. And of course the
girls will remain in all their charm, since girls cannot enlist.

The point may be worth considering. The decision, I feel sure, rests
entirely with the public. If the public says: "Let the young men go, and
give us more mature choristers for a while, and we will patriotically
endeavour to endure the privation"--then all the young men will, of
course, enlist as one. But unless the public says this they must remain
in the choruses against the grain.

I am, Sir, Yours gratefully,

OVER AGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Censor at Work.

Beneath a photograph of a naval officer _The Daily Mirror_ says:--

    "A daring raid has just been made by Commander Samson ... The small
    picture shows the commander."

Beneath the same photograph _The Daily Mail_ says:--

    "A famous British naval airman (nameless by order of the Censor)."

But the order of the Censor came too late. _The Mirror_ had given the
great secret away to the KAISER, and the whole course of the war was
altered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _Recruiting Officer._ "WHAT'S THE GOOD OF COMING HERE AND
SAYING YOU'RE ONLY SEVENTEEN YEARS OLD? GO AND WALK ROUND THAT YARD AND
COME BACK AND SEE IF YOU'RE NOT NINETEEN."

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: "I 'OPES YER MISTESS'LL 'SCUSE ME BEIN' SO LATE WITH THE
WASHIN'. YER SEE, I DUSSENT COME IN DAYLIGHT FOR FEAR OF THE GOVERNMENT
PINCHIN' MY 'ORSE FOR THE WAR."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SAVING OF STRATFORD.

[_It has been decided, we gather, to go on playing SHAKSPEARE in Berlin,
because SHAKSPEARE is so closely connected with the German race._]

  This was so good of you, so like your grace,
    Ye on whose brows the brand of Rheims is graven,
  To spare the poet of our common race
    And find forgiveness for the Bard of Avon;
  And all the little lore he feebly guessed,
    Phantasy, rhetoric, and trope and sermon,
  To clasp politely to your mailed breast,
    Refine, transmute and render wholly German.

  Seeing in _Henry V._ a Prussian King,
    Tracing in _Hamlet_ a more moody KAISER,
  You put new might into the master's wing,
    He seems more wonderful to us, and wiser;
  Not as he dimly sang in ages gone
    He warbles to us now, but wild with culture,
  Exchanging for the mere parochial Swan
    The full-mouthed war notes of the Potsdam Vulture.

  So shall he live, and live eternally
    (In humble homage to the War Lord's mitten)
  "This precious stone set in the silver sea,"
    Heligoland, of course, and not Great Britain:
  A thousand carven saints are lain in dust
    In lands the Prussian Junker sets his boot on,
  But WILHELM SHAKSPEARE and his honoured bust
    Shall save themselves by being partly Teuton.

  And when the hooves of those imperial swine
    Leap, as of course they will, the ocean's borders,
  And England's trampled down from Thames to Tyne,
    And Wells is burnt, and Winchester, by orders,
  It may be tears shall start into the eyes
    Of helmed colonels in our Midland valleys,
  And they shall spare the tomb where SHAKSPEARE lies;
    He was a German (_Deutschland ueber alles_).

  Almost I seem to see the Uhlans stand,
    Paying their pious sixpences to enter
  That little homestead of the Fatherland
    That housed the dramatist in Stratford's centre;
  A trifle flushed, maybe, with English beer,
    But mutely reverent and not talking chattily,
  They write beneath their names: "A friend lives here;
    Not to be ransacked. Signed, _The Modern ATTILAE_."

  A glorious scene. The voice of KRUPP is dumb;
    Not pining now for Frankfort or for Muenich,
  The sub-lieutenant slides with quivering thumb
    A picture-postcard underneath his tunic.
  Till then, if any dawn of doubt creeps in
    How best to judge the Bard and praise him rightly,
  Let me implore the actors of Berlin
    To play _Macbeth_ to crowded houses nightly.

  EVOE.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INTERPRETERS.

"May I go into the village to get my hair cut?" asked Sinclair of my
wife. "I'll promise to be back for tea."

Upon her assurance that Madame Mercier was lying down and was not at all
likely to appear, permission was granted. We do not generally allow
Sinclair to go out of the grounds at present. He is acting as the
central link which makes the continuance of the social life possible to
us. For I do not think that we could have undertaken (with our
deplorable ignorance of French) to entertain Belgian refugees at all had
he not been staying with us. As it is, it works beautifully, though
Madame Mercier and her two daughters speak no English, for Sinclair's
French is perfectly adequate.

It was during his absence that we learned that my neighbour, Andrew
Henderson, the dairy farmer, had also taken in a Belgian--a woman who
was to work on the farm during the winter.

"Here's another chance for you, Sinclair," said I, as he appeared at the
gate. "It looks as if you will have to call round every morning to
interpret and give 'em a good start for the day."

Sinclair was full of zeal and set off next day after breakfast. From the
drawing-room window we watched his triumphant entry into the farm-yard
at the foot of the hill. But he came back in a dejected frame of mind.

"She's called Suzanne," he told us, "and she's quite a nice-looking sort
of woman, and she handles a turnip-cutter like an expert; but she talks
nothing but Flemish."

"We might have thought of that," said the Reverend Henry. "Still, I
daresay they'll manage all right."

"On the contrary," said Sinclair. "Henderson sent Suzanne to get the
letters last night. She was gone a long, long time, and at last came
back with three live fowls in a sack. She had been chasing them round
the hen-house for all she was worth. Things can't go on like that, you
know."

The Reverend Henry had an idea. "The only way out of it," he said, "is
for you and Madame Mercier both to go. She knows Flemish."

"Yes, that's it," said I. "Henderson tells you what he wants; you hand
it on to Madame Mercier in French; she transmits it to Suzanne in
Flemish--and there you are!"

"Right-o!" said Sinclair. "We'll have a shot to-morrow morning."

Madame Mercier, who is a kindly, gentle creature, was most anxious to
help, and again we viewed the operations in the farm-yard. The Reverend
Henry got out his field-glasses (which have since been sent to Lord
ROBERTS) and we watched the little corps of interpreters getting to
work, while Suzanne, eager and expectant, like a hound on the leash,
waited, shovel in hand. But it all ended in confusion and head-shaking
and a dreary retreat up the hill. Madame Mercier seemed to be much
amused.

"We have decided to adjourn," said Sinclair. "The truth is, we were not
getting on at all. It looks as if you will have to come too."

"I was always afraid there were weak spots in you, after all, Sinclair,"
said the Reverend Henry. "It does not surprise me. You are all right in
table French or even in domestic, railway or restaurant French, but as
soon as we get outside of your beat into agricultural French----"

"It isn't that," said Sinclair. "I'm all right. It's that confounded
fellow, Henderson. I'm hanged if I can understand a word of his Scotch.
Never heard such a lingo in my life."

It is true that Henderson, who comes from some obscure district far
North even of this, is a little difficult to understand. I have found
him so myself.

"He said he wanted Suzanne to 'redd up the fauls,' as far as I could
gather. Well, I have no idea what the fauls are, and I don't see how she
is going to read them up in a language she doesn't understand. I had to
give him up. We can't get on without your help."

That afternoon the Interpretation Committee, now increased to four
active members, for Henry had insisted on coming too as referee, took up
its position in the farm-yard in the form of a chain, along which
communication was to pass from Henderson, through me, Sinclair and
Madame Mercier to Suzanne. It was a little embarrassing for Suzanne, but
she stood her ground well and waited in an admirably receptive mood,
while the various items percolated through. Henderson gave me in careful
detail the whole of his commands for her normal daily life, and
everything seemed to go splendidly. But I am afraid the thing must have
passed through too many hands before it reached its destination; for
Suzanne, after many cheerful nods, suddenly broke off and turned on her
heel. Then she secured an axe, which was lying against the bothy door,
and walked with a steady and fixed purpose, never turning her head, out
into the lane, through the gate and up the hill. We watched her
spellbound till she reached the horizon, and there saw her pause, roll
up her sleeves and furiously attack an old spruce tree.

It is impossible to say who was to blame. But it is clear that the
instructions (as the Frenchman said of BRAHMS' Variations) had been
_diablement changes en route_.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIA: 1784-1914.

  The job was for us, grin and bear;
    We'd lit on India's dust an' drought;
  We knew as we were planted there,
    But scarcely how it came about;
  And so, in rough and tumble style,
    And nothing much to make a shout,
  We set our backs to graft a while,
    And meant to stay and stick it out.

  Ten hundred risky, frisky Kings,
    And on the whole a decent lot;
  And several hundred million things
    That trusted us with all they'd got;
  And so we blundered at it straight,
    And found the times was pretty hot;
  And so they smiled and called it Fate,
    And Fate it was, as like as not.

  Our law was one for great and small--
    We heard 'em honest, claim for claim;
  We smooth'd their squabbles for 'em all,
    And let 'em pray by any name;
  And so we left enough alone,
    But learnt 'em plenty all the same;
  We show'd 'em what they should be shown,
    And tried to play the decent game.

  For all our work we've not got much?
    P'r'aps not: but now there's come a scrap
  That's got us good with lies and such,
    And gave 'em just the chance to snap;
  And fools had thought they likely would
    (That's German-made and rattle-trap);
  They'd shout--the KAISER said they should--
    And, happen, wipe us off the map.

  From snow to sand that shout has burst,
    And German lies are well belied;
  And flood calls field for who'll be first--
    They're proud to share the Empire-pride.
  It's them for Britain at the test;
    We knew they'd never stand aside;
  For when we tried and did our best
    The beggars must have known we tried.

       *       *       *       *       *

The German Campaign of Lies.

From a book of reference:--

    "'Berlin Work.' See 'Embroidery.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

News of a serious character reaches us from _The Toronto Daily Mail_,
which announces in its index of contents:--

    "Austrian Fleet Bombards Montenegro's Only Teapot."

Another one of true Britannia metal is being sent to our gallant ally.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: "FARVER FINKS HE'S GOT A GERMAN SPY. 'E'S SITTIN' ON 'IS
'EAD. 'E'LL NEED 'ELP--MUVVER'S OUT!"

Illustration: "THAT'S THE CHAP--'IM WIVOUT A COLLAR!"

Illustration: "NO!--NOT 'IM--THAT'S FARVER!"

Illustration: "OH, LUMME! YOU'VE MIXED 'EM UP NOW. I DUNNO WHICH IS
WHICH."

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: UNREPORTED CASUALTY TO THE FOOTBALL OF THE 85TH INFANTRY
REGIMENT OF THE ENEMY.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOW TO BRIGHTEN WARFARE.

The contents of a poster of an esteemed contemporary (I confess that I
got no further than the poster), which announced "Training Eagles to
Fight Airships," have led me to speculate whether something further
might not be achieved in similar directions.

Why, for instance, should not rabbits be trained to upset siege guns?
The innocent and docile character of the creatures would be a valuable
asset in work of this nature. Even if seen--and among grass or
undergrowth on a dark night a rabbit of ordinary intelligence might
reasonably hope to escape detection--their real purpose might be
cleverly masked until it was too late. Leisurely approaching the object
of attack, lulling the suspicions of a dull-witted sentinel or patrol by
stopping now to cull a leaf, now to wash a whisker, the well-trained
rabbit would have no difficulty in creeping to within striking distance.
Then suddenly rushing forward and throwing its whole weight against the
nearest wheel of the cannon it would tilt it from its foundation and
fling it headlong to irretrievable destruction, very likely pinning
several members of the gun company among its ruins.

If it is objected that the strength of an average rabbit would be
unequal to the task, are there not, I would ask, strong rabbits among
rabbits, just as there are strong men among men? None of the rabbits of
my acquaintance could, I admit, overturn a mowing-machine; but then
neither could I myself balance a coach-and-four upon my neck, yet I have
seen men upon the stage who could and did. The first object of the
efficient trainer would be, of course, to select suitable rabbits.

Surely something too might be done with white mice? By gnawing through
the tent ropes of a sleeping enemy--especially on wet and stormy
nights--they would engender a sense of strain and insecurity among our
opponents that could not be without an appreciable influence on their
temper and _moral_ throughout the campaign. The tents of commanding
officers of notoriously choleric nature should be the objects of
persistent attention in this way.

The suitability of parrots for use in warfare is obvious. Their especial
duty would be to give misleading words of command at points of critical
importance during a battle. A stealthy night attack might be converted
into a hasty "strategic retirement" by an observant parrot ingratiating
itself among the enemy's ranks and raising the cry, "Up, Guards, and at
'em!"

It is perhaps late in the season to utilise the services of trained
wasps to any extent, but the possibilities of other insect auxiliaries
should not be overlooked.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prime Minister of New Zealand as reported in _The Timaru Herald_:--

    "Just one word more. With regard to Canada's offer that is reported
    in this evening's paper, my opinion of it may be summed up in three
    words: Dibra, Jukova and Ipek."

This is one of the things we could have summed up more lucidly
ourselves, though perhaps not so concisely.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Will the Soldiers who saw Lady Thrown off Tramcar on Saturday
    evening, about 8 o'clock, please communicate."

    _Advt. in "Northampton Daily Chronicle."_

Another lovers' tiff in the gloaming?

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: THE ROAD TO RUSSIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _Cyclist_ (_taking initiative on being
caught without a light_). "DOUSE YOUR GLIM, MATE; WE'LL BE HAVING THEM
ZEPPELINS ALL OVER US."

       *       *       *       *       *

BURGOMASTER MAX.

  Belgian soldiers, martial heroes, in a world of fire and flame,
  By their fortitude and daring have achieved immortal fame,
  But there's one, a mere civilian, who a _vates sacer_ lacks--
          Burgomaster MAX!

  Therefore let a sorry rhymer offer you his humble meed,
  And salute your priceless service to your country in her need,
  All unarmed yet undefeated, never turning in your tracks--
          Burgomaster MAX!

  _Athanasius contra mundum_--you remind us of the tag,
  You whose fearless manifestoes never brooked the German gag;
  Bucking up your fellow-townsmen when their hearts were weak as wax--
          Burgomaster MAX!

  Now, alas! we read the foemen have decided to deport
  And intern you for a season in some dismal German fort,
  For your presence was distasteful to the Hun who sacks and "hacks"--
          Burgomaster MAX!

  Yet, whatever fate befalls you, as the ages onward roll
  You will live in deathless lustre on your country's Golden Roll,
  For you faced the German bullies with the stiffest of stiff backs--
          Burgomaster MAX!

       *       *       *       *       *

There are German financiers who now allude to him as "Dishonoured BILL."

       *       *       *       *       *

A SEA CHANGE.

  Ponto in town is strictly _comme il faut_,
    A member of the most exclusive set
  (His pedigree and dwelling all may know
    Who read page 90 in the "Dogs' Debrett").

  His mien is dignified, his gait is slow;
    If upstart strangers try to catch his eye
  He kicks the dust behind with scornful toe,
    Averts his lifted nose and passes by.

  His friends he greets with careful etiquette,
    Permits his well-poised tail-tip to vibrate,
  Then treads with them the solemn minuet
    That antique custom and good form dictate.

  But Ponto by the sea! ah, who would know
    This damp wild ragamuffin on the strand
  Who importunes the passers-by to throw
    Big stones across the opal-shining sand?

  Ponto dishevelled, ears turned inside out,
    Has suffered some sea change; his social worth
  Is all forgot; he leads a Comus rout,
    Tykes of the shore and curs of lowly birth.

  Yelping with joy he brings his wolfish pack
    About my legs, as, dripping from the sea,
  I pick my way thro' shingle and wet wrack
    Beleaguered by this bandit company.

  But when the day comes round to leave the shore
    Ponto puts off this maniac _Mr. Hyde_;
  Becomes a _Dr. Jekyll_ dog once more
    And homeward goes serene and dignified.

       *       *       *       *       *

AT THE PLAY.

"MAMEENA."

Those who are not in the mood just now for a whole evening of exotic
melodrama might look in at the Globe Theatre about 9.15, and derive a
few moments' distraction from a Zulu wedding dance. I found it a better
show than anything I have ever seen in the native compounds at Earl's
Court. The company, of course, was mixed, but the white contingent had
caught the local colour (coffee) and showed great aptitude in imitating
the methods of the aborigines. Naturally there were conventions; the
chiefs talked fluent English, while the Zulu supers employed their own
vernacular, except in certain formal phrases, as when the "praisers" (my
programme's name for a sort of universal _claque_) punctuated the
speeches of their king with cries of "Yes, O Lion!" or "Yes, Great
Beast!" No doubt our honoured visitors could perceive many technical
points in which the ruling race exposed itself as having something yet
to learn, but they tactfully concealed all signs of superior
civilisation; and the British audience, well pleased with the novelty
and picturesqueness of the scenes, were content to waive invidious
distinctions.

The little brochure that was thrown in with the programme informs me
that the martial spirit of the Zulus (at that time under their own
_regime_) was "identical in many respects with 'Prussian Militarism.'"
Certainly there was a savagery about the way in which they progged the
air with their assegais that made one picture them as _capables de
tout_. But any comparison, whether in point of costume or royal bearing,
between _King Mpande_ and the GERMAN KAISER must have been in favour of
the latter. On the other hand, his son _Umbuyazi_ was a far nobler
figure than my conception of the CROWN PRINCE.

I may perhaps be excused if I do not dwell on the merits of the chief
actors or of the plot--not too easy to grasp at the first, thanks to the
difficulty we found in following the unfamiliar names of the characters.
Both these interests were dominated by the attraction of the admirable
setting. Fortunately the scenes were numerous and brief, but we still
suffered considerable tedium from the affected and drawling delivery of
the heroine. The frequent assurances which we received as to the
exceptional quality of _Mameena's_ beauty, and the fact that, to our
knowledge, she had three husbands in the course of the play, never quite
convinced us of the overwhelming character of her charms. Whether, with
a fair chance, she would have worked them successfully on a fourth man,
_Allan Quatermain_--the one white man who retained his native hue--I
cannot say, for somehow a stage diversion always intervened just as they
had begun to embrace. The reason, by the way, for _Quatermain's_
existence was never made too clear. Sportsman and dealer in general
stores, his habit of hanging vaguely about Zulu kraals and Zulu impis,
on nodding terms with just anybody, did not greatly increase my pride of
race, notwithstanding the statement made to him by _Mameena_: "I shall
never love another man as I love you, however many I marry."

Mr. OSCAR ASCHE, who dramatised Sir RIDER HAGGARD'S _Child of Storm_,
did not aim at subtlety. But a rather nice question arose over the rival
immoralities of _Mameena's_ second and third husbands. _Prince Umbuyazi_
(No. 3) had expressed regret to his old friend and comrade, _Saduka_
(No. 2), for appropriating his wife; but the apology was not received in
the spirit in which it was tendered, and during the fight between
_Umbuyazi_ and his brother _Cetshwayo_ the wronged husband went over
with his impis to the camp of the enemy. _Umbuyazi_ made a strong
protest against this treachery, but he must have seen (for he had much
intelligence) that his case was a bad one; and this reflection no doubt
had something to do with the final act by which (in the old Roman way)
he fell upon his own assegai and dropped backwards--an admirable
gymnastic--off one of the high rocks above the Tugela.

I have already referred to the difficulties of Zulu nomenclature, and I
would add that the native custom of addressing a man by his proper name
in the course of every sentence materially extended the operation of the
play. It must have made a difference--which I, for one, bitterly
grudged--of nearly half-an-hour. How much more satisfactory the economy
of a certain author of whom CHARLIE BROOKFIELD used to say: "He read his
play to the company, and it took three solid hours, _and even so he
didn't put in any of the 'h's.'_"

  O. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: SOME OF THE GREATEST FIGURES OF ALL AGES.

_Recently discovered, by German research, to have been of Teutonic
birth._

JULIUS KAISER.

GENERAL
HERCULES.

JOHANNA
VON ARKSTEIN.

WILHELM
SCHAKESPEAR.

FRANZ
DRAKENBERG.

DR. JOHANNSSOHN.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "An official telegram from Nish received in London states that the
    Servian commanders agree that the enemy all along the front is
    employing explosive bullets. Every soldier carries 20 per cent. of
    explosive cartridges."

    _Daily Graphic._

The fact that 80 per cent. of Austrian cartridges refuse to explode may
account for the Austrian "victories."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Whelan replied: 'Yes, I sold the beef.' The military authorities
    pressed the case."

    _Liverpool Echo._

A case of pressed beef, we presume.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _Doctor (at Ambulance Class)._ "MY DEAR LADY, DO YOU
REALISE THAT THIS LAD'S ANKLE WAS SUPPOSED TO BE _BROKEN_ BEFORE YOU
BANDAGED IT?"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WAR IN ACACIA AVENUE.

When we are not running out after "specials" we are absorbed in the
mimic fight of Acacia Avenue--the desperate conflict between Mrs.
Studholm-Brown, of The Hollies, and Mrs. Dawburn-Jones, of Dulce Domum.
They have husbands, these amiable ladies, but the husbands are mainly
concerned with the commissariat and supply department, and are neither
allowed nor desired in the actual fighting line.

The very day the war began, a huge flagstaff with a Union Jack of
proportionate size rose in the grounds of Dulce Domum. It must have been
ordered in advance. I present this fact to the German Press Bureau as
showing that, at any rate, Mrs. Dawburn-Jones always intended war. But
the next day Mrs. Studholm-Brown went six feet better with a flagstaff
and three square yards better with a Union Jack.

Then we knew that it was war to the death in our Avenue and waited for
the next move in the campaign.

"The Hollies" broke out into Red Cross notices; "Dulce Domum" announced
itself to be the office for the organisation of local relief.

One morning we rose with a sort of idea that there was an eruption in
the air, and found the flags of Servia, France, Russia and Belgium
waving over "Dulce Domum." That day Mrs. Studholm-Brown met me in the
Avenue. She condescended to me. "Oh, could you tell me the colours of
the Montenegrin flag?" I couldn't; but it was the first time the great
lady had ever spoken to me. "Pink with green stripes," I replied
tremblingly.

The very next day seven Allied flags (including a pseudo-Montenegrin)
flew over "The Hollies." Mrs. Studholm-Brown had added Japan before the
MIKADO'S ultimatum had expired--which will prove to the German Press
Bureau that there was a secret understanding between our Far-Eastern
Ally and Mrs. Studholm-Brown.

But flags were not the only things that were flaunted. "Dulce Domum"
opened fire with an array of flannel shirts hung on clothes-lines across
the tennis-court. "The Hollies" replied with a deadly line of pyjamas.

Then the proprietress of the latter threw open her grounds--a croquet
court and a drying ground--as a place of rest for Territorials off duty.
Mrs. Dawburn-Jones promptly enlisted her husband as a special constable
and had squads drilled on her tennis lawn.

So the fight went on--with slight successes on both sides, but nothing
decisive--till one day when Mrs. Dawburn-Jones went to town in a taxi
and returned with a family of negroes from the Congo. It was a splendid
sight to see her leading them through the grounds and discoursing to
them in her best Boulognese. Mrs. Studholm-Brown wriggled with
mortification.

Then her chance of a counter-attack arrived. She had, or her husband
had, or her husband's brother-in-law had, a second cousin who was an
officer, and, what was more, a wounded officer. He was persuaded to
spend a week-end of his convalescence at "The Hollies." His hostess
walked him proudly up and down all the paths which were in full view of
"Dulce Domum." It was magnificent to see her adjust his sling. At that
moment I dare not have trusted Mrs. Dawburn-Jones with a gun or the
officer would have been in as great peril as in the trenches. How it
will end I can scarcely imagine. I like to picture a great day of
victory. Then, if the CROWN PRINCE be allowed to take up his abode on
_parole_, in some quiet suburban home, I am sure "The Hollies" will snap
him up. And if "The Hollies" secures the CROWN PRINCE no power in this
world can prevent Mrs. Dawburn-Jones from securing the KAISER.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE HELPMEET.

"May I come in?" said Cecily, knocking at my study door.

"If you insist," said I.

"I only want to use the telephone," she explained, as if that made it
any better.

"You couldn't take it away and use it somewhere else?" I asked.

She was unmoved. "It needn't disturb you," she said. "I'll be as quiet
as a mouse."

"Won't that be rather dull for the people at the other end of the
line?" I ventured.

"Now, you go on with your writing," she said severely. So I went on.

_Herbert closed the door softly behind him and went out, leaving
Ermyntrude alone. She had let him go. He had gone. He had left her
alone. Her--Ermyntrude--alone. It has been truly said that women are
queer creatures. They do not like being left alone._

_CHAPTER LVII._

_Herbert picked up his hat and stick and passed out of the spacious hall
into the street, closing the door softly behind him. It was his habit
when angry to close doors softly behind him. He was frequently angry;
men often are, and with reason._

"There's something I want to ask you," said Cecily.

"Ask away," I said brusquely.

"Not _you_," said Cecily, frowning at me and then smiling at the
receiver.

_And so Herbert found himself in the street. Where should he go? What
should he do ... say ... think ... feel...? He was quite unable to
decide. Somehow he couldn't bring his mind to bear on the subject. He
could hardly recall the name of the lady with whom he had been
conversing, let alone what all the trouble was about. He paused and lit
a cigarette. Absolutely there was nothing else for it._

"How are you getting on?" I asked Cecily a little peevishly.

"Nicely, thanks," she answered. "And you?"

"Oh, nicely, too," said I, with a sigh.

_As for ~Whatshername~ Ermyntrude, she was in little better case. She felt
as if nothing was ever going to happen to her again; almost, she
thought, things had given up happening for good. She felt ... but she
hardly knew what she felt. ~After all, love wasn't~ ~Maybe love was~ She
could not bear to think of love. Engaged? That is what she had been but
wasn't any longer. Who was to blame? Was it Herbert? Was it she? Was it
~Exchange~ Providence? The more thought she gave to the matter the further
she seemed to be from a definite conclusion. ~At times it seemed as if~ ~At
one time it appeared as though~ ~At one time~ ~At times~ ~At 2284 Mayfair~
~Mayfair 2248~ ~2248 Mayfair~ ~Twice two is four, twice four is eight.~_

"Are you coming to the end of your friends?" I asked Cecily.

"If I'm not wanted I'll go," said she snappily.

"You're always wanted, of course," I apologised.

"Then I'll stay," said she brightly.

_CHAPTER LVIII._

_As Herbert turned his back on Kensington and walked towards ~Gerrard~
Piccadilly, he would, had he looked behind him, have seen a malevolent,
sinister man emerge from the shadow and follow him stealthily. ~But
Herbert did not look behind him.~ ~And why not?~ ~It is impossible to say.~
~Suffice it that he didn't.~ Nay, that is exactly what Herbert did see
when he looked behind him. "My God," said he, turning pale...._

"Can we dine with the Monroes on Tuesday?" asked Cecily.

"That depends a good deal on whether they invite us," I answered.

"It's only Jack trying to be funny," Cecily told the receiver.

_"As I was saying," continued Herbert, "it's James MacClure."_

_"No less," said the other, with a fiendish smile._

_It is necessary to go back a little in order ~to property~ properly to
appreciate the momentous importance of the arrival of this man at this
juncture. He was destined to play a large part in Herbert's future; the
manner of their acquaintance was this._

_~Many years ago McClure had~ ~James was the son of rich but~ ~Jas, as his
college friends used to call~ ~McClure~ ~James~ Producing a revolver from his
hip pocket, Herbert shot James McClure through the heart._

Cecily flapped about with the Directory.

"Trying to find a number that you haven't used already?" I enquired.

_~CHAPTER LIX.~_

_~Ermyntrude~_

_~CHAPTER LIX.~_

_~ERMYNTRUDE~_

_~CHAPTER LIX.~_

_~MINNIE~_

_CHAPTER LIX._

_On the whole it must be agreed that Herbert was well rid of this
Ermyntrude person. There was nothing particular against her except that
she was a woman, but surely to goodness that is enough. When Eve arrived
the trouble began; when telephones were invented it came to a head.
Think what literature might have achieved had it not always been
obsessed by its desire to find some brief definition good enough for
woman! I think it is our chief difficulty in appreciating the supposed
greatness of VERGIL that he couldn't do any better than "Varium et
mutabile semper." If VERGIL had been a butcher or a grocer or any other
unhappy shopkeeper liable to the daily insult of receiving household
orders, he must have expressed it more thoroughly. For my own part,
sitting here in my study and thinking the matter over to myself, I
cannot do better than adopt the phraseology of the telephone
instructions: "Intermittent Buzz."_

_And so Herbert didn't marry, but lived happily ever afterwards. After
all, Ermyntrude was essentially a woman; they all are, confound them,
but some of us are not so lucky as was Herbert in finding out in time._

And that, of course, was the chapter that Cecily suddenly chose to read
... nor was it less than an hour before peace was declared again. The
terms, however, were not unfavourable. I was partially forgiven, and,
what was better still, Cecily wholly departed. I then wrote a revised
version of

_CHAPTER LIX._

_Ermyntrude was still where we left her, but was beginning to collect
her scattered thoughts when Herbert re-entered. He closed the door
behind him, neither softly nor loudly, but just ordinarily, and without
more ado took Ermyntrude in his arms._

_"We will never again think of all that came between us," he murmured._

_She smiled up at him._

_"It shall be as nothing," he added._

_"It shall," said she._

"It shall indeed," say I.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOON-PENNIES.

    (_Children in the Midlands give this name to the disc shaped fruit
    of Honesty._)

  My garden is a beggar's pitch
    That Heaven throws its coins upon;
  And in the Summer I am rich,
    And in the Winter all is gone;
  Yet as the long days hurry by
    I keep my pitch, content and free,
  Where in a sweet profusion lie
    Fair Marigolds and Honesty;
  And oft I turn and count for fun
    My largess from the night and noon--
  The golden tokens of the sun,
    The silver pennies of the moon!

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: "I'M SORRY TO 'AVE TO SAY, MUM, 'E'S BIN A VERY BAD DOG
WHILST YOU WAS HOUT. 'E'S BIN AN' EAT UP 'IS PATRIOTIC RIBBON."

       *       *       *       *       *

CANNON FODDER.

(_Thus the War Party designates the rank and file of the German army._)

  They are coming like a tempest, in their endless ranks of grey,
  While the world throws up a cloud of dust along their awful way;
  They're the glorious cannon fodder of the mighty Fatherland,
  Who shall make the kingdoms tremble and the nations understand.
      Tramp! tramp! tramp! the cannon fodder comes.
      God help the old; God help the young; God help the hearths and homes.
      They'll do his will that taught them, on the earth and on the waves,
      Then, like faithful cannon fodder, still salute him from their graves.

  From the barrack and the fortress they are pouring in a flood;
  They sweep, a herd of winter wolves, upon the scent of blood;
  For all their deeds of horror they are told that death atones
  And their master's harvest cannot spring till he has sowed their bones.

  Into beasts of prey he's turned them; when they show their teeth and growl
  The lash is buried in their cheeks; they're slaughtered if they howl;
  To their bloody Lord of Battles must they only bend the knee,
  For hard as steel and fierce as hell should cannon fodder be.

  Scourge and curses are their portion, pain and hunger without end,
  Till they hail the yell of shrapnel as the welcome of a friend;
  They rape and burn and laugh to hear the frantic women cry
  And do the devil's work to-day, but on the morrow die.

  A million souls, a million hearts, a million hopes and fears,
  A million million memories of partings and of tears
  March along with cannon fodder to the agony of war.
  Have they lost their human birthright? Are they fellow-men no more?
      Tramp! tramp! tramp! the cannon fodder comes.
      God help the old; God help the young; God help the hearths and homes.
      They'll do his will that taught them, on the earth and on the waves,
      Then, like faithful cannon fodder, still salute him from their graves.

       *       *       *       *       *

The War and Physical Development.

    "Here some words have been exercised by the Censor."

    _Manchester Evening News._

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Kiel is very delightful in its own way, but it misses _in toto_ the
    charm and originality of Cowes."

So said _The Tatler_ in the very early days of the war, and yet the
Germans still seem to prefer the waters of Kiel to the superior
attractions of the Solent.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NUT'S VIEWS ON THE WAR.

INTERESTING CHAT WITH MR. REGINALD FITZJENKINS.

He was manicuring himself when I called, and I was asked whether I would
see him now, or wait two hours till he had finished. I said I would see
him now; so I was shown into his dressing-room.

"I am sorry," said Mr. FitzJenkins, "but if you will call at such an
early hour----" It was twelve o'clock, but I apologised. "And what can I
do for you?" asked my host.

"My paper," I said, "would like to have your views on the War."

"Well, if you ask me what I think of the War," said Mr. FitzJenkins,
"it's a noosance--an unmitigated noosance. No one talks anything but War
nowadays--and the papers contain nothing but War news. Even the Men's
Dress Columns have disappeared. I can tell you it has caused the
greatest inconvenience to me personally. You may wonder why I am
manicuring myself. I'll tell you why. My manicurist--the only man in
London who knew how to manicure--turned out to be a beastly German or
Austrian or something, and has gone off to his beastly War. I even
offered to double the man's fees--at which the fellow, instead of being
grateful, was grossly impertinent. If he hadn't been such a great
hulking brute I'd have knocked him down.... So I have to do the business
myself. Couldn't trust it to anyone else.... And then look here. You see
this little pot of pink paste, which has to be used to give the nails
the necessary blush? Do you know that the price of that has doubled
since the War?"

I expressed my horror by a suitable gesture.

"Of course," said Mr. FitzJenkins, "I don't want to be hard on the
Government--I know they have a lot to think of--but I do consider they
ought to have prevented this somehow. They regulate the price of food,
but forget that there are other necessities.... Again, some of my
dividends have not been paid. A nice thing if one is to be forced to
earn one's own living!"

"You haven't volunteered to fight, then?" I said.

"Good lor, no! That might suit some people, but not me. It's not a job
for anyone of any refinement. Why, I am told that, when they are
fighting, for days together even the officers don't shave or change
their linen. I'm not that sort, thank you. There are plenty of rough
fellows to do it, I suppose. And in any event I could not fight
alongside of French soldiers. Have you seen the cut of their trousers?"

Mr. FitzJenkins laughed outright.

"And are you doing anything to help in the crisis?" I asked.

"Oh yes, oh yes," said Mr. FitzJenkins. "You mustn't imagine that it is
only those who fight who are helping. What about the women who are left
behind? I help amuse 'em--keep 'em bright. I'm 'carrying on.' I'm not of
your panicky sort. It's just as well that there should be a few men like
me left in town. We give it a tone."

"I trust, Mr. FitzJenkins," I said, "that you are not opposed to the
War."

"Oh, dear, no. Please don't imagine that. It had to be fought, I
suppose. And, although I am not taking an active part in it myself, I
wish the War well, and hope that the KING and KITCHENER will pull it off
all right."

"May I publish that? I think it would encourage them."

"Certainly. And you might say this. I am convinced we are going to win.
No good could ever come to a man who wears an out-of-date moustache like
the KAISER.... Oh, certainly I am in favour of the War. Why, I have just
ordered several pairs of khaki spats.... Believe me, I wish our
soldier-fellows well, and in my opinion they ought to be encouraged. I
met a lot of 'em trudging along in Pall Mall yesterday, poor devils of
Territorials, I fancy, and I waved my stick to 'em. Nothing would please
me more than to see the country to which that impudent manicurist has
returned receive a thrashing."

Just then the young man who had opened the door to me came in and asked
his master if he could see him privately for a minute. Mr. FitzJenkins
begged me to excuse him, and I did so. When he came back his face was
flushed and almost animated.

"Atrocious! Infamous! I shall write to the papers about it," he said.
"How dare he leave me helpless like this? Off to enlist, indeed!"

"Who?" I asked.

"My man," said Mr. FitzJenkins.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: ENTERPRISE ON OUR EAST COAST.

THE ANTI-ZEPPELIN BATH-CHAIR.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO A JADED GERMAN PRESSMAN.

    ["One cannot receive news of victories every day."--_German Official
    Newspaper._]

  True, as you say, there is no cause for grieving,
    When in your pages no triumphs appear,
  But, gentle Sir, when you talk of "receiving,"
    Are you not wandering out of your sphere?
  Yours not to wait for a foe's retrogression,
    Yours not to heed the belligerents' fate;
  You're higher up in the writer's profession;
    Perish "receiving," 'tis yours to create.

  What though you dabble in newspaper diction,
    Common reporters deserve your disdain;
  You should be ranked with the masters of fiction,
    Weaving your victories out of your brain.
  Stories are needed, and you must supply 'em;
    That should be easy; so gifted a man
  Surely can compass a triumph _per diem_,
    Seeing the truth is no part of your plan.

  Even although inspiration is flagging,
    Let not your output grow markedly less;
  Fiction gives precedents (plenty) for dragging
    Out an old yarn in a different dress.
  But, if your brain is too weary for spinning
    Words to re-tell our habitual rout,
  Don't blame the army that hasn't been winning;
    Frankly confess that you feel written out.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "London Lady (twenties) well-educated, fair linguist, deeply
    interested in psychology and the things that matter in life, considered
    clever by inmates, but not brilliant, would greatly appreciate
    broadminded and friendly companion to share walks."

  _T. P.'s Weekly._

We must remember that the inmates' standard would not be a very high
one.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _First Native._ "WE'RE DOIN' FINE AT THE WAR, JARGE."

_Second Native._ "YES, JAHN; AND SO BE THEY FRENCHIES."

_First Native._ "AY; AN' SO BE THEY BELGIANS AN' ROOSHIANS."

_Second Native._ "AY; AN' SO BE THEY ALLYS. OI DUNNO WHERE THEY COME
FROM, JAHN, BUT THEY BE DEVILS FOR FIGHTIN'."

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

(_By Mr. Punch's Staff of Learned Clerks._)

Why is it that novels with scamp-heroes are so much more interesting
than the conventional kind? _Bellamy_ (METHUEN) is a case in point, for
the central character, who gives his name to it, is about as worthless
an object, rightly-considered, as one need wish to meet. He steals and
lies and poses; he betrays most of his friends; and throughout a varied
life he only really cares for one person--himself. Yet Miss ELINOR
MORDAUNT never seems to have any difficulty in making us share
_Bellamy's_ delight in his own conscienceless career. Perhaps it is this
very delight that does the trick. Charlatan as he is, and worse,
_Bellamy_ is always so attractively amused at the success of his
impostures that it becomes impossible to avoid an answering grin. It was
not a little courageous of Miss MORDAUNT to write a story about a hero
from the Five Towns district; but, though this may look like trespass
upon the preserves of a brother novelist, _Bellamy_ is Miss MORDAUNT'S
very own. I have the feeling that she enjoyed writing about him--a
feeling that always makes for pleasure in reading. Perhaps of all his
manifold phases I liked best his _role_ of assistant necromancer at a
kind of psychical beauty parlour. There is some shrewd hitting here,
which is vastly well done. But none of the adventures of _Bellamy_
should be skipped. I am sorry to add that the copy supplied me for
review did not apparently credit me with this view, as it ruthlessly
omitted some forty of what I am persuaded were most agreeable pages. The
fact that it so far relented as to go back about ten, and repeat a
chapter I had already read, did little to console me. I could have
better spared part of a duller book.

       *       *       *       *       *

A story by Mr. DION CLAYTON CALTHROP, with the title _Wonderful Woman_
(HODDER AND STOUGHTON), may almost be regarded as a work of expert
reference. Because what he does not know about The Sex, and has not
already written in a galaxy of engaging romances, is hardly worth the
bother of remembering. So that his views on the matter naturally command
respect. _Wonderful Woman_ is perhaps less a novel than an
analysis--painfully close, with a kind of regretful brutality in it--of
one special type of femininity, and a glance at several others. Perhaps
its realistic quality may astonish you a little. You may have been
delighting in Mr. CALTHROP'S fantastic work (as I do myself) and yet
have cherished the suspicion that his Columbines and Chelsea fairies and
Moonbeam folk generally were the creations of a sentimentalist who would
have little taste for handling unsympathetic things. Well, if so,
_Philippina_ is the answer to that. Here is the most masterly
portraiture of a woman utterly without imagination or heart or anything
except a kind of futile and worthless attraction, that I remember to
have met for some time. As I say, it is all rather astonishing from Mr.
CALTHROP. The men who love _Flip_, and whose lives are ruined by her,
are easier to understand. About _Sir Timothy Swift_, for example, there
is a touch of the Harlequin, or rather Pierrot, that betrays his
origin. I will not tell you the story, for one reason because its charm
is too elusive to retrieve. I content myself by saying that it seems to
me the best work we have yet had from Mr. CALTHROP, combining his
special and expected graces with an unusual and moving sincerity.

       *       *       *       *       *

A month or two ago I have no doubt that the England of CHARLES II.'S
declining years would have seemed to me a monstrously exciting country
to live in; at the present moment (unfairly enough) I feel more like
congratulating the hero of Monsignor BENSON'S _Oddsfish!_ (HUTCHINSON)
on the mildness of his adventures for the furtherance of the Catholic
faith. It is true that _Mr. Roger Mallock_ beheld some notable
executions after the TITUS OATES affair, and on the night of the Rye
House Plot had a large meat chopper thrown at his head by one of the
conspirators; but, emissary of the Vatican as he was, he was actually
only once compelled to whip out his sword in self-defence, though on
that occasion he had the extreme bad luck to lose his _fiancee_ through
a misdirected dagger-thrust. Even this tragedy, sufficiently
overwhelming in an ordinary romance, is not, of course, wholly
disastrous in Monsignor BENSON'S eyes, since it enabled _Mr. Mallock_ to
resume the religious life and habit for which he had been originally
intended. For the rest the book is written in a most captivating manner,
and with a plausibility of incident and dialogue only too rare in novels
of the Restoration period. Evidently the author has studied his
authorities (and more particularly Mr. PEPYS) with a praiseworthy
diligence. But in view of the anti-Protestant bias which he naturally
exhibits I feel bound to bid him have a care. If he intends to pursue
his historical researches any further, and discover (let us say) virtue
in the Spanish Inquisition and villainy in Sir FRANCIS DRAKE, I shall
load my arquebus to the muzzle.

       *       *       *       *       *

The hero of _King Jack_ (HODDER AND STOUGHTON) "made sport," as his
creator, Mr. KEIGHLEY SNOWDEN, says, "nearly a hundred years ago" in
Yorkshire, and incidentally he also made records. For instance, he
cleared four-and-twenty feet at a "run-jump," and with this in my mind I
find it satisfactory to think that he lived in another century, or I
might find myself regretting the eclipse of the Olympic Games. As an
upholder of law and order I ought to be (I am not) ashamed to admire a
man who, to say the least of it, was a very prickly thorn in the side of
the police. My excuse is that _Jack Sincler_ and his brother _Lishe_
were kindly men withal. The game-laws were their trouble, but as far as
I could make out they did not poach for the sake of pelf but from sheer
love of sport. Among poachers they ought, anyhow, to be placed in Class
I., for they loved the open air and the freshness of the morning and all
the things that make for a clean mind in a clean body. _Jack_, though a
shade arrogant at times, is a stimulating figure, human both in his
weakness and his strength; and Mr. SNOWDEN deserves more than a little
gratitude for the care with which he has reproduced the atmosphere of
times that were conspicuously lawless and exciting.

       *       *       *       *       *

When _Dicky Furlong_, the brilliant and aspiring artist of _The
Achievement_ (CHAPMAN AND HALL) who was in love with _Diana Charteris_,
sloshed her husband, _Lord Freddy_, over the head with his own decanter
(_vide_ Chap. XXI.) he rather overdid it. For "the jagged thing fell
with a sullen thud behind his (_Lord Freddy's_) ear," and that
discourteous nobleman collapsed to rise no more. When the detective
arrived the following noon he convinced himself that there was no
necessity to detain any of the guests, even though no windows had been
found open or doors unlocked, and though Dicky had a contused lip from
the conflict overnight and everybody had coupled his name with
_Diana's_. However, the methodical sleuthhound ran his quarry to earth a
year or two later, just as he had put the finishing touches to his great
(seventeen-foot) canvas. And _Dicky_ took a little bottle out of his
pocket. In fact, our old friend the novelette, with its unexacting
canons of plausibility; tacked on, as it happens, to twenty chapters of
meandering incident, a long way after the well-known Five-Towns formula,
garnished with pleasantly romantic little notices of _Dicky's_ pictures
and _Dicky's_ love affairs. But you don't begin to see the _Dicky_ of
the decanter phase (even though a fight about an ill-treated dog is
lugged in for the purpose), or indeed any other _Dicky_ of real flesh
and blood, in this haphazard selection of episodes and comments. The
truth is there is more in that difficult and dangerous formula than Mr.
TEMPLE THURSTON is aware of. He has wandered into the wrong galley. A
pity. For _Mrs. Flint_ is a dear, if a stupid dear, and _Dicky_ himself
has his points.

       *       *       *       *       *

Illustration: _The Old Man._ "I SEE BY THE PAPER HERE THAT THE
ROOSHIANS ARE ATTACKING A TOWN THEY SPELL P-R-Z-E-M-Y-S-L. D'YE THINK,
NOW, WUD THAT BE A MISTAKE OF THE PRINTER'S OR WUD THE LETTERS OF IT BE
MIXED UP, LIKE, WI' THE BOMBARDMENT?"

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR DAILY BREAD.

[_The London correspondent of a German paper announces that London is on
the verge of starvation, his own diet being "reduced to bread and rancid
dripping."_]

  "There is a languor in this alien air;
  We are reduced, in fact, to famine fare;
  Mine, I may say, is dripping based on bread
  (Ugh!), and I gather I shall soon be dead.
  It is the same all over, East or West;
  Hungry each hollow just below the chest.
  Daily, I'm told, they rake the very dust,
  Hoping in vain to come across a crust.
  And, when our God-born WILHELM brings his Huns
  Here, he will find a few odd skeletons."
  Such is the tale a Teuton lately writ.
  How, then, I ask, does London look so fit?
  This is the reason, mainly, I surmise--
  We are fed up, of course, with German Lies.

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch or the London Charivari, Vol.
147, October 7, 1914, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***

***** This file should be named 28092.txt or 28092.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/0/9/28092/

Produced by Neville Allen, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
