The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jimsy, by Leona Dalrymple

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jimsy
       The Christmas Kid

Author: Leona Dalrymple

Illustrator: Charles Guischard

Release Date: February 18, 2009 [EBook #28110]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JIMSY ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








Jimsy

The Christmas Kid


By

Leona Dalrymple

Author of "The Lovable Meddler," "Diane
of the Green Van," "Uncle Noah's
Christmas Party," etc.


Decorations by
Charles Guischard


New York
Robert M. McBride & Company
1915


Copyright, 1915, by
Robert M. McBride & Co.
Published October, 1915




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                             PAGE

     I The Invasion                                                      9

    II The Biscuit Link                                                 19

   III The Chain Grows                                                  27

    IV The Chain Clanks                                                 38

     V The Proving                                                      46

    VI The Triumph                                                      51

   VII The Downfall                                                     55

  VIII The Chain is Locked                                              61




Jimsy

The Christmas Kid




[Illustration]

I

THE INVASION


His name was Jimsy and he took it for granted that you liked him. That
made things difficult from the very start--that and the fact that he
arrived in the village two days before Christmas strung to such a
holiday pitch of expectation that, if you were a respectable,
bewhiskered first citizen like Jimsy's host, you felt the cut-and-dried
dignity of a season which unflinching thrift had taught you to pare of
all its glittering non-essentials, threatened by his bubbling air of
faith in something wonderful to happen.

He had arrived at twilight, just as the first citizen was about to read
his evening paper, and he had made a great deal of noise, yelling back
at old Austin White, whose sleigh had conveyed him from the station to
the house, a "S'long, Uncle!" pregnant with the friendliness of a
conversational ride. He had scraped away his snow-heels with a somewhat
sustained noise, born perhaps of shyness, and now, as he stood in the
center of the prim, old-fashioned room, a thin, eager youngster not too
warmly clad for the bite of the New England wind, Abner Sawyer felt with
a sense of shock that this city urchin whom Judith had promised to
"Christmas," detracted, in some ridiculous manner, from the
respectability of the room. He was an inharmonious note in its staid
preciseness. Moreover, it was evident from the frank friendliness of his
dark, gray eyes that he was perniciously of that type who frolic through
a frosty, first-citizen aura of informality and give and accept
friendship as a matter of course.

[Illustration]

"What--what is your name?" asked the first citizen, peering over his
spectacles. He wished that Judith's Christmas protege was not so thin
and a trifle larger.

[Illustration]

"Jimsy," answered the boy. "An' Specks, he's me chum; he goes to Mister
Middleton's, next door."

Specks and Jimsy! The first citizen helplessly cleared his throat and
summoned Judith.

She came in a spotless apron no whiter than her hair. She was
spare--Aunt Judith Sawyer--spare and patient as the wife of a provident
man may well be who sees no need for servants, and her primness was of a
gentler, vaguer sort than that of Abner Sawyer. Jimsy glanced up into
her sweet, tired face and his eager eyes claimed her with a bewildering
smile of welcome. Then because Jimsy's experience with clean aprons and
trimly parted hair was negligible almost to the point of non-existence,
it became instantly imperative that he should polish the toe of one worn
shoe with the sole of the other and study the result and Aunt Judith
with furtive interest.

"Judith," said the first citizen, not wholly at his ease,
"Mr.--er--ah--Mr. Jimsy has arrived."

Jimsy snickered.

"Naw, naw, nix!" he said. "Jimsy's the handle. I'm a stray, I am. Hain't
got no folks. Mom Dorgan says ye have to have folks to have a
bunch-name. I'm the Christmas kid."

"To be sure you are," said Aunt Judith gently, "to be sure. And where
are your things?"

Jimsy's thin little face reddened.

"Hain't only got one rig," he mumbled, "an' that warn't fitten to wear.
Mom Dorgan borried these duds fur me. She--she's awful good that way
when she's sober."

There was wistful eagerness in his face to do his best by the one friend
who helped him.

[Illustration]

Quite unconscious of the scandalized flutter in this quiet room whose
oval portraits of ancestral Sawyers might well have tumbled down at the
notion of any one being anything but sober, the boy moved closer to the
fire as if the ride had chilled him.

[Illustration]

"Gee!" he said with a long, quivering breath, "ain't that a fire, now,
ain't it!" and because his keen young eyes could not somehow be evaded,
Abner Sawyer accepted the responsibility of the reply and said hastily
that it was. Then feeling his dignity imperilled in the presence of
Judith, though why he could not for the life of him explain, he moved
forward a chair for the Christmas guest and returned to his paper.

Aunt Judith went back to a region of tinkling china and humming kettle.
The room became quiet enough for any one to read, but the first citizen
somehow could not read. He was ridiculously conscious of that tense
little figure by the fire with the disturbingly friendly eyes. How on
earth could a boy be noisy who was absolutely quiet? Yet his very
presence seemed to clamor--the clamor of an inherent sociability
repressed with difficulty.

Jimsy glanced at the checkerboard window beyond which snowy hills lay
beneath a sunset afterglow.

"Gee whiz!" he burst forth. "_Ain't_ the snow white!"

The first citizen jumped--much as one may jump when he has waited in
nerve-racking suspense for a pistol shot. The boy had done exactly what
he had expected him to do--broken that sacred ante-prandial hour with
the Lindon _Evening News_ which Judith had not broken this twenty years.

[Illustration]

"Snow," he said discouragingly, for all he had determined to ignore the
remark, "snow is always white."

Jimsy shook his head.

"Naw," he said. "N'York snow's gray an' dirty. Specks said the snow we
seen on the hills from the train winder was Christmas card snow, and
with that the minister he up an' tells Specks an' me 'bout reg'lar
old-fashioned country Christmases, fire like this an' Christmas trees
an'--an' sleigh-bells an' gifts an' wreaths an' skatin' an'
holly--Gee--"

"That," said Abner Sawyer with cold finality, "will be quite enough."

"Sure," agreed Jimsy. "A Christmas like that 'snuff fur any kid."

Irritably conscious that his reproof had been misinterpreted, the first
citizen riveted his gaze upon the Lindon _Evening News_. But he could
not read. Jimsy's irreverent air of friendliness was not the only
disturbing factor in his Christmasing. Jimsy, plainly, was cherishing
expectations.

Conscious-driven, Abner Sawyer laid aside his paper.

[Illustration]

"James," he began primly, "I must take this occasion to inform you that
Mrs. Sawyer and I spend Christmas quietly--very quietly. We have never
had a Christmas tree, and personally I consider that holly is most
suitable and decorative where Nature planted it. Christmas," finished
Mr. Sawyer, slightly disconcerted by Jimsy's attentive stare, "Christmas
is merely a day and a dinner. Let the frivolous make of it an orgy of
sentimentality if they will."

Jimsy's face fell.

"Gee!" he said, "your Christmas ain't just an extra Sunday, is it?"

Shocked, Abner Sawyer glinted over the tops of his glasses.

"No," he said with an effort, "it--it is somewhat different."

"How's it different?"

"I"--the first citizen froze--"I hardly know."

[Illustration]

"What d'ye have that ye don't have Sundays?"

"I--I believe it's turkey," conceded Mr. Sawyer desperately, and feeling
his dignity hopelessly compromised by a dialogue of such pronounced
informality, returned to his paper.

"Gee!" said Jimsy, with a sigh of relief, "that's mos' enuff itself to
make a Christmas. Hain't never tasted turkey." He was silent a minute,
in which the clock ticked loudly. It was purple now beyond the
old-fashioned panes and the lamp seemed brighter. Jimsy's shrill young
voice broke the quiet, as it would, of course, be sure to do.

"Say," he said kindly, "don't you worry none about that there Christmas
tree an' no holly. We'll have a thump-walloper of a day, anyhow!"

It is conceivable that Abner Sawyer's experience with thump-wallopers
had been limited. There was something in the boy's words, however, that
brought his gaze over the top of his spectacles again and over his
paper. It was disconcerting to note that Jimsy still bristled with
faith and friendliness and cheerful expectation.

"My remark," he said coldly, "about the absence of a tree and holly was
a statement--not an apology."

"Don't get ye," admitted Jimsy. "Come again." And there was danger of a
mutual dead-lock of comprehension. Aunt Judith saved the day. Arriving
in the doorway with a flutter, she said that supper was ready and that
James had better wash his face and hands. And James, who was Jimsy,
meeting Aunt Judith's gentle eyes, turned scarlet, and stumbling to his
feet, he stepped, en route, upon the stately toe of Lindon's pride.

"Gee!" he burst forth contritely. "I'm awful sorry, honest Injun I am.
Spoiled yer shine, didn't I? An' it was a beaut, too!"

Could even a first citizen rebuke such eager apology? Better to stay
within the certain shelter of a chilling silence.

[Illustration]

Abner Sawyer rose, but even as he did so his world of law and order
seemed to rock in chaos about his feet. He was going out to supper--and
he had not read a single line in the Lindon _Evening News_!

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

II

THE BISCUIT LINK

It was at supper that the terrible realization came to Abner Sawyer that
Jimsy liked everything and _every one_ rather too well. He liked the ham
and he liked the biscuits, he accepted alarming quantities of marmalade
with utter confidence in his digestion; his round eyes swept every nook
of the prim old room and marveled at old-fashioned china and silver that
might have come over in the _Mayflower_, and then again might not, and
he continued irreverently unaware that the first citizen was president
of the Lindon Bank and therefore not a person to be liked
indiscriminately by urchins. Thanks to something in Aunt Judith's eyes,
furtively concessional to boyhood, Jimsy had mislaid what little
constraint and shyness he had had at first. His at-homeness might be
gauged at a glance by the way he gazed at the biscuits.

"Dear me," said Aunt Judith, glancing from Jimsy to the biscuits to see
which most threatened the other, "I--I scarcely think--I hardly know.
Abner?"

Time, Abner, now to impress this urchin once for all with a show of
power in terms he can understand!

Mr. Sawyer settled the trivial question of biscuits with dignity.

"James," he said. "You may have just _one_ more biscuit."

And Aunt Judith nodded:

"Just as you say, my dear!" as she had been nodding effasively for
thirty years.

Jimsy's eyes were very grateful and it came over the first citizen with
sickening conviction that Jimsy, misinterpreting again, had regarded the
biscuit as an overture instead of a show of power. Ridiculous indeed to
have thrown about your neck the unwelcome chain of a boy's regard and
then unintentionally to cement that chain--by a biscuit!

Abner Sawyer departed hastily for his lamp, his fire and his paper.

[Illustration]

Jimsy followed Aunt Judith to the kitchen and here, in the shining
quiet of an old-fashioned kitchen whose spotless rows of pans and its
rocker by the window reflected nothing of first citizenship, the
memory-making mystery of child and woman in a homely setting drew taut
an age-old chord of sympathy. Out of the hum of the kettle and the
fire-shadows of the grate it came, out of the winter wind that rattled
the checkerpaned windows--that eternal something that is only given to
women to understand. Jimsy did not know why Aunt Judith smiled or why
the smile made his throat hurt a little. He only knew by her eyes that
she liked him and that was enough.

"Aunt Judith," he blurted, "lemme--aw, lemme wipe your dishes."

But Aunt Judith, with the wisdom of women, knew that the best-behaved
china is perversely given to leaping without warning out of the hands of
any boy, to his utter consternation, and she patted him on the back.

"Bless your heart, Jimsy," she said, "there are so few I can do them
myself in no time."

[Illustration]

Jimsy!--not James! Jimsy felt that he must do something for Aunt Judith
Sawyer or his throat would burst. So finding one leg at liberty, he
furtively kicked the leg of the stove and hurt his toe, even as his eyes
fell upon a depleted stock of kindlings in the wood-box.

[Illustration]

"Well, then," he burst out in a glow of good-will, "lemme--lemme take
Uncle Ab's job to-night an' get the wood."

Aunt Judith's horrified glance made him redden uncomfortably.

"Jimsy," she whispered hurriedly, "you--you must never--never call Mr.
Sawyer--Uncle Ab. Nobody does."

"But," mumbled the boy, "ye--ye said folks call ye Aunt Judith,
an'--an'--"

"It--it's different," faltered Aunt Judith. "I--I'm nobody in
particular. Mr. Sawyer's a bank president, Jimsy, and I--I always get
the wood myself." She opened the door and pointed to a woodpile
glimmering out of the darkness with a rim of snow. "The kindlings are
split and piled in the shed. And hurry, child. The wind's sharp."

[Illustration]

Jimsy set forth with a noisy whistle. When presently he returned with an
armful of kindlings, his eyes were shining. And holding the door ajar,
he coaxed into the warmth of Aunt Judith's kitchen a shivering dog,
little and lame and thin.

"Aunt Judith," he shrilled, dropping his kindlings into the box with a
clatter, "look! He was out there under the woodpile, shiverin,' an' he
won't go away. He's a stray, too, like I was afore Mom Dorgan gave me a
bed with her kids." He patted the dog's head. "Gee, watch him duck, poor
mutt! That's cause he's been walloped so much. Aunt Judith," he blurted,
his gray eyes ablaze with pleading, "can't ye maybe jus' let him sleep
behind the stove? He's so sort of shivery I--I feel awful sorry fur
him."

"No, no, no!" said Aunt Judith in distress. "I can't. I can't, indeed.
Mr. Sawyer--"

"JAMES!"

[Illustration]

Aunt Judith and Jimsy jumped. The first citizen stood in the doorway,
the Lindon _Evening News_ in his hand, still unread. Nor could he have
explained why, save that a boy's absence may, queerly enough, be as
clamorous as his presence. With the biscuit still upon his mind, Abner
Sawyer felt impelled to discipline.

"Put the dog out!"

Jimsy stood his ground. He was used to that. And Abner Sawyer wondered
with a feeling of intense annoyance what there was about this ragged,
noisy child that injected drama into incident. There was a tenseness in
the silence of the trio and the cringing dog.

"Aw, have a heart!" pleaded Jimsy finally, and there was faith and
optimism in his steady glance.

Abner Sawyer cleared his throat and looked away. He wondered why he felt
defensive.

"I am fully equipped with the organ you mention," he said drily. "Put
the dog out."

Jimsy reluctantly obeyed, and as the door closed upon the shivering
little waif who scratched and whined at the door of his lost Paradise,
Jimsy's face, sharpened by disappointment, seemed suddenly thinner and
less boyish. Bent upon making the best of things, he reached for his
cap.

"Well," he said casually, "guess I'll go out and look the burg over."

It was queer how Jimsy's conversation seemed to bristle with verbal
shocks. Aunt Judith gasped. Mr. Sawyer fixed a stern eye upon the clock.

"It is eight o'clock," he said in what seemed to Jimsy's puzzled
comprehension a midnight tone of voice; "you will go to bed."

Dumfounded, Jimsy followed Aunt Judith up to bed. Here in a great,
old-fashioned bedroom he forgot everything in an eager contemplation of
a whirling, feathery background to his window.

"Aunt Judith," he called excitedly, "it's snowin'. Gee, that's
Christmasy, ain't it! I don't mind the snow at all s'long's I got a bed
cinched." His eager face lengthened. "Wisht Stump had a bed," he
finished wistfully.

[Illustration]

"Stump?"

"I jus' called him Stump, Aunt Judith, 'cause he didn't have no tail."
Aunt Judith's eyes were sympathetic.

But an embarrassing difficulty arose about Jimsy's bed attire which
drove Stump for a time from his mind. It was solved by a night-shirt of
first-citizen primness, which trailed upon the carpet and made him
snigger self-consciously behind his hand until he heard Aunt Judith's
step again beyond the door, when he vaulted into bed, shivering
luxuriously in the chill softness of unaccustomed linen.... And then
Aunt Judith blew out the lamp and tucked him in with hands so tremulous
and gentle that his throat troubled him again, and he lay very still.
Meeting her eyes, he suddenly buried his face in the pillow with a gulp
and a sob, and clung to her hand. Aunt Judith, shaking, caught him
wildly in her arms, cried very hard, and kissed him good-night. Jimsy,
Stump and Aunt Judith Sawyer knew variously the meaning of starvation.




[Illustration]

III

THE CHAIN GROWS


The house grew very still. Jimsy, awaking after a time with the start of
unfamiliar surroundings, heard the rattle of wind and snow against his
window. A tree brushed monotonously against the panes--then through the
sounds of winter storm came an unmistakable whimper and a howl. The boy
sat up. Stump! Huddled likely against the door in an agony of faith.
Jimsy thought of a winter night before Mom Dorgan had taken him in, and
shivered. The howl came again. Rising, Jimsy opened his door on a crack
and peered cautiously through it. The hallway was dimly alight from a
lamp, set, for safety's sake, within a pewter bowl. The house of Sawyer
slept. Gathering his train in his hand, Jimsy hurried through the hall
and down the stairs to the lower floor, quite dark now, save for barred
patches of window framing ghostly landscapes. A gust of wind and snow
whirled in as he unbarred the kitchen door. Then something with an
ingratiating waggle pushed gladly against his feet. Five seconds later
Jimsy and Stump were on their way upstairs.

[Illustration]

Excitement exacted its toll. Jimsy halted at the second turn in the
upper hall, his scalp feeling very queer. The lamp had gone out,
probably in the draft from the kitchen door, and he had lost his room!
Whispering desperate admonitions to the wriggling dog beneath his arm,
Jimsy went on tiptoed hunt until, finding a window, a turn and a door
that seemed familiar, he heaved a great sigh of relief and turned the
knob. As he pushed back the door, a flood of light and warmth fanned
out, and Jimsy, tangling his feet in his train as only a small boy
could, fell headlong into the room, propelling Stump, who yelped with
fright, at the very feet of Abner Sawyer.

"Oh, my Gosh!" yelled Jimsy wildly. "Pinched!"

[Illustration]

Outraged, the first citizen rose from a bench beside a table and a lamp,
and Jimsy, scrambling to his feet, a ridiculous figure of apology and
dismay in his billowing train and sagging shoulders, saw that Mr. Sawyer
held in his hand a plane and a piece of wood and that the room in which
he stood was a work-shop perfect in equipment.

"What," demanded Mr. Sawyer in a terrible voice, "what does this mean?
That dog--"

But Jimsy had not heard.

"Lordy," he breathed, "what a thump-walloper of a shop! Whisht Jack
Sweeny could see this. My, wouldn't his good eye open! Whatcha makin'?"

Mr. Sawyer reddened as any man may whose weakness has been unexpectedly
detected by a boy in an acre of night-shirt.

"No one," he began icily, "_no_ one--not even Mrs. Sawyer presumes to
come beyond that threshold"--he broke off and frowned impatiently,
feeling his power of aloofness threatened by something in Jimsy's eager
stare which claimed a kinship of interest.... There was an alarming
suggestion of intimacy anyway in a midnight scene with a tailless dog, a
boy clad in your own night-shirt--and an inferential person with an eye
by the name of Sweeny.... Why did a ridiculous frozen sense of guilt
impede his tongue now when rebuke was imperative?... Why on earth had a
look of relief and understanding supplanted the puzzled friendliness of
Jimsy's supper-time stare?... So might a dog look who had waggled in
friendly perplexity at the foot of a flawless statue only to find that
the statue held in its hand a lowly but perfectly comprehensible bone
... and the dog's attitude of course toward the flawless statue would
never be quite the same--nor--

"James," said the first citizen hoarsely, "go to bed!"

[Illustration]

"Aw," said James softly, "make it Jimsy. Aunt Judith did. I ain't no
stiff wit' spinach an' buttons chasin' newsies off the porch."

"Jimsy!" said the first citizen faintly, and felt his world rock about
him again. For fate and Jimsy, it was very plain, had filed the word
away with the biscuit.

[Illustration]

Jimsy's grin was radiant. Upset, Mr. Sawyer turned back to his bench
with Jimsy at his heels.

"Oh, Lordy, Lordy," breathed the boy in an ecstasy of admiration.
"Makin' a Christmas present fur Aunt Judith on the sly, ain't ye? Won't
she jus' open her eyes! _I_ bet! And polishin' the wood yerself. Gee!"

Mr. Sawyer cleared his throat.

"Mrs. Sawyer and I," said he, "do--not--exchange--gifts--at Christmas.
This cabinet is for my private office at the bank."

Jimsy's face fell.

"Aw," he said gently, "seems like ye'd orta give her sumthin' fur
Christmas. She's so awful good.... B'long to the union?"

"I--I beg your pardon?"

"Carpenters' union. Jack Sweeny does."

The first citizen froze.

"Carpentering with me," he explained stiffly, "is a fad--not an
occupation or a necessity. I," he added "am President of the Lindon
Bank."

Jimsy's glance was sympathetic. It regretted the world's gain of a bank
president at the expense of a better carpenter.

"I kin plane," he pleaded eagerly. "Honest Injun, I kin. I kin whittle
too, like ol' Scratch. Lemme plane this--"

"I thank you," began Mr. Sawyer coldly, with unfortunate selection of
words, "but--" His voice faltered under Jimsy's shining gaze. For,
reading in the formal repudiation a vote of thanks, Jimsy had seized a
plane and set to work.

[Illustration]

The shavings flew. The clock ticked loudly in the quiet. Outside a
winter blizzard was sweeping in white fury from the hills. Stump
crouched silently in a corner, his head upon his paws. And Abner
Sawyer, returning to his work in helpless indecision, felt his privacy
and his dignity forever compromised by a boy and a dog. He knew of
course that a small boy, scantily clad, should not be planing furiously
on the bench beside him at midnight with a sociable gleam in his
eye--yet--something--a terrible conviction perhaps that if he spoke at
all his voice would be hoarse and uncertain and his poise threatened by
the paralyzing sense of apology which welled strangely up within him in
Jimsy's presence, tied his tongue. The minutes ticked loudly on and the
shavings flew.... And Jimsy would misinterpret whatever he said in terms
of sentimentality. He always did.... The clock struck one.... Abner
Sawyer rose.

[Illustration]

"James--Jimsy," he said, and his voice was hoarse and uncertain as he
knew it would be, "you must go to bed."

Jimsy looked up sympathetically.

"Got a cold?"

"No."

"Frog in your throat?"

"No."

Jimsy resigned his plane with a sigh.

"Golly," he laughed, "we'd catch it, wouldn't we--me and you--if Aunt
Judith knew!"

Then he glanced at Stump and said nothing at all. And quite suddenly
conscience told Abner Sawyer that he could not accept without giving.
Jimsy had helped him willingly and he had accepted--why he could not for
the life of him remember, save that it had something to do with his
throat and his poise. It did entail obligation of a sort, however, and
he was a just man. Abner Sawyer did not look at Stump. He blew out the
light.

In silence the two passed out and closed the door. The episodic
irregularities of the evening beginning with the Lindon _Evening News_
had reached unheard of climax. A mongrel dog was asleep in the warmth of
the sanctum.

Abner Sawyer had a strangling sense of another link to his biscuit-riven
chain and passed his hand over his forehead in a dazed and weary way.

"Abner," said Aunt Judith nervously at breakfast, "you--you don't think
this once we--could have--a--a Christmas tree for Jimsy?"

[Illustration]

"Certainly not!" said Mr. Sawyer coldly.

Aunt Judith's hand trembled a little as she poured the coffee and the
first citizen waited so long for her usual reply that he thought
impatiently it would never come. It came at last--quietly.

[Illustration]

"Just as you--say, Abner." But the final word was lost in an outraged
yell from somewhere near the woodpile.

"It--it must be Jimsy," said Aunt Judith hurriedly. "He--he was up so
early I gave him his breakfast. He's shoveling the snow from the
walks--"

"Gwan!" came a muffled roar. "Say that again and I'll bust yer face
good." Sounds of battle and vilifying repartee speedily upset the Sawyer
breakfast. Abner Sawyer pushed back his chair and strode hastily to the
kitchen window. He saw concentric circles of fists and snow and a
yapping dog. He could not know that the defensive section of the
maelstrom was Specks, the Christmas urchin next door, or that Jimsy and
Specks settled every controversy under Heaven in a fashion of their own.

The first citizen flung up the window.

"James!" he said in a terrible voice.

The concentric circles wavered--then whirled dizzily on.

"James!" Too much conventional horror and dignity there to pierce the
elemental.

"_Jimsy!_" There was sharp informality now that meant business. Jimsy
upset his freckled antagonist in the snow and wheeled.

"Mister Sawyer," he yelled indignantly, "he went an' said ye was an ol'
crab--an' a miser--an' a skinflint--an'--an' a stiff--an' I blacked his
eye fur him an' tol' him he lied. An' he went an' said ye didn't have no
heart or ye wouldn't let Aunt Judith carry in the wood an' do all the
work an' never git no new clothes--"

"Yi! Yi! Yi! Yi!" derided Specks. "Boney Middleton tol' me--Boney
Middleton tol' me. You won't have no tree or nuthin'."

"Didn't I tell ye 'bout the biscuit?" demanded Jimsy fiercely. "An'
about Stump sleepin' in the work-shop, didn't I? Hain't that enuff?
Hain't he good to boys an' dogs? I--I don't want no Christmas tree, ye
big stiff. I'm goin' to have turkey--"

But Abner Sawyer had closed the window with a bang. Although he did not
look at Aunt Judith he knew that her face was white.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

IV

THE CHAIN CLANKS


It was the day before Christmas that the Village Conscience telephoned
the Lindon Bank.

"I felt that I must call you up, Mr. Sawyer," she said firmly, "and tell
you that the boy you have with you over Christmas is going around from
door to door, ringing the bell and--_begging_!"

"Begging!"

"Perhaps I shouldn't call it _just_ that--but--well, saying 'Merry
Christmas!' rather hopefully."

Feeling rather sick, Abner Sawyer formally thanked his informer and rang
off. Glancing out of his office window he saw with a shock that instead
of Austin White, who usually drove him home at night, Jimsy and Peggy,
the old Sawyer mare, were waiting beneath a snow-ridged elm with the
sleigh. Jimsy caught his eye, smiled warmly and waved, and because
Abner Sawyer did not know what else to do, he stiffly returned the
salute and reached for his hat, irritably conscious that sufficient
sleep and food had already left their marks upon his guest. Jimsy's
cheeks above the old-fashioned tippet Aunt Judith had wound about his
throat were smooth and ruddy.

"Aunt Judith didn't want me to come," explained Jimsy, "but I tol' her
how Gink Gunnigan often let me drive his truck an' I guess I coaxed so
hard she had to.... Unc--Mister Sawyer, it--it's nearly Chris'mus eve!"

Abner Sawyer climbed in without a word. Peggy flew off with a jingle of
bells through the village, through the woods, through a Christmas eve
twilight dotted now with homely squares of light shining jewel-wise
among the snowy trees.

[Illustration]

"Jimsy!"

"Yes, sir?"

"A lady telephoned that you'd been--_begging_--from door to door."

Jimsy hung his head.

"I--I only rung some door-bells an' said 'Merry Chris'mus.'"

"You expected and received--money?"

"Y-e-e-e-e-es, sir."

"Why?"

Silence.

"Jimsy, I insist upon an explanation."

Jimsy gulped and faced Abner Sawyer, his eyes blazing with heartbroken
disappointment through tear-wet lashes.

"Uncle Ab," he choked, "it--it was a Chris'mus s'prise fur you an' Aunt
Judith." A great tear rolled slowly down upon the tippet. "I--I seen a
book on fancy carpenterin' an' I--I didn't have no money an'--an' a
thimble. It ain't silver, but it's 'mos' as good." And then Jimsy lost
his moorings with a sob and cried his heart out upon the sleeve of Abner
Sawyer. "I--I got the book buttoned under my coat," he blurted after a
while, "an', Uncle Ab, I'm awful sorry 'bout the door-bells. All the
fellus do it home--"

[Illustration]

Abner Sawyer would have been less than human if the boy's tragedy had
not touched him.

"Why," he asked huskily, "why did you wish to give me a Christmas
present?"

[Illustration]

"Because," cried Jimsy passionately, "yer so awful good to me an' Stump,
an' so's Aunt Judith. An' I thought mebbe ye'd never had nobuddy ever
give ye a present an' mean it like I did or--"

"Or what, Jimsy?"

"Ye'd feel diffrunt 'bout Christmas."

The first citizen took the reins himself, tucked Jimsy in beneath the
fur robe and drove home in silence, conscious only that the world was
awry and he hated the Village Conscience. Nor was he quite himself even
after supper was done and Jimsy, a little tearful still in his
disappointment, safe in bed.

"Abner--" began Aunt Judith from her chair by the fire.

"Yes?" said Mr. Sawyer coldly. He wished Judith would not talk. She
rarely did. He was tired and upset and probing desperately within for
some remnant of the cold complacence of a week ago.

"The minister was here to-day. He--he told me how Mrs. Dorgan took Jimsy
in from the street. She--drinks. He--hasn't--a real--home. The minister
would like--to--to find one for him."

[Illustration]

Jimsy again! He must fling away his chain now or feel it clank.

"That," said Abner Sawyer resentfully, "is of no interest to me."

There was pitiful, hard-wrung bravery in Aunt Judith's face. Only a
passionate surge of feeling could have swept away the silence and
repression of the years. Only a woman's emotion, wild and maternal for
all its starving, inevitable as the law of God, could have leaped a
barrier so fixed and unrelenting.

"Abner," she said desperately. "I--I want to keep Jimsy. I--I can't
_bear_ to see him go--"

"Judith!" There was more in the single word of course than Aunt Judith
could know. There was an unread paper and a biscuit, a tailless dog
invading sanctity, a yelling boy by a woodpile, and now the memory of a
twilight ride and the tears of a choking lad upon his sleeve, an
irritating record of moments of weakness which it behooved a first
citizen to stamp out of his life forever. Aunt Judith read in his face
an inexorable death-sentence of her hope and rose, trembling.

[Illustration]

"You are a hard, cold man!" she said, very white. "And the house is so
lonely I hate it!... I _hate_ it!" quivered Aunt Judith with a long
shuddering sob; "there's no one to love in it--no one! And everything
Specks said to Jimsy was true!"

And then, crying and shaking, she was gone, and Abner Sawyer went with
stumbling feet to the privacy of his work-shop, his face death-white.
The pompous illusions of his little world were tumbling to ruins about
him.

He had said with frequent unction that he was a "hard" man, interpreting
that phrase liberally in terms of thrift, economy and substantial common
sense, and his world, through the mouth of an urchin, had flung back to
him the galling words--_miser_ and _skinflint_! They had fawned to his
face and flouted his back, gossiping of servants and made-over gowns
and kindlings. Up and down the quiet work-shop walked Abner Sawyer,
clinging in an agony of humiliation to the loyalty of a little
urchin.... It was all he had, he told himself fiercely, all he had!
Jimsy alone saw him as he was and liked him.... No heart!... No
Christmas tree!... No one in the house to love.... He must prove then to
Specks--to Jimsy--to Judith--to the Middletons--to all Lindon--

Turning with hot anger in his heart, he saw a book upon his work-bench;
and picking it up, Abner Sawyer faced the pitiful fiasco of Jimsy's
Christmas gift. With a great lump in his throat and his eyes wet he
glanced at the fly-leaf.

"To Uncle Ab," it said, "from Jimsy. Chrismus gretings."

The door clicked as it had clicked the night before and the night
before.

"Unc--Mister Sawyer," said Jimsy sleepily. "I 'mos' forgot to come, I
was so awful tired an' sleepy.... Ain't--ain't sick, are ye, Uncle Ab?
Yer face is awful queer."

"I--I don't know," said the first citizen hoarsely. "I--I think I am. Go
to bed, Jimsy, and--thank--you--for the book."

Jimsy went back to bed. He did not know--nor did Aunt Judith or Abner
Sawyer that presently he was the sole keeper of the house save Stump
snoring in the kitchen. For Abner Sawyer was furtively driving Peggy
into a village that knew him only by repute and Aunt Judith, having
slipped away in white defiance to Cousin Lemuel's down the road, was
driving into Lindon with the surreptitious savings of many years in the
old-fashioned pocket of her gown.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

V

THE PROVING


The clock struck six. It was Christmas morning! Jimsy awoke with the
thought of turkey uppermost in his mind, to find Aunt Judith by his bed,
a wonderful look of Christmas, he thought, in her gentle face.

"Dress quickly, Jimsy," she whispered, "and don't make a sound--not a
sound! I'll wait outside by the door. It--it's a Christmas secret that
nobody but you and I must know."

Jimsy tumbled into his clothes and opened the door.

"W-w-w-w-what is it, Aunt Judith?" he whispered.

But for answer Aunt Judith only hurried him in a flutter to the
sewing-room, safe this many a year from the measured tread of
first-citizen feet, and closed the door.

"Oh, Aunt Judith!" gulped the boy. "Aunt Judith!"

A Christmas tree winked and rainbowed glory in a window by the eaves,
everything beneath its tinselled branches that the heart of boy could
wish. The radiance in Jimsy's eyes brought Aunt Judith to her knees
beside him, her sweet, tired eyes wet with tears of pleasure.

"You like it, Jimsy?" she whispered. "You're sure you like it, dear?"

Jimsy buried his face on Aunt Judith's shoulder with a strangled sob of
excitement and delight.

"Aunt Judith," he blurted, "I--I can't 'mos' tell ye what I think."

Aunt Judith's arms clung tightly to him.

"Cousin Lemuel helped me," she whispered. "The house was dark and Mr.
Sawyer in bed. There wasn't even a light in the work-shop. We tiptoed up
and down the back-stairs. You mustn't breathe a word of it, Jimsy! Not a
word! It's for you and me."

Jimsy sighed.

[Illustration]

"Whisht," he said, "whisht Uncle Ab believed in Chris'mus."

Aunt Judith kissed him.

"Bless your heart, Jimsy," she said bravely. "So do I."

[Illustration]

But even bewildering hours with gifts and trees must come to an end, and
presently Aunt Judith and Jimsy went down hand in hand to attend to the
fire and breakfast.... And the opening of the sitting-room door froze
Aunt Judith Sawyer to the threshold, her face whitely unbelieving.
Something was wrong with the primness of the sitting-room--something in
evergreen and tinsel and a hundred candles that showered Christmas from
its boughs--something was wrong with Abner Sawyer--up and waiting by the
window, his face twisted into a faint and sickly smile of apology.

For now that he was in the very heart of his "proving" he did not know
what on earth to do. Dignity?... It was hopelessly out of the question.
With a monument to his midnight guilt blazing there in the corner--with
Christmas wreaths hung in the windows to confound the Middletons--he
must face the music. Feeling very foolish, he cleared his throat and
essayed to speak, paralyzed into silence again by the unexpected
evolution of a hoarse croak so horribly un-first-citizen that it
frightened him.

[Illustration]

Jimsy broke the staring silence.

"Uncle Ab," he quivered, "ye never--ye never went an' done all that fur
me!"

"I--I don't know," said Abner Sawyer, swallowing very hard. "I--I think
I did."

"When," faltered Aunt Judith from the doorway, "did you--do it?"

"It must have been after midnight. I came in very quietly. The ride was
long--I went to Matsville. You must have been in bed asleep--"

Jimsy embarked upon a handspring of celebration.

"Two trees!" he shouted, caution quite forgotten in his wild excitement,
"two suits of clothes--two everything! Oh, my gosh, Specks ain't in it.
I'm the Christmas kid!" and then in a panic he was on his feet again,
his face hot and red. "Aunt Judith," he exclaimed, almost crying, "I'm
awfully sorry--"

Aunt Judith's tremulous laugh seemed tears and silver.

"Never mind, dear. It's all right now. Abner," she swallowed bravely,
"one of--one of Jimsy's Christmas trees is in the sewing-room. I--I'd
like you to see it."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

VI

THE TRIUMPH


Specks reviewed the Christmas tree in the sitting-room after breakfast
and looked upset. It was bigger than his own.

"Got one downstairs, too," crowed Jimsy. "Uncle Ab," he added, "he sort
o' wanted it to be awful Christmasy through the whole house, an'--an'
Jiminy Crickets, Specks, it is!"

"Uncle Ab--who's Uncle Ab?"

"Uncle Ab Sawyer." Jimsy bristled. "What ye got to say about it?"

"Nuthin'."

"Did _you_ get _two_ trees, Specks?"

"Naw. Hain't many folks did, I guess. 'Tain't nuthin' to crow about,
anyway."

"Huh! Thought ye said the Middletons was more Christmasy'n us."

"I didn't."

"Ye did."

"I didn't."

"Ye did, too, and I walloped ye fur it. I'll wallop ye again if ye say
ye didn't."

"Jimsy!" Aunt Judith's gentle voice put an end to controversy. An
armistice was pledged.

[Illustration]

"Did ye get skates, Specks?"

"Nope."

"Gosh, I'm sorry fur that. I got two pairs. Mebbe--Aunt Judith?"

"Yes, Jimsy?"

"Would ye mebbe mind me givin' Specks a pair o' skates? Mr. Middleton he
ain't so Christmasy as you an' Uncle Ab--"

Specks swallowed hard and accepted this and the skates. But he could not
forbear at least one shaft of triumph.

"I got a sled, Jimsy!"

"Huh!" said Jimsy. "So did I. Two of 'em."

It was too much. The street urchin in Specks came to the fore in a
mighty wave of envy.

"Gawd!" he gulped.

Jimsy glowered.

"Hey!" he whispered fiercely "Hain't ye got no decency?"

Specks blushed apology and departed.

[Illustration]

Later, Jimsy reviewed the Sawyer turkey with a reverential glisten in
his eye.

"Specks!" he yelled from the kitchen window. "Yi, Specksy!"

"What d'ye want?"

"Come over an' see the turkey."

"Y'ain't got two, have ye?" demanded Specks with suspicion.

"Naw," said Jimsy. "One's enuff. This un's bigger'n the turkey Pete
Googan raffled off last Christmas eve."

So Specks returned to envy--for the house of Sawyer had outdone the
house of Middleton once more--and Jimsy in a glow of noisy delight led
him to rows of pies and a barrel of ruddy apples--to celery and
tarts--to fruit cake and cranberries and simmering vegetables--in short
to every home-keeping kitchen device for filling a country house with
the odor of Christmas and the promise of good cheer. The Sawyer kitchen
to-day was a wonderful place of shine and spice. Even Aunt Judith felt
the nameless something in the air, for her cheeks were faintly pink and
the hand that smoothed her snowy apron trembled ever so little.
Christmas had not come so this many a year.

But Specks departed this time with a furtive air of triumph.

"Mr. Middleton ain't no stiff," he announced. "_He's_ goin' out on the
hill coastin' with me this afternoon--"

"S-s-s-s-h!" whispered Jimsy fiercely. "D'ye want Aunt Judith to hear
ye? I git awful sick o' wallopin' you, Specks, but lemme hear ye say
that again an' I'll baste ye good."

The kitchen door swung back. Specks paled, as well he might. The first
citizen stood in the doorway, his mouth set.

"Jimsy," he said, clearing his throat. "Get your sled, my boy. We'd
better try it out before dinner."

It was a challenge to the Middletons, of course, but afterwards, in a
wild moment of panic, Abner Sawyer felt that he would have retracted at
any cost had it not been for the wonderful glow in Jimsy's face. He felt
a little sick.... God help him, he liked Jimsy! He wanted to please
him!




[Illustration]

VII

THE DOWNFALL


The Lindon hill was full of watchers. That in itself was disconcerting.
Wild spirits gather in the snow on Christmas morning. And it was, of
course, like Jimsy to fling himself suddenly upon his sled with a whoop
and go flying down the hill through the snow fleet, yelling wildly, but
Abner Sawyer wished he had made his debut a trifle less conspicuously.
For it brought all eyes to Abner Sawyer himself standing stiffly upon
the hill-top not quite sure of his ground. A neighbor or so eyed him in
polite surprise and nodded; a child fastened round eyes upon his silk
hat and he wished he had left it at home. But Christmas was no more
Christmas than Sunday was Sunday without this formal head-piece, and
besides, it had been his sole concession to the horrified stir of
dignity within him when Jimsy had appeared upon the walk beside him
dragging his sled. What on earth was he doing here anyway in the rough
and tumble sport of a Christmas morning!

Yells of greeting followed Jimsy's meteoric flight down the hillside.
Everybody seemed to know and like him, and Jimsy, as ever, was noisily
responsive. Yes, he was more a part of this village of Lindon than the
first citizen himself standing aloof upon the hill-top, and the first
citizen had spent his life in Lindon. Abner Sawyer felt hurt and alone.
He had slipped in an unwary moment from his wound-proof armor of
conscious superiority and in this world of friends outside it, there was
more room for Jimsy than there was for him. Small comfort, after all,
the solitude of greatness!

[Illustration]

The first citizen frowned impatiently. What was it all about, anyway, he
wondered hopelessly. Did he want to be one of that yelling, shoving,
jostling crowd? Surely not! His dignity rose in revolt at the very
thought of it. Did he hunger for Jimsy's supreme gift of adaptability?
Why should this fierce new hunger for one friendly, honest,
heart-warming smile of liking and welcome gnaw at his heart?... Why--God
help him!--why was he a stranger in his own town?

[Illustration]

"The world is all wrong," said Abner Sawyer, a little white; "I am not
myself." And for a wild moment his sore heart flamed again at Jimsy's
revolutionizing intrusion into the quiet smugness of his life.

Jimsy's quick, eager little smile of greeting as he came up the hill
again warmed the pang away--it was so full of good-fellowship and
understanding.

"Ever go belly-whopper, Uncle Ab?" he demanded radiantly.

"I--I scarcely think so," said the first citizen.

"I--I don't like to belly-whop down the hill with you standin' up here
alone," said Jimsy shyly. "Why don't ye go down just once with me, Uncle
Ab? Then if ye like it, we'll just have one thump-walloper of a time!"

"No, no, Jimsy," said the first citizen. "I--I can't do that--" and then
for the first time he met the amused eyes of Hiram Middleton and
Specks.

[Illustration]

So they had followed to the hill--incredulous and curious! A wave of
anger swept Abner Sawyer into indiscretion.

"I--I'll go with you once, Jimsy," he said, and Jimsy's round little
face glowed.

So the first citizen seated himself stiffly on the sled behind Jimsy,
wondering what on earth to do with his legs. They seemed to have
lengthened mysteriously and they looked astonishingly thin. Jimsy gave a
wild Indian whoop of warning and the sled hurtled off down the hill,
with the first citizen, unbelievably stiff-legged and frightened,
clinging to his hat.

His emotions were panoramic. There was panic first at his lost
dignity--then wonder at their speed, but most of all his legs bothered
him--his legs and his hat. He wished Jimsy would quit yelling. Yet for
all he tried he could not bring himself to say so.

"Ki-yi-yi-yi-whoop!" sang Jimsy, steering. Abner Sawyer gulped.
Everybody on the hill, of course, was staring; his coat-tails were
flying dizzily behind him. There would be a scandal and the directors
of the Lindon Bank might even meet and call him to account. Small
blame to them. Abner Sawyer mentally sketched a caricature of
himself--coat-tails, legs and all--and Heaven help him!--lost his hat.
He emitted a feeble croak of dismay. Jimsy looking back steered into a
snow-bank and dumped the president of the Lindon Bank out upon the hill.

"Gosh Almighty, Uncle Ab," he yelled, "I'm awful sorry. I seen your lid
go--"

"Never mind, Jimsy," said the first citizen, sitting up, "never
mind--I--I really shouldn't have worn such a wind-catcher to--to
belly-whop in--"

He sat very stiff amid the ruins of the snow-bank. Jimsy grinned.

"Ye ain't really done no belly-whoppin' yet," he said.

[Illustration]

And now for the first time Abner Sawyer realized that everybody on the
hill had come running at Jimsy's yell to see if he was hurt.... One was
brushing him off ... another had rescued his hat with a horrible
un-first-citizen dent in it and a lump of snow on the brim ... and they
weren't shocked ... they weren't laughing.... Why on earth should there
be friendliness now in their gaze when he had seemed so far away from
them standing up there on the hill? No scandalized amazement here at the
downfall of Lindon's pride ... he was somehow closer to them all.

It was Aunt Polly Magee, the self-appointed mother of the village, who
finally stood the first citizen upon his feet and brushed the snow from
his back.

"Dear me," she said, "that was a spill. When ye went down ye seemed
'mos' as leggy as a spider. Next time ye go coastin', Ab, ye'd better
not wear your Sunday hat. 'Tain't no better'n a kite when it comes to
wind."

Abner Sawyer's smile was vague and apologetic, but there was a fierce,
wild joy in his heart that he didn't try to understand. He was glad he
had lost his hat--he was glad he had fallen into the snow-bank--and he
was glad Aunt Polly Magee had called him Ab for the first time in thirty
years!




[Illustration]


VIII

THE CHAIN IS LOCKED


Like a rainbow blur fled the Sawyer Christmas, punctuated with the yells
and bangs of boyhood. From dawn to bed it was a triumph.

"Jimsy," said the first citizen at dusk, "has it--has it been what you'd
call a--a walloper-thump--"

"Thump-walloper," corrected Jimsy.

"Thump-walloper of a day?"

Jimsy's reply was ecstatic.

"I 'mos' always forget," he added ruefully. "Aunt Judith said I mustn't
call ye Uncle Ab. Which d'ye like best, Uncle Ab? Mister Sawyer or Uncle
Ab?"

"I--I think," said the first citizen with a gulp, "that I like Uncle Ab
a little better."

"So do I," said Jimsy.

With a wind-beaten flutter of wings, Jimsy's Christmas fled at
midnight. Dawn grayed bleakly over the Sawyer home, and there came an
hour when Peggy waited to carry Jimsy to the station. Nervous and
irritable--why he did not know save that time was crowding and he must
deliver Jimsy to the minister in time for the 8.32, Abner Sawyer strode
resolutely to the kitchen door. But he did not summon Jimsy. Instead he
turned a little white.

[Illustration]

It was a common enough sight--a woman clinging to a child and
crying--but Abner Sawyer was conscious of a swelling mutiny in his
throat and a blur to his vision.

"Do-o-o-on't cry, Aunt Judith!" gulped Jimsy courageously. "I'll be as
good as I know how. An' you'll be awful good to Stump, won't ye, Aunt
Judith? He's lame an'--an' he's had a fierce life."

"Yes--yes--"

"An' tell Uncle Austin White I sent him good-by."

"Yes, Jimsy."

"An'--an' write me every week 'bout ol' Peggy an' Uncle Ab an'--an' you,
Aunt Judith. Don't forget--"

"Everything, dear!"

"Go-o-o-oby, Aunt Judith!"

"Oh, Jimsy! Jimsy!"

Abner Sawyer fled to his wagon with his hands upon his ears. It was the
wildest sobbing he had ever heard. When Jimsy came, at last, looking
very red and swollen, the first citizen was staring straight ahead.

[Illustration]

Peggy finished at the station almost neck and neck with the train. The
minister spoke to Mr. Sawyer and rushed Jimsy up the steps. A bell
clanged. There was much noise and puffing and the train was under way.
Jimsy, wildly remembering his good-by to Uncle Ab, flung up the train
window and waved a frantic hand.

Then something happened.

A shaking hand touched the baggage-master.

"Stop the train!" said Abner Sawyer harshly. He was deathly white.
"It--it is important. I will pay if necessary."

It was unprecedented, but, thoroughly rural in his taste for sensation,
the baggage-master leaped to the bottom step of the nearest car and
spoke to a brakeman. The brakeman glanced at the first citizen with
respect. There was a hissing noise and a jerk. When the train rumbled to
a stop again under the startled eyes of Lindon, Abner Sawyer was already
striding up the aisle. With the intelligent eyes of the young minister
upon him, he snatched Jimsy roughly from the seat, carried him down the
aisle--down the steps--and over the platform to Peggy.

"W-what is it, Uncle Ab?" faltered the boy. "Did I--did I forget
something?"

Abner Sawyer felt the boy's warm young cheek against his face and a
great lump welled up in his throat. Something hot stung his eyes. The
clasp of his arms tightened.

"Jimsy," he said huskily, "you said I ought to give Aunt Judith a
Christmas present, and I'm going to give her--_you_!"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Jimsy, by Leona Dalrymple

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JIMSY ***

***** This file should be named 28110.txt or 28110.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/1/28110/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
