The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dear Santa Claus, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Dear Santa Claus

Author: Various

Release Date: February 20, 2009 [EBook #28125]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEAR SANTA CLAUS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Claudine Corbasson and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Florida's Publication of Archival, Library
& Museum Materials (PALMM))









[Illustration]

[Illustration]




Dear Santa Claus

Charming Holiday Stories
for Boys and Girls

[Illustration]

HANDSOMELY ILLUSTRATED

Copyright, 1901, by W. B. Conkey Company

Chicago
W. B. CONKEY COMPANY
PUBLISHERS




[Illustration]




_The Night Before Christmas._


    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    'Twas the night before Christmas, and all through the house,
    Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse.
    The stockings were hung by the chimney with care,
    In the hope that St. Nicholas soon would be there.
    The children were nestled all snug in their beds,
    While visions of sugar-plums danced in their heads.

    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    And mamma in her kerchief, and I in my cap,
    Had just settled our brains for a long winter's nap;
    When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter,
    I sprang from the bed to see what was the matter.
    Away to the window I flew like a flash,
    Tore open the shutters and threw up the sash.
    The moon on the breast of the new-fallen snow
    Gave the lustre of midday to objects below--
    When what to my wondering eyes should appear
    But a miniature sleigh and eight tiny reindeer,
    With a little old driver so lively and quick,
    I knew in a moment it must be St. Nick.

    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    More rapid than eagles his coursers they came,
    And he whistled and shouted and called them by name--
    "Now, Dasher! Now, Dancer! Now, Prancer! Now, Vixen!
    On, Comet! On, Cupid! On, Dunder and Blixen!
    To the top of the porch, to the top of the wall!
    Now, dash away! Dash away! Dash away! All!"
    As dry leaves before the wild hurricane fly,
    When they meet with an obstacle, mount to the sky,
    So up to the house-top the coursers they flew
    With the sleigh full of toys, and St. Nicholas, too.

    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    And then in a twinkling I heard on the roof
    The prancing and pawing of each tiny hoof.
    As I drew in my head, and was turning around,
    Down the chimney St. Nicholas came with a bound.

    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    He was dressed all in fur from his head to his foot,
    And his clothes were all tarnished with ashes and soot;
    A bundle of toys he had flung on his back,
    And he looked like a pedlar just opening his pack.
    His eyes--how they twinkled! His dimples, how merry!
    His cheeks were like roses, his nose like a cherry;
    His droll little mouth was drawn up in a bow,
    And the beard on his chin was as white as the snow.

    [Illustration]

    He spoke not a word, but went straight to his work,
    And filled all the stockings--then turned with a jerk,
    And laying his finger aside of his nose,
    And giving a nod, up the chimney he rose.
    He sprang to his sleigh, to his team gave a whistle,
    And away they all flew, like the down of a thistle;
    But I heard him exclaim ere he drove out of sight,
    "Merry Christmas to all, and to all a good-night!"

    [Illustration]




_The Night After Christmas._


    [Illustration]

    'Twas the night after Christmas, and all through the house
    Not a creature was stirring--excepting a mouse.
    The stockings were flung in haste over the chair,
    For hopes of St. Nicholas were no longer there.
    The children were restlessly tossing in bed,
    For the pie and the candy were heavy as lead;
    While mamma in her kerchief, and I in my gown,
    Had just made up our minds that we would not lie down,
    When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter,
    I sprang from my chair to see what was the matter.
    Away to the window I went with a dash,
    Flung open the shutter, and threw up the sash.
    The moon on the breast of the new-fallen snow,
    Gave the lustre of noon-day to objects below,
    I knew at a glance it must be Dr. Brough.
    I drew in my head, and was turning around,
    When upstairs came the Doctor, with scarcely a sound.

    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    [Illustration]

    He wore a thick overcoat, made long ago,
    And the beard on his chin was white with the snow.
    He spoke a few words, and went straight to his work;
    He felt all the pulses,--then turned with a jerk,
    And laying his finger aside of his nose,
    With a nod of his head to the chimney he goes:--
    "A spoonful of oil, ma'am, if you have it handy;
    No nuts and no raisins, no pies and no candy.
    These tender young stomachs cannot well digest
    All the sweets that they get; toys and books are the best.
    But I know my advice will not find many friends,
    For the custom of Christmas the other way tends.
    The fathers and mothers, and Santa Claus, too,
    Are exceedingly blind. Well, a good-night to you!"
    And I heard him exclaim, as he drove out of sight:
    "These feastings and candies make Doctors' bills right!"

    [Illustration]




NELLY'S VISIT


One summer, Nelly's auntie, who lived in the country, asked her to
come and make a good, long visit, and you may be sure Nelly was very
glad to go.

[Illustration]

She had always lived in the city, and she thought it great fun to feed
the hens and chickens and calves, and to watch all the animals and
talk to them.

[Illustration]

Cousin Fred was about her own age, so it was very pleasant for them to
play together. Fred took her around the farm and told her about all
the pets, and they soon knew her as well as though she had always
lived there.

Milly, one of the horses, would eat out of a spoon, and Nelly and her
cousin took turns feeding her. When they went away, she whinnied for
them to come back again, but Nelly said, "You shall have some more
to-morrow; you mustn't be a piggy-wiggy."

[Illustration]

One day Fred and Nelly gathered flowers in the woods, and Nelly made a
wreath to put upon her cousin's head.

"It seems just like fairyland out here," she said. "Let's play it is
fairyland, and I'm a fairy and you're a brownie."

[Illustration]

Fred thought that a very good game indeed, and they played that they
lived in the flowers and could change themselves into birds, or
squirrels, or people, whenever they wished.

But bye and bye they got hungry, and they couldn't live on the honey
from the flowers, as real fairies might; so they spread out the lunch
which they had brought and decided to be children again. It seemed as
though they had never tasted anything quite so good as that lunch.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

One day Speckle, the big hen, made a great fuss because her brood of
ducklings went into the water. She flew about here and there on the
bank of the stream, and called to them to come back, but the ducklings
were having great fun and paid no attention at all to her.

[Illustration]

Chanticleer seemed to think they were not very well behaved and needed
a good scolding; so he began to strut about and talk at the top of his
voice; but the ducklings had their swim and came out as happy as could
be.

Nelly thought the little chicks were prettier.

[Illustration]

Shep, the dog, could hunt eggs as well as they could, and he always
helped them. After he had found a nest, he took each egg carefully in
his mouth, and laid it in the basket which the children had brought;
and he never broke one.

"I believe he could count them if he tried," said Nelly.

"Of course he can count," said Fred. "When we send him after the cows,
he never leaves one behind, nor the sheep either. If one strays away,
he hunts for it until he finds it. But he wouldn't hurt one of them
for anything, no matter how hard he had to work to bring them in."

[Illustration]

They watched the milking, and drank all the warm milk they wanted; and
one day they helped churn.

"I believe I could make butter, too," said Nelly.

"Of course you could, dear," said her auntie; "it wouldn't take long
for you to learn, either."

Nelly was delighted with this, and wanted to begin right away.




FAIRY STORIES


Laura, Eva, and Susy are three sisters who are very fond of fairy
stories, as most little girls are. Laura is the oldest, and reads the
stories aloud to the others, while Humpty-Dumpty, the kitten, sits
near and listen--or, at least, he seems to be listening.

[Illustration]

But sometimes he gets tired of sitting still and jumps right up on
Laura's book, so she has to stop. Then they all have a great frolic,
and very often little brother Harry comes in to join in the fun, and
they play until they are tired out.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

One story which they like very much is about a little girl who was
lost in the woods and wandered about for a long, long time, until she
was so tired that she fell asleep on the ground, with the flowers all
around her and the birds singing.

[Illustration]

But the birds were really fairies and were watching over her to see
that she was not harmed, and they sang to her on purpose to lull her
to sleep, for they knew how tired she was.

[Illustration]

And when she wakened, she understood what they said to her and knew
they were fairies, and they led her out of the forest and all the way
to her home. They asked her to come and visit them again, too, and
promised to take good care of her.

[Illustration]

Another of their favorite stories is about the flower fairies who come
and dance and sing for little children in the forest when it is very
still and the sun is shining brightly.

[Illustration]

Laura says she thinks she has almost heard them sometimes, talking to
the birds; and they often sit very quiet indeed, with their dollies
hugged tightly in their arms, and listen and watch.

[Illustration]

Once Eva went to sleep when she was watching like this, out in the
grove back of her home, and she dreamed that a fairy came and danced
for her and sang the sweetest songs you ever heard.

[Illustration]

"She was just like a little girl, too," said Eva. "She was bare-footed
and hadn't any hat on her head, and she wanted me to come and dance
with her."

[Illustration]

"Did you?" asked little Susy, breathlessly.

[Illustration]

"Of course!" said Eva. "We danced and danced and had just a lovely
time together, and then I had to go and wake up."

"Oh, oh, oh, I wish I could have a dream like that!" cried little Susy;
 and she went and lay down on the couch right away, to see if she
couldn't go to sleep and dream about fairies, too.

[Illustration]

But when she wakened, she said that all she could dream about was just
a lot of little frogs sitting up very straight on the bank of a brook,
with a great, big frog on a great, big log talking to them.

[Illustration]

"I think that was a lovely dream," said Laura; and then little Susy
was happy.

[Illustration]

"Now let's read some more stories," said Eva, and perhaps next time
we'll see some really-truly fairies.


    _--Fannie E. Ostrander._




[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Kate and Dick had a good many pets. There were Frisk and Ponto and
Fuss and another little dog called Fly. There was the pony, Fleet, and
the newest pet of all was a dear little colt that Kate's papa had
given to her for her very own because the pony she rode really
belonged to Dick.

This colt she had named Fairy, and she took great care of it. Fly and
Fairy were good friends, and they had a funny way of looking at each
other that made the children laugh.

Then the baby that they all loved lived here. Her name was May, and
she was Kate's sister. She was a sweet little thing, just beginning to
walk and to talk. She could say "chicky" quite plainly, and she liked
to toddle out and watch the little girls feed the chickens.

But I can't begin to tell you all the good times the children had that
summer. They were happy all the time, and grandma said they were so
good that it was really no trouble at all to have them there.

[Illustration]

But at last one Saturday evening, papa, who always came out from the
city to spend Sunday with them, said they must start for home the next
Monday.

They did want to stay longer, but papa laughed and said, "Christmas is
coming now, you know, and Santa Claus couldn't bring things way out
here as easy as he could get them to you in town."

Then the children began to think of Christmas and to tease grandpa and
grandma to come and spend it with them, and of course papa and mamma
teased too; so at last they promised, and the children said good-by to
their pets and to Kate and May and Dick and went away shouting?

"Good-by, grandma. Now remember you promised!"

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

After the children reached home they talked of grandma's nearly all
the time when they were not talking of Christmas, and Bessie wrote a
letter to Santa Claus asking him to be sure and bring a pair of his
nicest gold-bowed spectacles for grandma because she had lost her old
ones, and not to forget a gold-headed cane for grandpa.

At last Christmas Eve came, and grandma and grandpa were there, and
the children hung up their stockings, and Bessie said that grandma and
grandpa must be sure and hang up theirs too; then, after they had gone
to bed, the smaller children whispered for a long time about Santa
Claus and listened to hear his sleigh bells on the roof.

"I don't see how he can get down the chimney," whispered Bessie. "You
know he's so fat in all his pictures."

"Maybe he takes off his coat," whispered Clara, "then he wouldn't be
quite so big." But she didn't see how he could get down the chimney,
either.

Once or twice they were sure they heard him on the roof, and they
covered up their heads so he wouldn't think they were peeping, and at
last they went to sleep before they knew it.

Willie and Tom were just as anxious as the little girls, and whispered
just as much, and they all dreamed of Santa Claus.

[Illustration]

Bessie and Clara were the first ones up. They shouted with delight
when they looked in their stockings. There was a dear little dolly in
each stocking--a dolly with real hair and eyes that opened and shut,
and the dollies were dressed very prettily. They were too large to go
into the stockings, so they just stood in them, looking as though they
were ready to jump down.

Willie found the funniest jumping-jack in his stocking, and Tom pulled
a flute out of his. He had everybody awake in no time after that.

Grace was happy when she looked in her stocking. There was a little
plush box in it, and in the box was a lovely gold watch; while Harry
found just what he wanted too--a pair of skates.

But grandma and grandpa were surprised when they discovered the
spectacles and the cane.

"Who in the world could have told Santa what we wanted most?" said
grandma.

Grandpa said he couldn't understand it either, and then Bessie had to
tell the secret.

She ran up to each of them and whispered, "I wrote to him myself!"

Then how they kissed her.

All day long the library was kept closed; not a child was allowed to
peep in. But what fun they had all day, and what a Christmas dinner,
with a plum pudding as big as a pumpkin.

In the evening the library door was opened, and there was the
prettiest Christmas tree, all blazing with candles and hung with
pretty things; while piled around it were books and toys and
everything that everybody wanted most.

And just think of it! There, lying in front of the tree and looking as
happy as the children themselves, was a great, big, noble dog, who got
up and came to meet them as they trooped in.

"Ooo! Ooo! Ooo!" cried Bessie, bending to pat his head. "What's your
name, you great, big darling? Ooo! Ooo! Whose is he, papa?"

"Ask Santa Claus," said papa; and sure enough, Santa Claus stepped out
from behind the tree.

"His name is on his collar," said Santa Claus. Then the children all
rushed for him for they knew it was grandpa dressed up like Santa Claus.

[Illustration]

Afterwards Bessie spelled out the dog's name, "C-a-r-l-o," on his
collar, and her own name on a card which was tied to it, and she was
the happiest little girl in the world.

But everyone else was happy too, and they all said it was the very
merriest Christmas they had ever seen, and Clara and Bessie dreamed
that Santa Claus told them he himself had never had so much fun before.

    _Fannie E. Ostrander._




OFF ON THE WHEELS


One summer Alma and her brother Philip spent their vacation with their
auntie, who lived in a beautiful village, so near the pretty country
that they could take a ride out into it on their wheels, at any time
they wished.

[Illustration]

They both rode very well indeed, and they were always finding pretty
little spots along the road-side, where they played camp out; for
auntie let them take a lunch if they wanted to, and the air was so
fresh and pure that they were hungry almost all the time.

[Illustration]

One morning they started off quite early with their wheels and their
lunch, and they rode out into the country on a pretty road where they
had never been before.

[Illustration]

It had great trees along the side and a little river winding along
with it, and they saw the cattle and horses in the fields, and the
hens and chickens and turkeys and geese along the road-side, and once
they got off their wheels to talk to a pretty bossy and her calf that
were very near the fence.

[Illustration]

The bossy was a little afraid they might hurt her baby, so she wasn't
quite friendly. But she didn't try to drive them away.

[Illustration]

At one side of a farm-house near, a big dog was lying in his kennel,
and a great black cat came up to him very slyly and tapped him on the
nose with one paw. It was funny to see the dog jump up.

[Illustration]

The birds sang, and the hens and chickens talked to each other, and
once or twice they stopped to let a flock of geese cross the road in
front of them.

[Illustration]

Then they came upon a big flock of turkeys, and the gobbler put on
airs and pretended he was going to stop them; but they flew past and
laughed at him.

[Illustration]

By the side of the road in one place, a big, fat, clean-looking pig
was standing, sunning himself; but when he saw them, he ran away,
squealing.

[Illustration]

"You needn't run from us," Philip called after him; "we don't want any
pork to-day--we've got chicken for our lunch."

[Illustration]

"Yes," said Alma, "and nice, fresh strawberries, and everything good."

They saw a big dog lying near a chicken-coop, with the chickens
running over him just as they pleased, and Philip called out again,
"Be careful, you little fellows, or you might happen to run down his
throat."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

They got off their wheels and walked for a little while just for fun;
and all at once, as they were passing a barn, Alma cried, "Look! Did
you see that cat after the mouse?"

Philip said he didn't; but pretty soon Mrs Pussy came out.

[Illustration]

"You didn't get it, did you?" said Alma. "Well, you're fat enough now;
you don't need to catch mice."

They stopped to eat their lunch under a clump of trees not very far
from a pleasant farm-house. There was a cunning little fat dog lying
in front of the house, and as they watched him, up came a bee and lit
on his nose.

[Illustration]

The little doggy jumped up and barked at the bee; then he sat down and
put up his nose in a friendly way, to see what it was.

[Illustration]

"Look out, sir!" cried Philip. "You'll get hurt!"

But he spoke just a little too late, for puppy-dog found out his
mistake, and the next minute he was running away and yelping at the
top of his voice.

[Illustration]

"The poor little thing!" said Alma. "Wasn't that too bad?"

"Yes," said Philip, "but he'll get over it pretty quick, and I can't
help laughing, it did look so funny."

[Illustration]

When they went back to their auntie's, they told her that was the best
bicycle ride they had ever had.

[Illustration]

    --_Fannie E. Ostrander._


[Illustration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dear Santa Claus, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEAR SANTA CLAUS ***

***** This file should be named 28125.txt or 28125.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/2/28125/

Produced by David Edwards, Claudine Corbasson and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Florida's Publication of Archival, Library
& Museum Materials (PALMM))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
