Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, February 1877, Vol. XXI. No. 2, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Nursery, February 1877, Vol. XXI. No. 2
       A Monthly Magazine for Youngest Readers

Author: Various

Release Date: February 20, 2009 [EBook #28130]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, FEBRUARY 1877 ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. Music
by Linda Cantoni.









THE

NURSERY


_A Monthly Magazine_

FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

VOLUME XXI.--No. 2.

          BOSTON:
          JOHN L. SHOREY, No. 36 BROMFIELD STREET,
          1877.



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1877, by

JOHN L. SHOREY,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.

FRANKLIN PRESS: RAND, AVERY, AND COMPANY, 117 FRANKLIN STREET, BOSTON.



[Illustration: Contents]


IN PROSE.
                                          PAGE
  "Christmas Presents made here"           33
  My Dog Jack                              37
  Bertie's Steamer                         40
  A Story about Squirrels                  41
  What a Little Boy in England says        42
  First Lesson in Astronomy                46
  Papa's Birthday Present                  47
  Drawing-Lesson                           49
  The Rescue                               50
  The Young Sheep-Owner                    52
  Emma's Choice                            55
  Help one another                         57
  Billy and the Pig                        61
  Jocko, the Raven                         62


IN VERSE.

  The Petition of the Sparrows             35
  Ensign Johnny                            39
  The Froggies' Party                      45
  The Faithless Friend                     59
  Chipperee Chip (_with music_)            64




[Illustration: "CHRISTMAS PRESENTS MADE HERE."

VOL. XXI.--NO. 2.]




"CHRISTMAS PRESENTS MADE HERE."


[Illustration: A]BOUT a year ago, Edwin had a Christmas present of a
jig-saw. If Santa Claus brought it, then Santa Claus did a good thing
for himself; for last Christmas his pack was loaded down with presents
of Edwin's manufacture.

Nice little brackets to set up against the wall, nice little bedsteads,
book-shelves, toy-houses, frames for pictures, card-baskets,--these are
but a few of the great variety of things that Edwin makes with his
jig-saw.

Many little articles he gives away, for he is a generous boy: but he
wants books, and his mother cannot always afford to buy him the books he
wants; for she has two children, besides himself, to provide for.

So one day when Mr. Topliff, who keeps a great toy-shop, said to Edwin,
"I'll pay you well for as many of these toy-houses as you can make,"
Edwin replied, "I'll go to work just as soon as I have finished this
bracket; for a little money is just what I want."

Edwin had by practice learned to use his saw with great skill, and he
took pains always to do his work well. Gradually he learned to do the
finer sort of cabinet-work; and then he puzzled his wits to invent new
varieties of toys, and other things often sought for as Christmas
presents.

Mr. Topliff said, "You can earn a living by this kind of work, if you
choose, Edwin." But no! Edwin had made up his mind to go to college; and
so he replied, "If I can pay my college expenses by working at odd
hours, Mr. Topliff, I mean to do it--and I think I can."

"So do I," said Mr. Topliff. "You've got the knack. Well, my lad, don't
forget the firm of Topliff & Co. Bring us all your pretty things."

                                                UNCLE CHARLES.

[Illustration]




THE PETITION OF THE SPARROWS.


          NOW girls and boys of Chester Square,
          Pray give us of your meals a share.
          Just have the kindness to remember
          That this is chilly, bleak December;
          That snow has covered long the ground
          Till really nothing's to be found:
          So throw us out a crumb or two,
          And, as you would be done by, do.

          In those snug little cottages
          That you have placed among the trees,
          We all were hatched, and so, you see,
          Are members of the family.
          Hunger and frost are hard to bear:
          So, girls and boys of Chester Square,
          Just throw us out a crumb or two,
          And, as you would be done by, do.

          We know bad things of us are told:
          They call us English upstarts bold;
          Say we drive off the snow-birds dear,
          And fight the Yankee sparrows here;
          That we make havoc in the spring
          With all the sweet-pea's blossoming:
          Still throw us out a crumb or two,
          And, as you would be done by, do.

          We're not as bad as they declare,
          O girls and boys of Chester Square!
          Be sure some little good we do,
          Even though we pilfer buds a few.
          Don't grudge them, since your trees we clear
          Of vermin that would cost you dear:
          So throw us out a crumb or two,
          And, as you would be done by, do.

          Dear girls and boys of Chester Square,
          We, too, partake the Father's care;
          And to your kindly hearts he sends
          The impulse that our race befriends:
          We know that you, while Winter reigns,
          For our relief will take some pains;
          Will throw us out a crumb or two,
          And, as you would be done by, do.

                                                 EMILY CARTER.

[Illustration]




MY DOG JACK.


I WANT to tell the readers of "The Nursery" about my dog. My mamma
bought him for me when he was very young. He is a Newfoundland dog, and
is very large. He is black, with a white face and neck. His name is
Jack.

Jack is very useful in keeping tramps out of our orchard, and is also
very kind and playful. I do not like to play with him; for he is so
rough, that he sometimes tumbles me over, and hurts me: but I have a
good time with him in other ways.

He draws me about in a little cart into which I harness him. He minds a
pull on the reins, and will go just as I wish him to. But he will insist
on chasing pigs whenever he sees them. He does not like pigs.

One day, when I was harnessing him, he spied a pig, and away he ran
after it--cart and all. He broke one wheel of the cart, and came back
panting and wagging his tail, as if he had done something good; but I
scolded him well.

Jack will sit on his hind-legs, and catch bits of bread or cake in his
mouth when I throw them to him. One summer, we went to the seashore, and
took him with us. He is a splendid swimmer; and when we took a stick,
and threw it into the water, he would plunge through the waves, and
bring it back in his mouth.

Sometimes an old fisherman took me out sailing, and as there was not
room in the boat for Jack, the good old dog would lie on the wharf and
wait patiently till I came back. When he saw the boat coming in, he
would jump up and bark in great delight; and one day he leaped into the
water, and swam out to meet us.

Once my cousin and I were sitting in a cleft in the rocks, gathering
shells and pebbles, when a great black creature jumped right over our
heads. We were much frightened, but soon found that it was only our good
friend Jack. He had seen us from the top of the rock, and had jumped
down full fifteen feet to get to us.

                                                   PAUL EATON.

[Illustration]




ENSIGN JOHNNY.


          THIS is Ensign Johnny:
            See him armed for fight!
          Mice are in the garret;
            Forth he goes to smite.
          Ready for the battle,
            He is not afraid;
          For the cat, as captain,
            Will be by to aid.

          Now, good-by, my Johnny!
            Soldiers must be brave:
          While puss does the fighting,
            You the flag can wave.
          Do not, like a coward,
            From the field retreat:
          Forward, Ensign Johnny,
            And the mice defeat!

                                                      IDA FAY.




BERTIE'S STEAMER.

BERTIE has taken much pleasure in hearing me read about the different
ways in which the little "Nursery" people amuse themselves. He is very
anxious that they should, in return, know about the steamboat which his
uncle brought him from the Centennial,--a _real_ little steamboat.

It is nearly a foot long, made of brass, with a "truly" boiler, as
Bertie says, and a little alcohol lamp to convert the water in the
boiler into steam.

The older folks were as much interested in its trial trip as Bertie. The
biggest tub was brought up, and half filled with water. The little
boiler was also filled, and the lamp lighted; and we all waited
patiently for the steam to start the little wheel. A stick was put
across the tub, and a string fastened from its centre to the end of the
steamer, to keep it from running against the side of the tub. The rudder
was turned to guide the boat in a circle, and soon the steamer started.

But it did not run easily. Could it be that it would prove a failure?
Bertie's face began to put on a disappointed look.

"Can't Uncle Nelson fix it?" said he. "Uncle Nelson can do most any
thing."

So Uncle Nelson took the delicate machinery apart, and found some
particles of dirt, which prevented the piston from working smoothly.
Then he cleaned and oiled it, put it together again, and once more it
started. This time it was a complete success. How Bertie clapped his
hands, as the steam hissed, and the boat went round and round, as if it
were alive!

It was half an hour before the water in the little boiler gave out.

                                               BERTIE'S MAMMA.




A STORY ABOUT SQUIRRELS.


[Illustration]

FREDDIE is a bright little boy six years old. He goes with his papa and
mamma every summer to stay a few months at a nice place in the country.
In front of the house, near the fence, stands a large elm-tree, which is
the home of many little squirrels.


One day Freddie got his papa to build him a small shelf on the tree,
about four feet from the ground, so that he could put nuts on it to feed
the squirrels. At first the little fellows were very shy, and would not
come near the shelf, but sat on the branches of the tree; and we fancied
that we heard them saying to each other, "Do you think that little boy
would hurt us, if we should run down, and take one of those nuts?"

But, after a while, they came down, one by one, took the nuts, and went
scampering up to the top branches; and in a few minutes down came the
empty shells. They grew so tame before the summer was over, that if we
put any thing on their shelf, and took a seat a few steps away, they
would come down quite boldly, and get their breakfast.

One day we put a small ear of sweet-corn on the shelf. Pretty soon a
little squirrel came after it; but it was too heavy for him: so he sat
down on the shelf, as though quite at home, ate off about half of the
kernels of corn, to make his burden lighter, and, after trying many
times, finally got it up to his hiding-place. Presently we saw all the
squirrels running to that part of the tree, and we thought he might be
having a squirrel-party in his best parlor.

There was a large pond not very far away; and we often saw the squirrels
go from tree to tree, jump a fence here and there, and run down behind a
stone wall to the pond to get a drink, and then run home again. If they
had only known as much as some squirrels we read about, what a nice sail
they might have had by jumping on a piece of wood, and putting their
bushy tails up in the air for a sail! Wouldn't it look funny to see a
squirrel yacht-race?

As we sit in our warm rooms this cold weather, we often wonder what the
little fellows are doing, and if they are eating any of the nuts they
stored away last summer.

                                               FREDDIE'S PAPA.




WHAT A LITTLE BOY IN ENGLAND SAYS.


MY grandfather and grandmother live in the country. Everybody in their
house is very fond of birds, and very thoughtful for the comfort of all
dumb creatures.

Among the birds that flock about grandfather's house are the bright
little tom-tits. They fly very quickly, and look very pretty, darting in
and out of a tall evergreen-tree that grows in front of the dining-room
window.

[Illustration]

In winter, my Aunt Emily has a pole, about four feet high, stuck in the
ground near this tree. Across the top of the pole, a light bamboo stick
is fastened, not quite as long as the pole is high. On strings tied at
the ends of the bamboo stick, netted bags, filled with fat or suet, are
hung.

Now, tom-tits are, I think, the only birds in England that can cling to
a thing with their heads hanging down; and they are very fond of fat. So
they come to aunty's bags, cling to them as they sway to and fro in the
wind, and eat to their little hearts' content. We watch them from the
windows, and see what is going on.

Sometimes other birds try very hard to get a share of the feast,
particularly when the weather is very cold, and they cannot find much
else. Then they will stand on the ground, looking at the bags, and now
and then make an awkward spring at them, sometimes snatching a piece of
suet, but generally failing to reach it.

A tiny robin (an English robin is not at all like an American one) has
practised so much, this cold weather, that he can not only get a taste
of the suet by darting at it, but, better still, will sit on the top of
the bag, and get at it in that way. But he seems very much afraid of
falling off, and I think the tom-tits would laugh at him: perhaps they
do, in bird fashion.

When they cling, they do not mind where it is, and often seem to take
the very bottom of the bag by choice, and hang there, with their heads
down, so long, that it seems as though they would surely get the
headache.

I have often seen two, and sometimes three birds on a bag at a time.

                                                         H. B.
  BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND.

[Illustration: OFF IN A HURRY.]




THE FROGGIES' PARTY.


          THE frog who would a-wooing go
          Gave a party, you must know;
          And his bride, dressed all in green,
          Looked as fine as any queen.
          Their reception numbered some
          Of the best in Froggiedom.
          Four gay froggies played the fiddle,--
          Hands all round, and down the middle.

          In the room were stern old croakers,
          Yellow vests and snow-white chokers.
          Froggie belles with rush-leaf fans,
          Froggie beaux in green brogans,
          Flirted in the bowers there,
          Hidden from the ball-room's glare.
          Three old froggies tried a reel,--
          Twist 'em, turn 'em, toe and heel.

[Illustration]


          One young miss was asked to sing;
          But she had a cold that spring.
          Little frogs were sound asleep,
          Late hours--bad for them to keep.
          Each one wished the couple joy;
          No bad boys came to annoy.
          This next fall,--the news is spreading,--
          They will have their silver-wedding!

                                                GEORGE COOPER.




[Illustration: THE FIRMAMENT SHEWETH HIS HANDYWORK]




FIRST LESSON IN ASTRONOMY.

          "Twinkle, twinkle, little star:
          How I wonder what you are,
          Up above the world so high,
          Like a diamond in the sky!"


I AM going to tell all the wondering children just what that little star
is, and I want them to go to the window this minute, and take a good
look at it.

Have you been? And was it "up above the world so high"? Some of you are
laughing at me, perhaps, because it is broad daylight, when stars do not
show themselves. But do not laugh yet. If the sun is out, you can
certainly see a star.

To be sure you cannot take a good look at it, it is so bright; but there
it is,--the star that gives us light and heat,--the sun himself. Now,
were you ever told before, that the sun is a star, just like the little
diamonds you see in the sky before you go to bed?

Why shouldn't it look like a star then? Because it is not "up above the
world so high" as all the rest of the stars are. It is near enough to us
to keep us warm, and make every thing grow.

But what is more wonderful than that our sun is a star, is, that all the
stars are suns. They keep the worlds that are near them warm and bright,
just as our sun does this world. They are great globes of fire that
never go out.

Some are red fire, some are blue, some yellow, and some white, like
ours. How should you like to have it all red, or blue, or green, out
doors, instead of white? It would seem a good deal like fireworks to us,
I think.

Now look out of the window again, and try to pick out a red star. I know
one you can all see before you go to bed, unless you are too sleepy to
see any thing. It is nearly overhead about supper-time. If you find it,
write a little letter to "The Nursery," and tell me.

                                                      M. E. R.




PAPA'S BIRTHDAY PRESENT.


HARRY is a little boy six years old. He always wants to be doing
something; and many funny pictures he makes, both on his slate and with
a lead pencil on paper. Mamma saves all the blank pieces of paper she
can to give him. When he is tired of pictures, he plays with his
blocks, and makes boats, and cars and bridges, and towers and churches.

Harry lives on the west bank of the Mississippi River, where there is a
bridge right in sight from his home. He often watches the cars go across
the bridge, and the boats go through the draw. He is an observing little
fellow, and he notices that just before the cars get to the bridge they
stop, and then go over very slowly. Then they start up faster and
faster; and soon the bridge is left behind, and the cars are out of
sight.

The cars always have to wait for the boats to go through the bridge; and
Harry thinks that is too bad; for the cars would not keep the boats
waiting half as long as the boats keep them. So mamma tells him that the
river was there first, and the boats have the first right.

But about the present. There had been a week of rain; but papa's
birthday was pleasant, and Harry was glad to get out of doors. He ran
till he was tired, and then, as he sat down to rest, he thought he would
get some clay, and make something to show mamma.

So he began. First he made a round ball like a marble, then a larger
ball; then he put them together, and thought, "I will make a man, and
this little ball shall be his head." He put a stick in to hold the head
to the body, and put clay around the stick, and that made the neck. Then
he made a long piece for the legs, and cut out between them with a knife
to form two. Then he made the arms, and joined them to the body.

He was very much pleased with his work so far; but to complete it was
the most fun. He got little stones, and stuck them into the clay for
eyes, nose, and buttons; made a cut for the mouth; and, for a
head-dress, made use of the green spikes from a pine-tree. This made
the figure look so much like an Indian, that Harry danced with joy.

Then he took it to mamma, who was so pleased that she told him to put it
on papa's study-table to dry, and said that it would do for papa's
birthday present.

Papa thinks so much of it, that he has locked it up in his curiosity
cabinet. This is a true story.

                                                  COUSIN VIDA.





[Illustration: DRAWING-LESSON BY HARRISON WEIR.

VOL. XXI.--NO. 2.]




THE RESCUE.


JANE is a bright little girl, about six years old, who lives not far
from a wharf in a seaport town, where her father is employed in a junk
store. She has an elder sister named Susan, a baby-brother named
Charlie, and a doll named Anna Maria.

One pleasant summer day Susan took the baby in her arms, Jane took Anna
Maria in her arms, and all together, and all bareheaded, they took a
stroll down the wharf. It was not a safe place for young children; and
Susan ought to have known better than to take them there.

They wandered about, enjoying the cool sea-air, and pretty soon stood on
the very edge of the wharf, looking down into the water. Just then, by
some accident (I don't know exactly how it happened), Anna Maria slipped
out of Jane's arms, and fell overboard.

Well, this was not so bad as if Jane herself had fallen over; but it was
almost as bad to poor Jane. She burst into tears, and raised a cry of
distress. There was her dear little Anna Maria in the water, beyond her
reach, and she could do nothing to save her.

Now there happened to be a smart boy, named Tom Williams, not far off.
He heard Jane's outcry, and came running down the wharf to see what was
the matter; and another bright boy, named Sam Brown, came with him. The
two saw what the trouble was in a moment.

[Illustration]

They lay down on the wharf, and tried to reach Anna Maria. But it was of
no use. Their arms were not long enough. Poor Jane's heart sank within
her. She cried and sobbed, and was in more distress than ever.

"Don't cry," said Tom. "Crying's of no use. Wait a minute: I know how to
do it." And off he ran into the old junk shop. In a moment he came back,
bringing a pair of tongs. "Now I'll show you!" said he. Down he lay
again, with his bare feet sticking up, as you see in the picture,
reached over the side of the wharf, took Anna Maria in the tongs, just
as she was near floating under the wharf, and placed her, all wet and
dripping, in Jane's arms.

How happy the little girl was to get her darling safe back again! And
how thankful she was to Tom, for coming to the rescue so bravely! Anna
Maria soon got over the effects of her bath: she did not even catch
cold.

But I hope that both Jane and Susan will learn a lesson from her mishap,
and not go so near the edge of the wharf another time.

                                                    UNCLE SAM.




THE YOUNG SHEEP-OWNER.


SEVERAL years ago, on the Island of Nantucket, lived a little boy named
Frank Simmons. His grandfather, with whom he was a great favorite, owned
about two hundred sheep. Many other persons on the island owned sheep at
that time; and there was a broad plain of open ground, over which all
the flocks roamed in common.

Every year, in the month of June, all the sheep were driven into a large
enclosure near a pond, in which they were washed until their wool was
white and clean. This was the preparation for shearing, or taking off
their heavy coats of wool.

Each separate flock was marked by a little cut made in the ears. The
ears of one flock, for instance, were clipped at the ends; of another,
notched at the sides; of another, marked by a slit.

[Illustration]

This last was the mark which Frank looked for when he went with his
grandfather to catch his sheep. Frank thought it was cruel to cut the
ears so; but, when his grandfather told him it was the only way by which
each owner could know his own sheep, he was satisfied.

Whenever he caught one, he would lead it along to his grandfather's pen,
where a man was waiting to take it on his back, and carry it into the
pond. After being washed, the sheep were left to find their own way to
the shore, which they did very quickly.

It took two days to wash all the sheep on the island. The washing was
finished on Saturday. The sheep were allowed to rest and dry themselves
on Sunday; and on Monday morning, bright and early, Frank was ready to
start with his grandfather to catch the sheep for the shearing.

The shearing occupied two days more; and, after their heavy coats were
off, the sheep would feel so smart, that they would frisk about like
young lambs; and some of them would jump five or six feet up in the air.

During all this time, their poor little lambs had been kept apart by
themselves. They must have felt lonely enough without their mothers;
but, as soon as the shearing was over, all the sheep and lambs were set
at liberty. Such a bleating and baa-ing as there was! The sheep ran
round for the lambs, and the lambs for their mothers; and away they
skipped over the plains like children at play.

Frank had made himself so useful in catching the sheep, that his
grandfather gave him two sheep and two lambs as a reward, and put a new
mark on them for him. So Frank became a young sheep-owner, and, the next
year, had his own sheep to catch.

                                                   CARTWRIGHT.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




EMMA'S CHOICE.


THREE young children, Emma, Charles, and Arthur Payson, had been left to
the care of their old grandfather, through the death of their parents.

Grandpa Payson was not rich: he was a day-laborer, and had to work hard
for the support of a family, which would have been large enough without
the addition of three hungry little ones.

But grandpa's heart was large enough to take them all in; and they
proved such good and lovable children, that he soon became very much
attached to them.

Little Emma was his especial favorite; and one December day he said to
her, "What shall I get you, darling, for a Christmas present? A nice
pair of shoes would be just the thing, I'm thinking."

"Oh, no, grandpa! Give me a book--a book with pictures in it: that will
be better than new shoes. By going barefoot, I can make my old shoes
last me a year longer."

Well, in the shop where Grandpa Payson bought a beautiful bound copy of
"The Nursery" for his darling, he happened to mention to the shopkeeper
the fact that Emma had preferred a new book to a new pair of shoes.

An old lady who stood near could not help hearing the conversation. That
evening, while Grandpa Payson, Emma, and the two boys, were gathered
around the table, feasting their eyes on the new book, there was a knock
at the door, and a package was left, directed to "Miss Emma Payson."

"Dear me! What can it be? I never had a package left for me before in
all my life," cried Emma.

She opened the package, and there found several pairs of shoes, and a
note, telling her to select two pairs that would fit her, and to send
the rest to the shopkeeper.

In the note the old lady wrote: "You must not only fill your head with
knowledge, but keep your feet warm, if you would preserve your health.
If your brothers will go to Mr. Lane's to-morrow, he will fit them both
to new shoes, a gift from me. A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to
you all!"

                                                      IDA FAY.

[Illustration]




HELP ONE ANOTHER.


ONE day, passing through a meadow, I saw a sheep much troubled by flies.
Presently I saw it walk to a small pond where there were some young
ducks, and stand there quietly. Soon the ducks took notice of the flies,
and, coming out from the water, began snapping them up, as if to punish
them for worrying the poor sheep.

By and by a starling, from a tree near by, flew down, lighted on the
sheep's back, and helped in the good work of ridding her of the flies.

This, thought I, is a clear case of putting into practice the golden
rule of "Help one another." Perhaps you will say, that the ducks and the
starling wanted to make a meal of the flies; but I like to think that
some less selfish motive was mingled with their work.

                                                ALFRED SELWYN.




THE FAITHLESS FRIEND.

          MY little lamb, in early spring,
          Was but a timid, weakly thing:
          His old sheep-mother did not own him:
          He would, no doubt, have soon been dead,
          If I had not some pity shown him,
          And seen that he was warmed and fed.
          I was the only friend he knew,
          And fond of him each day I grew;
          And, as I stroked his woolly head,
          "Wherever you may be,
          I know, my little lamb," I said,
          "You will remember me."

          But, when the fields grew green in May,
          They sent my little pet away
          To pasture, where the brooks were flowing
          Through yellow beds of cowslip flowers,
          Where purple violets were growing,
          And scented blossoms fell in showers
          From off the shading chestnut-trees,
          And daisies nodded in the breeze:
          And many mates my lambkin found,
          As young and gay as he,
          And all day long they frisked around
          And gambolled full of glee.

          But when the robin-redbreasts flew,
          And loud and shrill the north-winds blew,
          Back from the pastures hard and frozen,
          Through winter in the barn to keep,
          The little lamb that I had chosen
          They brought with all the other sheep;
          And, oh! how glad my face to see,
          I thought, my pretty pet will be!
          But when to meet him I went out,
          And tried to coax and call,
          He drew away, and turned about,
          And would not come at all.

          With his white fleece and playful ways,
          My lamb now all about me praise;
          But dearer far to me the sickly,
          Poor, shivering thing he used to be;
          When to my call he came so quickly
          I thought that he was fond of me!
          But if I pet him now, I know
          He'll take my gifts, and off he'll go;
          For I, to my regret, have found
          I can no more depend
          On one who will go frisking round,
          And quite forget a friend.

                                               MARIAN DOUGLAS.

[Illustration]




BILLY AND THE PIG.


HERE is another story about my father's wise old horse, Billy.

One day, when my father wished to go away to the mill, he sent my
brother Robert down to the pasture to catch Billy. Robert brought the
horse up to the house, tied him to the fence in the backyard, and gave
him some oats in a pail.

In a pen back of the house we kept three pigs: two of them were white;
and the other was spotted,--black and white. These pigs had got out of
the pen by pushing off a board from one side of it.

Soon after Billy began to eat his dinner, the two white pigs came
running through the yard. They saw Billy eating his oats; and, thinking
it would be nice for them to have some as well as he, they ran up to his
pail, and without as much as saying, "By your leave," began to help
themselves.

Billy had no idea of sharing his dinner with such company as this: so he
lopped back his ears, looked as cross as he possibly could, snapped at
the pigs fiercely with his teeth, raised his hind-feet from the ground,
as if to kick them, and at last succeeded in frightening them away.

Scarcely had they left the yard, however, before the spotted pig got his
eye upon the pail of oats; and he at once ran for it with all his might.

Billy tried to scare him as he had the others; but Spotty was not so
easily frightened. He took no notice of any thing but the oats.

Finding that threats were of no use, Billy seized him by the back of the
neck, raised him about two feet from the ground, shook him a little, and
then let him drop.

Spotty was satisfied. He lost his appetite for oats, and ran squealing
out of the yard.

                                                 EDITH'S PAPA.




JOCKO, THE RAVEN.


THE raven is a sly bird, and has not many friends. He will steal from
you, if he can. He can crow like a cock, mew like a cat, and bark like a
dog; and sometimes he will imitate the sound of the rattle with which
the farmer tries to frighten him away from the corn.

The raven, like the parrot, can learn to talk a little. He is even
capable of learning a little Latin. Dr. J. Franklin's raven, which was
named Jocko, pronounced the word _aqua_ (water) distinctly; but he much
preferred wine to water. Sad to say, Jocko was a toper.

"One day," says the doctor, "my housekeeper placed a glass of red wine
on the table: in an instant the bird plunged in his beak, and began
sucking up the wine, drop by drop. The housekeeper, fearing he would
break the glass, took it away; but at this Jocko was very angry, and
tried to peck at her face.

"If three glasses are placed on the table,--one of water, another of
beer, and the third of wine,--Jocko will leave the first two, and will
pay his respects only to the glass of wine."

[Illustration]

The raven has a strong memory, great prudence, and some capacity for
reasoning. The keen watchfulness with which he will regard a man armed
with a gun has often been noticed.

A traveller in the arctic regions relates that he once saw some ravens
outwit a dog. While the dog was at his dinner, they would make him
angry, and entice him away in pursuit of them; and, when they had led
him some distance, they would fly quickly back, and snatch up the best
bones, before he could prevent it.

That was hardly honest, was it? The raven, you see, does not set a good
example. He drinks wine, he fights, and he steals. But I suppose he
knows no better, and has not been taught, like you and me, that to do
such things is very wrong.

                                                ALFRED SELWYN.




[Illustration]

[Illustration: Music]




CHIPPEREE, CHIP.

  Words by G. COOPER.         Music by T. CRAMPTON.


1.

          I once knew a couple that liv'd in a wood,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          And up in a tree-top their dwelling it stood,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          The summer it came and the summer it went,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          And there they lived on though they never paid rent,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!

2.

          When winter came on with its frost and its snow,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          They cared not a bit when they heard the wind blow,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          For wrapp'd in their feathers they lay down to sleep,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          But oh, in the spring, how their bright eyes did peep,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!

3.

          Their parlor was lined with the softest of wool,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          Their kitchen was warm and their pantry was full,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          And four little babies peep'd out at the sky,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!
          You never saw darlings so pretty and shy,--
          Chipperee, chipperee, chip!

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

The January edition of the Nursery had a table of contents for the first
six issues of the year. This table was divided to cover each specific
issue. A title page copied from the January edition was also used for
this number.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery, February 1877, Vol. XXI.
No. 2, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, FEBRUARY 1877 ***

***** This file should be named 28130.txt or 28130.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/3/28130/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. Music
by Linda Cantoni.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
