Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, May 1877, Vol. XXI. No. 5, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Nursery, May 1877, Vol. XXI. No. 5
       A Monthly Magazine for Youngest Readers

Author: Various

Release Date: February 20, 2009 [EBook #28133]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, MAY 1877 ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. Music
by Linda Cantoni.








THE

NURSERY


_A Monthly Magazine_

FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

VOLUME XXI.--No. 5.

          BOSTON:
          JOHN L. SHOREY, No. 36 BROMFIELD STREET,
          1877.



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1877, by

JOHN L. SHOREY,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.

FRANKLIN PRESS: RAND, AVERY, AND COMPANY, 117 FRANKLIN STREET, BOSTON.


[Illustration: Contents]


IN PROSE.

  The Young Lamplighter                   129
  Fourth Lesson in Astronomy              131
  The Poor Blind Woman                    133
  "Good-morning, Sir!"                    136
  Playing April-Fool                      138
  The Eider-Duck                          139
  The Trial-Trip                          141
  Swaddling-Clothes                       142
  Drawing-Lesson                          145
  Fanny and Louise                        146
  True Story of a Bird                    149
  A Rough Sketch                          151
  Peter's Pets                            153
  The Strolling Bear                      154
  The Parrot and the Sparrow              156


IN VERSE.

  "Popping Corn"                          132
  The Cooper's Song                       135
  Polliwogs                               143
  The Toad                                148
  That Fox                                158
  Grasshopper Green (_with music_)        160

[Illustration: Decoration]



[Illustration: THE YOUNG LAMPLIGHTER.]




THE YOUNG LAMPLIGHTER.


[Illustration: W]ALLACE is a boy about ten years old, who lives in a
town near Boston. He has a brother Charles, eighteen years of age. These
two brothers are the town lamplighters.

There are at least fifty lamps to be lighted every night; and some of
them are a good deal farther apart than the street-lamps in large
cities. Charles takes the more distant ones for his part of the work,
and drives from post to post in a gig.

Wallace, being a small boy, calls to his aid his father's saddle-horse.
This horse is a kind, gentle creature, and as wise as he is kind. He and
Wallace are about the same age, and have always been good friends.

So when Wallace puts the saddle on him every evening, just before dark,
the horse knows just what is going to be done. He looks at the boy with
his great bright eyes, as much as to say, "We have our evening work to
do, haven't we, Wallace? Well, I'm ready: jump on."

Wallace mounts the horse; and they go straight to the nearest lamp-post.
Here the horse stops close by the post, and stands as still and steady
as the post itself.

Then Wallace stands upright on the saddle, takes a match from his
pocket, lights the lamp, drops quickly into his seat again, takes up the
bridle, gives the word to the horse, and on they go to the next
lamp-post.

So they go on, till all the lamps allotted to Wallace are lighted. Then
they trot home merrily, and, before Wallace goes to bed himself, I am
sure he does not forget to see that his good horse is well fed and cared
for.

This is a true story.

                                                    UNCLE SAM.

[Illustration]




FOURTH LESSON IN ASTRONOMY.


BECAUSE our earth has one sun and one moon, you may think all earths
have only one; but wise men have looked through their telescopes, and
have discovered that some of the stars which look to us like single
stars are really double; and many of them are clusters of three or four,
all lighting up the same planets.

Those earths, then, have more than one sun: they have two, three, or
four, as the case may be. Think of two suns. How bright it must be! And
imagine one of them red, and the other blue, as some of them are.
Wouldn't you feel as if you were living in a rainbow?

And how would you like to look out of the window in the evening and see
four moons? The wise men can see through their telescopes that Jupiter
has four and Saturn eight. (You remember I told you Jupiter and Saturn
are two of the earths lighted up by our sun.) Shouldn't you think so
many moons would make the nights so bright that one could hardly go to
sleep?

On the whole, I think we get along very well as we are; and I hope the
people who live in the brightness of two suns have strong eyes given
them. It must be very beautiful, though. Perhaps you can get an idea how
it seems to have a red sun, if you look through a piece of red glass;
but I do not believe we can any of us imagine what it would be like to
have two suns of different colors.

Do you think a red sun shining on a moon makes a red moon? A colored sun
or a colored moon seems very strange to us; but I suppose the people
that are used to them would think our white light strange.

I wonder whether the two suns rise and set at the same time. But we may
all wonder and wonder. Nobody knows much about it. I hope you will all
look at a double star through a telescope, if you ever have an
opportunity.

                                                      M. E. R.

[Illustration]




"POPPING CORN."


          BRING a yellow ear of corn, and then rub, rub, rub,
          Till the kernels rattle off from the nub, nub, nub!
          Then put them in a hopper made of wire, wire, wire,
          And set the little hopper on the fire, fire, fire!
          If you find them getting lively, give a shake, shake, shake;
          And a very pretty clatter they will make, make, make:
          You will hear the heated grains going pop, pop, pop;
          All about the little hopper, going hop, hop, hop!
          When you see the yellow corn turning white, white, white,
          You may know that the popping is done right, right, right:
          When the hopper gets too full, you may know, know, know,
          That the fire has changed your corn into snow, snow, snow:
          Turn the snow into a dish, for it is done, done, done;
          Then pass it round and eat--for that's the fun, fun, fun!

                                                      FLETA F.

[Illustration]




THE POOR BLIND WOMAN.


I HAVE a true story to tell about a colored woman who lives in the city
of Salem, not far from Boston.

She is old and poor and blind. She has had a husband and six children;
but they are all dead; her last remaining son was killed in the war, and
she is now quite alone in the world.

But she is a cheerful old body. She does not whine, nor complain, nor
beg; though she needs help much, and is very thankful for any help that
is given her.

When she goes out to walk, she finds her way as well as she can by
groping about with her big umbrella. Very often she loses her way, and
goes in the wrong direction; and sometimes she gets bewildered: but I
have never known her to be really lost or hurt. There is always somebody
to set her right; and it is pleasant to see how kind every one is to
her.

Many a time I have seen some gentleman, while hurrying to catch his
train, stop to help her over the crossing; or some handsomely-dressed
lady take her by the arm, and set her right, when she has gone astray.

Best of all it is, though, to see the children so kind to her. She comes
to our square every Saturday; and, as she is very apt to go to the wrong
gate, the little girls--bless their dear hearts!--seem to consider it
their duty to guide her, and to help her over the slippery places.

In the picture, you may see Lily helping the poor old woman along, as I
often see her from my window. Another day it may be Lina, and the next
time Mamie; for they are all good to her. Even baby Robin runs to meet
her, and is not afraid of her black face.

Last week, these small folks had a fair for her in Lily's house. Nobody
thought they would get so much money; but they made fifty dollars out of
it. This will make the old woman comfortable for a long time.

The good woman said, when she was told what they had done, that she
hoped the Lord would reward them, for she could not.

I think he has rewarded them already by making them very happy while
they were doing this kind deed.

                                                            P.

[Illustration]




THE COOPER'S SONG.


          I AM the cooper: I bind the cask:
          The sweat flows down as I drive my task;
          Yet on with the hoop! And merry's the sound
                As I featly pound,
          And with block and hammer go travelling round,
                And round and round.

          I am the cooper: I bind the cask;
          And gay as play is my nimble task;
          And though I grow crooked with stooping to pound,
                Yet merry's the sound
          As with block and with hammer I journey round
                And round and round.

          I am the cooper: I bind the cask:
          Am healthy and happy--what more shall I ask?
          Not in king's palaces, I'll be bound,
                Such joy is found,
          Where men do nothing, and still go round,
                And round and round.

          So I'll still be a cooper, and bind the cask:
          Bread for children and wife is all I ask;
          And glad will they be at night, I'll be bound,
                That, with cheerful sound,
          Father all day went a-hammering round,
                And round and round.

                                              FROM THE GERMAN.




"GOOD-MORNING, SIR!"


THERE was once a little robin that grew to be so tame, that it would
come to my sister Helen's door every morning for a few crumbs. Sometimes
it would perch on the table.

What a power there is in kindness! It is very pleasant to form these
friendships with birds; so that they learn to trust you and to love you.
The sound of the human voice often seems to have a strange effect on
animals, as if they almost understood your words.

My sister would say, "Good-morning, sir! Come in! Don't make yourself a
stranger. Hard times these; but you will find plenty of crumbs on the
table. Don't be bashful. You don't rob us. Try as you may, you can't eat
us out of house and home. You have a great appetite, have you? Oh, well,
eat away! No cat is prowling round."

[Illustration]

The little bird, as if he knew that my sister was talking to him, would
chirp away, and seem quite happy. As soon as the warm weather came, his
visits were not so frequent; but, every now and then, he would make his
appearance, as if to say, "Don't forget me, Helen. I may want some more
crumbs when the cold weather comes."

                                                      IDA FAY.




PLAYING APRIL-FOOL.


IT was the last evening in March, and raining drearily out of doors; but
in mamma's sitting-room all was bright, warm, and cosey. Jim and his big
brother Rob were stretched out on the rug, feet in the air, watching the
blazing fire, and talking of the tricks they meant to play next day.

"No, sir," said Rob, "you can't fool me! I know about every way there is
of fooling; and I'd just like to see anybody try it on me!" And Rob
rolled over on his back, and studied the ceiling with a very defiant
air.

Poor little Jim looked very much troubled; for, if Rob said he could not
be fooled, of course he couldn't be; and he did want to play a trick on
Rob so badly! At last he sprang up, saying, "I'm going to ask mamma;"
and ran out of the room. Rob waited a while; but Jim did not come back:
so he yawned, stretched, and went to bed.

Next morning, bright and early, up jumped Jim, pulled on his clothes;
wrong-side out and upside down (for he was not used to dressing
himself), and crept softly downstairs.

An hour or two later, Rob went slowly down, rubbing his eyes. He put on
his cap, and took up the pail to go for the milk; but it was very heavy.
What could be the matter with it? Why, somebody had got the milk
already. Just then, Jim appeared from behind the door, crying, "April
Fool! April Fool! You thought I couldn't fool you; but I did."

Rob looked a little foolish, but said nothing, and went out to feed his
hens. To his great surprise, the biddies were already enjoying
breakfast; and again he heard little Jim behind him, shouting, "April
Fool! April Fool!"

Poor Rob! He started to fill the kitchen wood-box; but Jim had filled
it. Jim had filled the water-pails: in fact, he had done all of Rob's
work; and at last, when he trudged in at breakfast-time, with the sugar
that Rob had been told to bring from the store the first thing after
breakfast, Rob said, "I give up, Jim. You have fooled me well. But such
tricks as yours are first-rate, and I don't care how many of them you
play."

                                                  AUNT SALLIE.




THE EIDER-DUCK.


DID you ever sleep under an eider-down quilt? If you have, you must have
noticed how light and soft it was. Would you like to hear where the
eider-down comes from? I will tell you.

[Illustration]

A long, long way from here, there is a country called Norway. It is a
very cold country, and very rocky; and there are a great many small
islands all around it. It is on these islands that the dear little
eider-ducks build their nests. They take a great deal of time and
trouble to make them, and they use fine seaweed, mosses, and dry sticks,
so as to make them as strong as they can.

When the mother-duck has laid four or five eggs, which are of a pretty,
green color, she plucks out some of the soft gray down that grows on her
breast, to cover them up, and keep them warm, while she goes off to find
some food.

And now what do you think happens? Why, when she comes back to sit on
her eggs, she finds that all her eggs and beautiful down have been taken
away! Oh! how she cries, and flaps her wings, to find her darling eggs
gone!

But, after a while, she lays five more, and again pulls the down out of
her dear little breast to cover them. She goes away again; and again the
people take the down away.

When she returns the second time, her cries are very sad to hear; but,
as she is a very brave little duck, she thinks she will try once more;
and this time she is left in peace, and when she has her dear little
children-ducks around her, you may be sure she is a joyful mamma.

So this is where the eider-down comes from; and, as there are a great
many ducks, the people get a great deal of down; and with this down are
made the quilts which keep us so warm in cold winter-nights.

The eider-down quilts are very light and warm; but I always feel sorry
for the poor mamma-duck.

                                               SISTER PEPILLA.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE TRIAL-TRIP


DAVIE and Harold are two little Boston boys. They are brothers. Last
summer, they had two pretty little yachts given them by a friend. Then
they had a launch in the bath-tub; and their mamma named the yachts,
breaking a bottle of water (a small medicine-bottle) over the bows.
Davie's yacht was named the "West Wind;" and Harold's, the "Flyaway."

One afternoon, the boys went to City Point, hired a row-boat, and rowed
out about halfway to Fort Independence, where they put the little
vessels into the water for a trial-trip. It was a pretty sight to see
the sails fill with the wind, and the tiny yachts ride the waves as if
they meant to go to China before they stopped.

The "West Wind" beat the "Flyaway," and I regret to say that Davie
taunted his brother with the fact, and made him cry; for Harold is a boy
that takes every thing to heart.

                                                        MAMMA.




SWADDLING-CLOTHES


DID the little readers of "The Nursery" ever think how thankful they
should be for the free use of their arms and legs? I do not believe it
ever came into their thoughts that there could be any other way than to
use them freely. But in Syria, a country many miles from here, the
mothers do not let their babies kick their feet, and hold out their dear
little hands. They are bound very closely in what are called
"swaddling-clothes."

They are seldom undressed, and are kept in a rough cradle, and rocked to
sleep as much as possible. When the mother carries them out, she straps
them to her back; and often, on the mountains there, one may see a woman
with a baby on her back, and a great bundle of sticks in her arms.

With the sticks she makes her fire, in a room where there is no chimney,
and where the smoke often makes poor baby's eyes smart; but all he can
do, poor swaddled child, is to open his mouth, and cry.

This custom of binding the baby up so straight and tight is a very old
one. The Bible tells us, you know, that the mother of Jesus "wrapped him
in swaddling-clothes, and laid him in a manger." So the people of Syria
keep on using swaddling-clothes, thinking, that, if they do not, the
baby will grow crooked.

[Illustration]

They are used in Russia also, and in other countries of northern Europe.
Poor babies! We pity them.

                                                   EM. JUNIUS.




POLLIWOGS.


          THE cat-tails all along the brook
            Are growing tall and green;
          And in the meadow-pool, once more,
            The polliwogs are seen;
          Among the duck-weed, in and out,
            As quick as thought they dart about;
          Their constant hurry, to and fro,
            It tires me to see:
          I wish they knew it did no good
            To so uneasy be!
          I mean to ask them if they will
            Be, just for one half-minute, still!
          "Be patient, little polliwogs,
            And by and by you'll turn to frogs."

          But what's the use to counsel them?
            My words are thrown away;
          And not a second in one place
            A polliwog will stay.
          They still keep darting all about
            The floating duck-weed, in and out.
          Well, if they will so restless be,
            I will not let it trouble me,
          But leave these little polliwogs
            To wriggle till they turn to frogs!

                                               MARIAN DOUGLAS.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: DRAWING-LESSON BY HARRISON WEIR.

VOL. XXI.--NO. 5.]




FANNY AND LOUISE.


FANNY was a little pony, and Louise was a little girl. Fanny had a long
black mane and tail, and Louise had long brown curls. Louise wore a
gypsy-hat with blue ribbons, and Fanny wore a saddle and bridle with
blue girths and reins.

Louise was a gentle little girl, and Fanny was a very headstrong pony;
consequently Fanny had it all her own way. When she was trotting along
the road, with Louise on her back, if she chanced to spy a nice prickly
thistle away up on a bank, up she would scramble, as fast as she could
go, the sand and gravel rolling down under her hoofs; and, no matter how
hard Louise pulled on the reins, there she would stay until she had
eaten the thistle down to the very roots. Then she would back down the
bank, and trot on.

Fanny was fond of other good things besides thistles. She would spy an
apple on a tree, no matter how thick the leaves were; and, without
waiting to ask Louise's permission, she would run under the tree,
stretch her head up among the branches, and even raise herself up on her
hind-legs, like a dog, to reach the apple.

Louise would clasp Fanny around the neck, and bury her face in her mane:
but she often got scratched by the little twigs; and many a long hair
has she left waving from the apple-boughs after such an adventure.

Whenever Fanny smelled any very savory odor issuing from the kitchen,
she would trot up, and put her head in at the window, waiting for Biddy
to give her a doughnut or cooky. One day a boy named Frank borrowed
Fanny, as he wished to ride out with a little girl from the city. As
they were passing a farm-house, Fanny perceived by the smell that some
one was frying crullers there.

[Illustration]

She immediately ran down the lane to the house, and stuck her head in at
the open window, and would not stir from the spot until the farmer's
wife gave her a cruller. Then she went quickly back to the road, and
behaved very properly all the rest of the way.

Fanny was such a good pony, with all her tricks, that the neighbors
often used to borrow her. This Fanny did not think at all fair; and she
soon found a way to put a stop to it. One warm summer day, the minister
borrowed her in order to visit a sick man about two miles away. After
several hours he returned, very warm and tired, walking through the
dust, and leading Fanny, who came limping along, holding down her head,
and appearing to be very lame.

She had fallen lame when only half-way to the sick man's house; and the
good old minister had led her all the way, rather than ride her when she
was lame. All the family gathered around Fanny to see where she was
hurt, when Fanny tossed her head, kicked up her heels, and pranced off
to the stable, no more lame than a young kitten. It had been all a trick
to punish the minister for borrowing her. And it succeeded; for he never
asked for Fanny again.

                                                      L. S. H.

[Illustration]





THE TOAD.


          WHAT a curious thing is the little brown toad;
            Do come and look at it, pray!
          It sits in the grass, and, when we come near,
            Just hops along out of our way.

          It does not know how to sing like a bird,
            Nor honey to make like a bee;
          'Tis not joyous and bright like a butterfly;
            Oh, say, of what use can it be?

          But, since God made it, and placed it here,
            He must have meant it to stay:
          So we will be kind to you, little brown toad,
            And you need not hop out of our way.

                                                      E. A. B.

[Illustration]




TRUE STORY OF A BIRD.

ONE day last spring, in looking over the contents of some boxes which
had long been stowed away in the attic, I found some pieces of lace,
which, though old-fashioned, seemed to me very pretty. But they were
yellow with age,--quite too yellow for use.

I took them to the kitchen, and, after a nice washing, spread them on
the grass to bleach. I knew that the bright sun would soon take away
their yellow hue.

A day or two after, Johnnie came running in, and said, "Auntie, the
birds are carrying off all your old rags out there," pointing to the
place where the laces were spread. Out I went to see about my "old
rags," as he called them; and I found that several pieces were missing.
We knew that the birds must have taken them; but, where to look for
them, we could not tell.

That afternoon, Johnny invited me and his cousins to take a row with him
in his boat to Rocky Island, of which the readers of "The Nursery" have
heard before. We were all glad to go. As we were passing some bushes on
the bank of the river, one of us spied something white among them. We
wondered what it could be.

Johnny rowed nearer; and we could see that it was a piece of lace.
Rowing nearer still, we saw another piece, and another, and at the same
time heard the flutter of wings. We then asked to be landed, and our
boatman soon brought us to shore in fine style.

On parting the bushes, we saw a nest just begun, and a piece of lace
near it, but not woven in. Close by were four other pieces; but they
were all caught by the little twigs, so that the bird could not get them
to the nest. We took the lace off carefully, leaving the nest as it was,
and brought it away with us.

On returning to the house, the children measured the lace, and found
nearly six yards, the largest piece being about two yards. It seemed
quite a lift for the little birds; and it was too bad that after all
they did not get the use of it. But do you think they were discouraged?

Oh, no! for they soon had a nice nest built; and one day Johnny found an
egg in the nest, which, from its bright hue, he knew to be a robin's
egg. This was followed by other eggs, and, in due time, by a whole brood
of young birds.

                                                   AUNT ABBIE.

[Illustration]




A ROUGH SKETCH.


HERE is a boy drawing on a wall. He is a shoemaker's boy. His name is
Bob.

Tom, the baker's boy, and a little girl named Ann are looking on. "What
is it?" asks Ann at sight of the picture.

"It's a fine lady, of course," says Tom. "Don't you see her head-dress
and her sun-shade?" Bob is so busy that he cannot stop to talk.

He is well pleased with his work. But the man who is looking around the
corner of the wall does not look pleased in the least.

It is plain that he has no love for the fine arts. Or it may be that he
does not like to see such a rough sketch on his wall.

Perhaps he thinks that when boys are sent on an errand, they ought not
to loiter by the way.

                                                      A. B. C.

[Illustration]




PETER'S PETS.


"HOW old are they, Peter?" asked Ralph Lamson, pointing to two little
guinea-pigs on a rude cage which Peter had himself made.

"I've had them about six weeks," said Peter. "I don't know how old they
were then; but they were only little things: they've grown twice as big
since I've had them."

"What do you give them to eat?" asked Edwin Moore.

"Oh! all sorts of things," replied Peter. "They're fond of carrots,
apples, and all sorts of green leaves, and, what is queer, they are fond
of tea-leaves."

"Fond of tea-leaves!" cried Ralph and Edwin.

"Yes," said Peter, "they like tea-leaves very much. I give them oats
too, and bits of bread."

"And what do they drink?" asked Edwin.

"They don't want much to drink, if they get plenty of green stuff and
tea-leaves," said Peter; "but they like a drop of milk now and then, if
they can get it."

"Where do these animals come from?" asked Ralph.

"From Brazil and Paraguay in South America. It is thought that their
odor drives away rats; and that is one reason why we keep them."

"What will you sell them for?" asked Ralph.

"Oh, I can't sell them!" said Peter. "They are my pets. Funny little
fellows they are, and not so stupid as they seem. This white one I call
Daisy; and the other I call Dozy, because he sleeps a good deal."

                                                UNCLE CHARLES.




THE STROLLING BEAR.


IN St. Paul, one day last winter, a big black bear was seen strolling
along on the sidewalk on Third Street. He seemed to be quite at his
ease, and would stop now and then, and look in at the shop-windows.

Half a dozen men and boys soon gathered behind him, following him at a
safe distance. Others, going up and down the street, would stop to
learn the cause of the crowd, and perhaps join it, so that they might
see the end of the fun.

[Illustration]

For a while, Bruin did not seem to care much for the crowd. But they
grew to be pretty free in their speech, calling out to him, "Does your
mother know you're out?" "Will you take a glass of whiskey?" and making
other rude remarks. Bruin stood it for a while, then turned fiercely
upon the crowd, who scattered at once, some running into shops, and
others down the side-streets.

This free-and-easy bear then continued his stroll. But the crowd behind
him grew larger and larger, and he again turned upon them, and made them
run, all laughing and shouting, in various directions.

At last, as if he had had enough of this kind of fun, he quickened his
pace, driving five or six fellows into a saloon, while he followed close
at their heels. The boys on the other side of the street laughed at
this: so he crossed the street quickly, and put them to flight; and the
way they all ran was fun for those near the saloon, who were now the
laughers, in their turn.

At last, a man with whom Bruin was well acquainted, and on good terms,
came up, with a chain in his hand, and threw it about the bear's neck;
and then, as if he had had quite enough of a stroll, Bruin quietly
followed his guide, and was led back to his owner.

                                                ALFRED SELWYN.




THE PARROT AND THE SPARROW.


AT the "Jardin des Plantes," a famous garden and museum in Paris, there
was once a parrot that took a great fancy to a little wild sparrow.

Every morning, the little bird would fly to the parrot's perch; and
there it would sit almost all day by the side of its great friend.
Sometimes the parrot would raise his unchained claw, and the sparrow
would perch upon it.

Jacquot,--that was the parrot's name,--holding the sparrow at the end of
his claw, would turn his head on one side, and gaze fondly on the little
bird, which would flap its wings in answer to this sign of friendship.
Then Jacquot would slide down to his food-tin, as if to invite the
sparrow to share his breakfast.

Once the parrot was ill for some days. He did not eat: he trembled with
fever, and looked very sad. The sparrow tried in vain to cheer him up.
Then the little bird flew out into the garden, and soon returned,
holding in his beak some blades of grass. The parrot with great effort
managed to eat them. The sparrow kept him supplied with grass; and in a
few days he was cured.

Once, when the sparrow was hopping about on the grassplot near the
parrot's perch, a cat sprang out from some bushes. At this sight,
Jacquot raised a loud cry, and broke his chain to fly to the aid of his
friend. The cat ran away in terror; and the little bird was saved.

[Illustration]

                                                UNCLE CHARLES.




THAT FOX!


                  A LITTLE gray fox
                  Had a home in the rocks,
          And most of his naps and his leisure took there;
                  But, one frosty eve,
                  He decided to leave,
          And for a short absence began to prepare.

                  A letter he wrote;
                  And he brushed up his coat;
          And he shook out his tail, which was plumy and fine:
                  At first break of day
                  He galloped away,
          At some distant farm-house intending to dine.

                  How gay he did look,
                  As he frisked to the brook,
          And gazed at himself in the water so clear!
                  He looked with delight
                  At the beautiful sight;
          For all was so perfect, from tail-tip to ear!

                  That noon, our gray fox
                  Called on good Farmer Knox,
          Where some of the fattest of poultry was kept,
                  And, sly as a mouse,
                  Lay in wait by the house;
          Or, peeping and watching, he stealthily crept.

                  He felt very sure
                  He should shortly secure
          A fat little chicken, or turkey, or goose;
                  And his eyes were as bright
                  As the stars are at night,
          As he tried to decide which his foxship should choose.

[Illustration]

                  From his sharp-pointed nose
                  To the tip of his toes,
          He was all expectation!--when, suddenly "_Snap!_"
                  With a "_click_" and a "_clack_;"
                  And, before he could wink,
          This smart little fox was caught fast in a trap.

                  And now that gray fox
                  Does not live in the rocks;
          And just what his fate was I never have learned:
                  This only I know,
                  That, a long time ago,
          He left there one morning--and never returned.

                                                      FLETA F.

[Illustration: GRASSHOPPER GREEN.]




GRASSHOPPER GREEN.

                                                  T. CRAMPTON.

[Illustration: music]

          1.
          Grasshopper Green is a comical chap;
          He lives on the best of fare;
          Bright little jacket and breeches and cap,
          These are his summer wear.
          Out in the meadows he loves to go,
          Playing away in the sun;
          It's hopperty, skipperty, high and low,
          Summer's the time for fun.

          2.
          Grasshopper Green has a dozen wee boys,
          And soon as their legs grow strong,
          All of them join in his frolicsome joys,
          Humming his merry song.
          Under the leaves in a happy row,
          Soon as the day has begun;
          It's hopperty, skipperty, high and low,
          Summer's the time for fun.

          3.
          Grasshopper Green has a quaint little house,
          It's under a hedge so gay,
          Grandmother spider as still as a mouse,
          Envies him o'er the way.
          Little folks always he calls I know,
          Out in the beautiful sun:
          It's hopperty, skipperty, high and low,
          Summer's the time for fun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

The January edition of the Nursery had a table of contents for the first
six issues of the year. This table was divided to cover each specific
issue. A title page copied from the January edition was also used for
this number.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, May 1877, Vol. XXI. No. 5, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, MAY 1877 ***

***** This file should be named 28133.txt or 28133.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/3/28133/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. Music
by Linda Cantoni.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
