Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, December 2, 1879, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Harper's Young People, December 2, 1879
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: March 4, 2009 [EBook #28246]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, DEC 2, 1879 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]


       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 5. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, December 2, 1879. Copyright, 1879, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: FEEDING THE TWINS.

A QUEER PAIR OF HOUSEHOLD PETS.]

THE TWINS.


Young bears have always been great favorites as pets, being playful and
affectionate when kindly treated. They can be trained to perform all
kinds of amusing tricks; and their antics when playing together or with
children are very laughable. They have been taught to execute difficult
parts in theatrical displays; among other things, to ring bells, pretend
to fall dead when shot at, beat the drum, and go through the manual
exercise of the soldier with the musket.

But though playful and harmless when young, they can not be trusted when
their teeth and claws are full grown. Then their good nature can not be
counted on; and many instances have occurred in which they have repaid
friendly confidence with sudden treachery. It must be said in their
favor, however, that their wildness is often the result of bad treatment
or thoughtless teasing. There is a story in print of a planter in
Louisiana who once picked up a young cub that had either been abandoned
by its mother, or had run away from the parental den. He carried it home
and threw it down in the yard, where it was immediately adopted by the
little negroes. It became a great favorite with them, sharing their
corn-bread, and taking part in all their sports. "Billy"--that was the
name given to him--thrived and grew large and stout, and learned to box
and wrestle with the boys so well that visitors to the plantation were
always entertained with these droll exhibitions.

But one day, in the spring, when he had been about a year in captivity,
Billy was detected in making free with the young cabbages in the garden.
A stout negro man picked up a branch of rose-bush, and gave the marauder
a playful stroke. Filled with rage, Billy sprang upon the man, shook him
as if he had been a bundle of straw, and bit the poor fellow so severely
that he died. Billy was at once shot. A pet that could not control his
temper better than that was considered rather too dangerous to keep.

In a wild state, when in distress, young bears utter cries like those of
a child in trouble. During an overflow of the Mississippi the
inhabitants of a plantation were alarmed by the dreadful wailings, as
was supposed, of some children in a swamp. After a careful search two
little cubs were found in the hollow of an old tree, locked in each
other's arms. The mother bear had been drowned or shot, and these funny
little "babes in the woods" were crying with fright and hunger, and
appeared to welcome the protection of man with real joy.

Bears are very fond of whiskey and other kinds of strong drink, and when
intoxicated will act very much like a man in a similar condition.




[Begun in No. 1 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, NOV. 4.]

THE BRAVE SWISS BOY.

_IV.--A TERRIBLE FALL._


For a moment father and son stood silent on the brink of the crevasse,
looking after the chamois.

"We can't get across here, father," said Walter, in a whisper; "let us
try and find some other way."

"We can't find a better spot than this," replied his father, examining
his gun.

"But what's the use of shooting him? What's the good of a dead chamois
if we can't get him?"

"When he's once dead, boy, we'll soon find some means of getting at
him," was the answer. "A board laid over the crevasse will be an easy
way of recovering the venison."

"But we haven't got a board, father."

"That we'll see about. Just stand on one side, Watty."

The hunter cocked his gun, took aim for a moment, and was going to fire,
when he turned suddenly pale, and dropped his arm.

"What's the matter, father? Do you feel ill?" inquired Walter, with
anxiety.

"No," replied the huntsman; "but it seemed as if the ice was giving way
just as I was going to fire. But it can't be," he continued, stamping
his foot; "the ice is solid and firm enough."

"Let us go home, father," implored Walter. "I feel a presentiment that
something will happen. Come home now, and we can try for the buck
to-morrow."

But the old mountaineer had in the mean time become self-possessed
again, and again raised his gun to fire. Just as he pulled the trigger,
however, his foot slipped, and with an exclamation of horror, Walter saw
him carried rapidly toward the rift in the ice, and suddenly disappear.
With the recoil of the gun the hunter had lost his balance on the
slippery ice, and at the same moment that his shot struck the chamois,
he was hurled into the "rift."

"Father! father! father!" screamed Walter, throwing himself on the ice,
horror-stricken, and peering wildly down the crevasse. "Father, speak!"

All was silent. Only a slight trickling, as if from some subterranean
stream, reached his ear.

For several minutes the youth lay at the edge of the chasm, paralyzed
with terror. When he recovered his consciousness, a feeling of alarm and
distress overwhelmed him. He wept, and wrung his hands bitterly.

"Father!" he cried again into the abyss that yawned beneath
him--"father, speak to me, for God's sake!"

A sudden thrill passed through his frame as a low murmur came up from
the icy grave. He strained his ears to listen to the broken words. "I am
alive, Watty," was the reply of the unfortunate man; "but my ankle is
out of joint, and one of my arms broken. I shall never see the light of
day again."

A cry of mingled joy and agony burst from Walter's lips.

"Don't be afraid, father," he exclaimed. "You shall be rescued, with
God's help. Have you got your bag with you?"

"Yes, but my bottle is broken."

"Well, then, take mine. I'll lower it down with a cord. Have you got
it?"

"Yes," was feebly answered. "I can hold out now for a while, unless the
cold strikes me."

"Courage, father, till I run down to the village, and get the neighbors
and shepherds to come with ropes and poles. Try to hold out for a couple
of hours, and with the help of God you shall be saved."

"Ay, ay, dear boy," was the faint reply; "I will try to be patient till
you come back." And with a godspeed Walter hurried off to rouse the
neighbors to the rescue.

It was a dangerous journey that the brave boy undertook for his father's
rescue; but courage, and the agility which is acquired by those who are
accustomed to the mountains from childhood, enabled him to reach the
valley in a wonderfully short time. Pale as death, with hands bleeding,
and clothes torn to shreds, he rushed to the inn, which was the nearest
spot where help could be found. His appearance naturally created
consternation, and in answer to the numerous questions addressed to him
he related in a few breathless words the dreadful accident which had
befallen his father. A score of stalwart hands were instantly ready to
rescue the unfortunate man from his dreadful position; the landlord of
the inn ordered ropes, poles, and ladders to be got in readiness, and
meanwhile pressed refreshment on the well-nigh exhausted youth. Moments
were precious, but ere long the party reached the scene of the disaster,
when Walter, leaning over the edge of the cleft, cried to his father,
and was answered.

"Yes, I'm still alive," replied the mountaineer, in feeble tones; "but I
am almost frozen to death, and in dreadful pain. Make haste and help me,
if you can, for I'm losing my senses."

"Down with the rope!" shouted the landlord, who had himself come up with
the party.--"Look out, Hirzel! Place the loop over your shoulders and
under your arms, and try to draw it tight. There are plenty of strong
arms here that will soon get you up."

The rope having been made fast to an iron stanchion driven into the ice,
the looped end was lowered away into the chasm; but no sign was made by
Hirzel that he had obeyed the directions, and fastened it round his
body.

"Father, why don't you make haste?" exclaimed Walter in agony.

But there was no answer.

"He must have fainted at the last moment," said the landlord; "and if
so, then may God have mercy upon him! for not a living creature could
venture such a depth."

[Illustration: "LET ME GO!" HE CRIED. "I MUST SAVE MY FATHER!"]

"_I_ will venture it!" exclaimed Walter, seizing the rope. But twenty
hands held him back. "Let me go!" he cried. "I must save my father!" and
breaking loose with a sudden effort from the men who surrounded him, the
courageous youth seized the rope and disappeared in sight of his
horror-stricken companions.

A few terrible moments passed, when a shout from below was suddenly
heard, and the cry, "All right! pull away, friends!" sent a thrill of
joy through every heart.

"Pull steadily, my men," cried the good landlord; "but pull as if your
own lives depended on it. I can see them now!" exclaimed he, gazing into
the gloomy abyss. "Hirzel seems to have fainted, just as I thought, but
Watty has fastened the rope round him securely. Pull away! they will be
at the top in a few seconds."

Encouraged by success, the men redoubled their efforts, and had soon the
satisfaction of landing father and son safely on the ice.

A rough kind of stretcher having been hastily made of poles and ropes,
the wounded hunter was laid upon it and carried home; and as there was
no lack of stout hearts and sure feet, the journey was accomplished
without accident. After setting his broken limbs and binding up his
wounds, the doctor, who had been speedily called in, expressed the hope
that Hirzel's life would be saved, but he doubted very much if he would
ever be able to climb the mountains for chamois again. Walter was
thankful to find that his father's life was in no danger, and had
himself so far recovered his equanimity as to be able to relate how he
had rescued him from his icy grave, and how he found that the rope,
instead of having reached the wounded man, had actually rested on a
ledge ten feet above the place where he lay. Walter, who felt devoutly
thankful that his efforts had been so successful, was overwhelmed with
praises for his heroism.

Nor was the chamois forgotten. The generous landlord had it brought down
to the inn from the spot where it had fallen, and sent an ample
equivalent to Hirzel's cottage.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




THE PROFESSOR ON TWINKLING.


Jack was delighted with the idea. Gus differed from him entirely. Joe
and I, being girls, pronounced it--horrid.

"Papa wants us to, you know," said May, who always sets us straight.

Jack, who had recently joined one of the college societies, moved that
the Professor be cordially supported. "His lecture last week was
exceedingly entertaining," he argued. "That he should be so good as to
come here and talk to us about his wonderful science in a pleasant
familiar way, simply because he's papa's old friend, shows the interest
he takes in the family."

"Do hush, Jack."

"My dear sister, I can not. What the Professor has to tell us about the
heavenly bodies--"

"I hate the heavenly bodies," growls Gus.

"Is it jealousy, Augustus, because they are allowed to stay out late
nights, while you are not?"

"Whatever it is, I agree with him," puts in Joe, who always stands by
Gus. "I hate astronomy too."

"Feeling as I do, Josephine, that your knowledge in the science is
confined to 'Twinkle, twinkle, little star,' and the fact that 'the moon
is made of green cheese,' I am surprised at you."

"What makes them twinkle?" asked May.

The Professor heard this, for he was just coming up stairs.

"What makes them twinkle, May?" and the Professor seated himself in an
easy-chair, as if ready to talk.

"I don't know, Sir. Won't you please tell us?"

"Pooh, May, don't bother the Professor with such juvenile questions.
He'll think he's intrusted with the charge of the third form in an
infant school."

"But," persisted May, "I would like very much to know, and I don't
believe you can tell, if you _have_ been to college. Now there!"

Jack was somewhat nonplussed at this, but after a moment's hesitation
said, "Well, anyhow, the books I studied never told anything about the
stars twinkling, and I don't believe they do twinkle. It's nothing but a
baby notion."

All eyes are now intently fixed upon the Professor, who is expected
first to settle the fact, and then to account for it.

"You, Jack, who have been to college," he began, "know that all vision
or sight is produced by rays falling upon the eyes. These rays may be
broken or turned from their natural course--the word astronomers use is
refracted. Now the stars are so far away from us that through the
largest telescope they are still only points of light. As the rays come
down through space there is nothing to break or refract them, but when
they reach our atmosphere, there is the tremulous agitation of the air
and ascending vapors. By these the rays coming from the tiny points are
at intervals turned aside from the narrow space of the pupil of the eye.
When the eye is assisted with the wide opening of the object-glass of a
telescope no such thing happens. So Jack is right; the stars don't
twinkle. When viewed through a telescope, they are found to shine with a
steady brightness, and hence the motion is only in appearance. Recent
astronomers have little to say about it; but it is due, doubtless, as
Sir Isaac Newton explains in his celebrated _Principia_, to the
ascending vapors and tremulous movements of the atmosphere. You have
seen how the heated air or gas rising from a stove will sometimes make
things behind it tremble and dance. Now if a small candle were burning
on the other side of the ascending vapor, its flame, though really
steady, would seem to flicker."

"Then, Sir, the stars, being so very far off, appear so very little, and
the rays of light they send are disturbed by atmospheric vapor, and thus
to the naked eye they twinkle."

"Yes," said the Professor. "The sun and moon, as you know, present broad
disks, with light radiating from every point--"

"Please, Professor," interrupted May, "tell us what a 'disk' is. Jack's
big words are dreadful to understand; and this, although a little one,
seems just as bad."

"I don't wonder I puzzled you, May. We use the word disk for the face or
surface of a heavenly body which appears to have some size. You may
always stop me when I use a word you don't understand; but when I have
once told you, I shall want you to remember; for we can not know much
about science unless we learn some of the hard words. I was saying that
the sun and moon present broad disks, so that if some of the light is
intercepted, the eye does not notice the loss. The same is true also of
the planets, which appear large when they are magnified, but not of the
stars, owing to their immense distances; and when the impurities in the
atmosphere obscure or divert the narrow line of light they send to us,
the eye perceives it at once. Some of the stars appear very brilliant
through the large telescopes, but the light still seems to proceed from
a single point. There are some four or five thousand stars that can be
seen without a telescope."

"Why," interrupted Joe, "I thought there were more than anybody could
count."

"So there are," replied the Professor, "but the number that can be
distinctly perceived by the unassisted eye is found to be comparatively
small when they are carefully looked after. On very clear nights the
whole sky may seem to glisten when the eye is suddenly turned upward;
and there are some portions of it where a confused light comes from a
sort of star-cloud, which has received the name of 'Milky Way.' But the
stars that can be seen separately are very easily counted. Some persons
can see rather more than others, on account of their eye-sight being
naturally better, or improved by use. A rough count of the number that
could be seen through Herschel's famous telescope made it twenty
thousand. The great telescopes more recently made would probably show as
many as forty or fifty millions."

"I should think," said May, "that it would be awful tiresome to count so
many things just alike, and that the man would often count the same one
over and over without knowing it, and would never be sure that he had
counted right."

"They are not all alike," said the Professor. "They differ greatly in
brightness, and to some extent in color, and in other particulars. They
have been divided according to their brilliancy into sixteen classes or
magnitudes. The fifteen brightest stars are said to be of the first
magnitude, the fifty next of the second, and so on to the sixth, which
comprises the faintest stars visible to the unassisted eye. The
brightest star of all visible in our latitude is the dogstar, which
gives four times as much light as any other. In every age of the world
there have been learned men interested enough in the stars to make
catalogues of them, giving their magnitudes and their positions."

"I think they must have been very slow and stupid follows," said Gus,
"or they would have found something better to do."

At this the Professor laughed.

[Illustration: THE GREAT EQUATORIAL, UNITED STATES NATIONAL
OBSERVATORY.]

"I think, Gus, you are hungry, and have your mind on mutton-chops. I
shall not talk to you any more this morning; but, after lunch, if you
will look in one of the great books in papa's library, which he will
point out, you will find pictures of all the great telescopes in the
world. The best one in our own country is that at the United States
National Observatory at Washington. Without the aid of these wonderful
instruments we should never have learned much about the stars."




THE HISTORY OF PHOTOGEN AND NYCTERIS.

A Day and Night Maehrchen.

By GEORGE MACDONALD.


I.--WATHO.

There was once a witch who desired to know everything. But the wiser a
witch is, the harder she knocks her head against the wall when she comes
to it. Her name was Watho, and she had a wolf in her mind. She cared for
nothing in itself--only for knowing it. She was not naturally cruel, but
the wolf had made her cruel.

She was tall and graceful, with a white skin, red hair, and black eyes,
which had a red fire in them. She was straight and strong, but now and
then would fall bent together, shudder, and sit for a moment with her
head turned over her shoulder, as if the wolf had got out of her mind on
to her back.


II.--AURORA.

This witch got two ladies to visit her. One of them belonged to the
court, and her husband had been sent on a far and difficult embassy. The
other was a young widow whose husband had lately died, and who had since
lost her sight. Watho lodged them in different parts of her castle, and
they did not know of each other's existence.

The castle stood on the side of a hill sloping gently down into a narrow
valley, in which was a river, with a pebbly channel and a continual
song.

The garden went down to the bank of the river, inclosed by high walls,
which crossed the river, and there stopped. Each wall had a double row
of battlements, and between the rows was a narrow walk.

In the topmost story of the castle the Lady Aurora occupied a spacious
apartment of several large rooms looking southward. The windows
projected oriel-wise over the garden below, and there was a splendid
view from them both up and down and across the river. The opposite side
of the valley was steep, but not very high. Far away snow peaks were
visible. These rooms Aurora seldom left, but their airy spaces, the
brilliant landscape and sky, the plentiful sunlight, the musical
instruments, books, pictures, curiosities, with the company of Watho,
who made herself charming, precluded all dullness. She had venison and
feathered game to eat, milk and pale sunny sparkling wine to drink.

She had hair of the yellow gold, waved and rippled; her skin was fair,
not white like Watho's, and her eyes were of the blue of the heavens
when bluest; her features were delicate but strong, her mouth large and
finely curved, and haunted with smiles.


III.--VESPER.

Behind the castle the hill rose abruptly; the northeastern tower,
indeed, was in contact with the rock, and communicated with the interior
of it. For in the rock was a series of chambers, known only to Watho and
the one servant whom she trusted, called Falca. Some former owner had
constructed these chambers after the tomb of an Egyptian king, and
probably with the same design, for in the centre of one of them stood
what could only be a sarcophagus, but that and others were walled off.
The sides and roofs of them were carved in low relief, and curiously
painted. Here the witch lodged the blind lady, whose name was Vesper.
Her eyes were black, with long black lashes; her skin had a look of
darkened silver, but was of purest tint and grain; her hair was black
and fine and straight-flowing; her features were exquisitely formed, and
if less beautiful, yet more lovely from sadness; she always looked as if
she wanted to lie down and not rise again. She did not know she was
lodged in a tomb, though now and then she wondered she never touched a
window. There were many couches, covered with richest silk, and soft as
her own cheek, for her to lie upon; and the carpets were so thick she
might have cast herself down anywhere--as befitted a tomb. The place was
dry and warm, and cunningly pierced for air, so that it was always
fresh, and lacked only sunlight. There the witch fed her upon milk, and
wine dark as a carbuncle, and pomegranates, and purple grapes, and birds
that dwell in marshy places; and she played to her mournful tunes, and
caused wailful violins to attend her, and told her sad tales, thus
holding her ever in an atmosphere of sweet sorrow.


IV.--PHOTOGEN.

The witch at length had her desire, for witches often get what they
want: a splendid boy was born to the fair Aurora. Just as the sun rose,
he opened his eyes. Watho carried him immediately to a distant part of
the castle, and persuaded the mother that he never cried but once, dying
the moment he was born. Overcome with grief, Aurora left the castle as
soon as she was able, and Watho never invited her again.

[Illustration: "ALL DAY HE BASKED IN THE FULL SPLENDOR OF THE SUN."]

And now the witch's care was that the child should not know darkness.
Persistently she trained him, until at last he never slept during the
day, and never woke during the night. She never let him see anything
black, and even kept all dull colors out of his way. Never, if she could
help it, would she let a shadow fall upon him, watching against shadows
as if they had been live things that would hurt him. All day he basked
in the full splendor of the sun, in the same large rooms his mother had
occupied. Watho used him to the sun until he could bear more of it than
any dark-skinned African. In the hottest of every day she stripped him
and laid him in it, that he might ripen like a peach; and the boy
rejoiced in it, and would resist being dressed again. She brought all
her knowledge to bear on making his muscles strong and elastic and
swiftly responsive--that his soul, she said, laughing, might sit in
every fibre, be all in every part, and awake the moment of call. His
hair was of the red gold, but his eyes grew darker as he grew, until
they were as black as Vesper's. He was the merriest of creatures, always
laughing, always loving, for a moment raging, then laughing afresh.
Watho called him Photogen.


V.--NYCTERIS.

Five or six months after the birth of Photogen, the dark lady also gave
birth to a baby: in the windowless tomb of a blind mother, in the dead
of night, under the feeble rays of a lamp in an alabaster globe, a girl
came into the darkness with a wail. And just as she was born for the
first time, Vesper was born for the second and passed into a world as
unknown to her as this was to her child--who would have to be born yet
again before she could see her mother.

Watho called her Nycteris, and she grew as like Vesper as possible--in
all but one particular. She had the same dark skin, dark eyelashes and
brows, dark hair, and gentle, sad look; but she had just the eyes of
Aurora, the mother of Photogen, and if they grew darker as she grew
older, it was only a darker blue. Watho, with the help of Falca, took
the greatest possible care of her--in every way consistent with her
plans, that is, the main point in which was that she should never see
any light but what came from the lamp. Hence her optic nerves, and
indeed her whole apparatus for seeing, grew both larger and more
sensitive; her eyes, indeed, stopped short only of being too large. She
was a sadly dainty little creature. No one in the world except those two
was aware of the being of the little bat. Watho trained her to sleep
during the day, and wake during the night. She taught her music, and
taught her scarcely anything else.


VI.--HOW PHOTOGEN GREW.

The hollow in which the castle of Watho lay was a cleft in a plain
rather than a valley among hills, for at the top of its steep sides,
both north and south, was a table-land large and wide. It was covered
with rich grass and flowers, with here and there a wood, the outlying
colony of a great forest. These grassy plains were the finest hunting
grounds in the world. The chief of Watho's huntsmen was a fine fellow,
and when Photogen began to outgrow the training she could give him, she
handed him over to Fargu. He with a will set about teaching him all he
knew. He got him pony after pony, larger and larger as he grew, every
one less manageable than that which had preceded it, and advanced him
from pony to horse, and from horse to horse, until he was equal to
anything in that kind which the country produced. In similar fashion he
trained him to the use of bow and arrow substituting every three months
a stronger bow and longer arrows, and soon he became, even on horseback,
a wonderful archer. Every day, almost as soon as the sun was up, he went
out hunting, and would in general be out nearly the whole of the day.
But Watho had laid upon Fargu just one commandment, namely, that
Photogen should on no account, whatever the plea, be out until sun-down,
or so near it as to wake in him the desire of seeing what was going to
happen; and this commandment Fargu was anxiously careful not to break;
for although he would not have trembled had a whole herd of bulls come
down upon him, charging at full speed across the level, and not an arrow
left in his quiver, he was more than afraid of his mistress. So that, as
Photogen grew older, Fargu began to tremble, for he found it steadily
growing harder to restrain him. He did not know what fear was, and that
not because he did not know danger; for he had had a severe laceration
from the razor-like tusk of a boar--whose spine, however, he had severed
with one blow of his hunting-knife before Fargu could reach him with
defense.

When the boy was approaching his sixteenth year, Fargu ventured to beg
of Watho that she would lay her commands upon the youth himself, and
release him from responsibility for him. One might as soon hold a
tawny-maned lion as Photogen, he said. Watho called the youth, laid her
command upon him never to be out when the rim of the sun should touch
the horizon, accompanying the prohibition with hints of consequences
none the less awful that they were obscure. Photogen listened
respectfully, but knowing neither the taste of fear nor the temptation
of the night, her words were but sounds to him.


VII.--HOW NYCTERIS GREW.

The little education she intended Nycteris to have, Watho gave her by
word of mouth. Not meaning she should have light enough to read by, she
never put a book in her hands. Nycteris, however, saw so much better
than Watho imagined, that the light she gave her was quite sufficient,
and she managed to coax Falca into teaching her the letters, after which
she taught herself to read, and Falca now and then brought her a child's
book. But her chief pleasure was in her instrument. Her very fingers
loved it, and would wander about over its keys like feeding sheep. She
was not unhappy. She knew nothing of the world except the tomb in which
she dwelt, and had some pleasure in everything she did. But she desired,
nevertheless, something more or different. She did not know what it was,
and the nearest she could come to expressing it to herself was--that she
wanted more room. Watho and Falca would go from her beyond the shine of
the lamp, and come again; therefore surely there must be more room
somewhere. As often as she was left alone she would fall to poring over
the colored bas-reliefs on the walls. These were intended to represent
various of the powers of Nature under allegorical similitudes, and as
nothing can be made that does not belong to the general scheme, she
could not fail at least to imagine a flicker of relationship between
some of them, and thus a shadow of the reality of things found its way
to her.

There was one thing, however, which moved and taught her more than all
the rest--the lamp, namely, that hung from the ceiling, which she always
saw alight, though she never saw the flame, only the slight condensation
toward the centre of the alabaster globe. And besides the operation of
the light itself after its kind, the indefiniteness of the globe, and
the softness of the light, giving her the feeling as if her eyes could
go in and into its whiteness, were somehow also associated with the idea
of space and room. She would sit for an hour together gazing up at the
lamp, and her heart would swell as she gazed. She would wonder what had
hurt her when she found her face wet with tears, and then would wonder
how she could have been hurt without knowing it. She never looked thus
at the lamp except when she was alone.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration: WAITING FOR THEIR TURN.]




EMBROIDERED CANVAS RUG.


[Illustration: Fig. 1.--RUG.--[See Figs. 2-4.]]

The pretty glove-case published in No. 2, November 11, was warmly
welcomed, and our young friends are eagerly clamoring for more holiday
gifts that they can make readily and cheaply. In compliance with their
wish we will occasionally furnish fancy articles that can be
manufactured by little hands. One of the most tasteful and useful
presents that we can suggest is a handsome canvas rug, which can be
easily made with the help of the accompanying pictures and description,
and which is sure to prove a successful Christmas gift. The rug is made
of ecru linen Java canvas, which, with the border, can be bought cheaply
in any large fancy store. The centre of the rug is twenty-eight inches
long and nineteen inches wide, and is embroidered in loop stitch with
claret-colored worsted. The border is four inches wide, and is worked in
cross stitch with similar worsted. That useful periodical, _Harper's
Bazar_, gives full directions for working these and many other stitches.
Almost every little girl, however, knows how to make these simple
stitches, or can find some one to show her. The rug is lined with gray
drilling, and edged with fringe, of which the illustration Fig. 4 shows
a full-sized section.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--REEL FOR RUG, FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--REEL FOR RUG, FIG. 1.]

To make the fringe first twist together threads of claret-colored
worsted. For this purpose use a wooden reel, the middle rod of which
forms a movable handle. One side of the reel is furnished with brass
hooks on the ends. Lay a thread of claret-colored worsted on the upper
hook as shown by Fig. 2; turn the reel quickly, holding the thread
double with the left hand and the handle of the reel with the right hand
until the thread has been twisted long enough to be wound on the reel,
with the hands in the position as shown by Fig. 3. When the threads have
been twisted of sufficient length, wind them tight on a long wooden
board four inches and seven-eighths in circumference (see Fig. 4), and
for the heading of the fringe crochet on each thread 1 sc. (single
crochet) with claret-colored worsted. Withdraw the board from the loops,
twist these, and on the sc. work a second round of sc. with similar
worsted, at the same time fastening in a chain stitch foundation worked
with ecru cotton. In doing this, work alternately 2 sc. on the
foundation and 2 sc. without the foundation.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--MANNER OF MAKING FRINGE FOR RUG, FIG. 1.]

Another simple fringe is made by winding the worsted on a suitable-sized
book, then cutting it through on one end, and knotting strands of four
threads each into the edge of the rug.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Electric Ornaments.=--Some curious trinkets, to which certain motions
can be given at will by means of electricity, have recently been devised
by an ingenious Frenchman, M. Trouve. Two of these are scarf pins; one
has a death's-head, gold or enamel, with diamond eyes and lower
articulated jaw; the other has a rabbit seated upright on a box with a
little bell before it, to be struck with two rods held in the animal's
fore-paws. An invisible wire connects these objects with a small
hermetically closed battery, the ebonite case of which is about the size
of a cigarette. It is kept in the waistcoat pocket, and acts only when
turned horizontally or inverted. When a person looks at the pin, the
owner, slipping a finger into his pocket, moves the battery, whereupon
the death's-head rolls its eyes and grinds its teeth, or the little
rabbit beats the bell with its rods (through electro-magnetic action). A
third kind of ornament is a small bird set with diamonds, to be fixed in
a lady's hair, and the wings of which can be set in motion electrically.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Great Wall of China.=--An American engineer engaged in the
construction of a railway in China, gives the following account of this
wonderful work. The wall is 1728 miles long, 18 feet high, and 15 feet
thick at the top. The foundation throughout is of solid granite, the
remainder of compact masonry. At intervals of between two hundred and
three hundred yards towers rise up, twenty-five to thirty feet high, and
twenty-four feet in diameter. On the top of the wall and on both sides
of it are masonry parapets to enable the defenders to pass unseen from
one tower to another. The wall is carried from point to point in a
straight line, across valleys, plains, and hills, sometimes plunging
down into deep abysses. Rivers are bridged over by the wall, while on
both banks of large streams strong flanking towers are placed.




MARGOTTE'S STORY.


"I will tell you the story," said Margotte, pausing in her knitting, as
we leaned together over the white palings of her little garden. "Yes,
there is a story, madame--a story of a wolf; but you have got it wrong,
madame, and I must set you right."

Picture a sunset in the Pyrenees, a glorious crimson sky tipping the
distant peaks with pale pink, and deepening the purple shadows on the
nearer mountains--the mountains that inclose and overtop Margotte
Nevaire's pretty home. I had come for a quiet month to this picturesque,
secluded village, and though my month was over, I was tempted to linger
day after day, for the sake of the sunshine and the mountains, and not
least, perhaps, for the sake of these two peasant girls, with whom I
lodged.

Margotte was the youngest of the two by fifteen years--the three boys
who came between had died--and though it is very long since we leaned
side by side over the white palings, I can always call her to mind as
she stood knitting there.

She was tall and strong, and finely made, with a clear white skin, and
brown hair waving in heavy masses under her white starched caps. She had
beautiful eyes, heavy-lidded and dark-lashed, and a firm, sweet
mouth--such a woman as you see sometimes amongst the desolate mountains,
as if God had given to them a grander soul, to compensate for the
blessings He denied.

Leontine was different; tall too, and active, but with heavier
movements, and more of firmness than of sweetness in her scarred face.
She had no girlish vanity in her glossy hair, or the cap starched to
such absolute perfection, for so much of her youth and beauty had
vanished with that scar--a deep blue line from brow to chin--that no
loving arrangement of the hair by Margotte's deft fingers could hide.

So Margotte said to me that evening, dropping her knitting into her
apron pocket: "I will tell you the story of the wolf, madame. Leontine
is out, and it is a grand story--a story I should like you to hear."

"It was night," said Margotte, "a cruel, cold winter night, such as we
who live amongst the mountains have terrible cause to dread, for it
means hunger and cold--sometimes absolute famine. It means the children
crying for food when there is none to give them, and the wolves howling
in the distance. Ah! those wolves, madame, how they make one shudder
with their monotonous howls, that seem so near at first, and then die
away into the far distance!

"Well, it was night, as I have said, and the baby was asleep, as it
might be here, and Leontine was knitting on the hearth, and Marcelle, a
friend of Leontine's, was chattering to her, kneeling on the stones, and
the door was on the latch.

"That was the mischief, you see; but Leontine was young then, and
Marcelle was a giddy, thoughtless chatterer, and she had run in with her
shawl over her head for an hour's talk. Leontine has told me of it so
often that I almost seem to see the two girls crouching by the fire that
sent bright and flickering reflections on to the snow outside.

"Suddenly, as they talked, there came distinctly to them the howling of
the wolves across the snow. Marcelle put her hands over her ears and
shuddered. Leontine knelt up and stirred the fire.

"'Come closer, my friend,' she said; 'it is a dreary sound. Thank God,
we are safe here!'

"'Are we safe, do you think?' asked Marcelle, with chattering teeth. 'I
dare not go home to-night. Will your mother let me stay here, Leontine?'

"'Surely,' said Leontine.

"She was so brave, my sister, my dear, dear sister, madame, and so
gentle! she took Marcelle's head upon her knee, and put her knitting
aside to soothe her terror.

"'We are quite safe, Marcelle,' she said, 'and mother will soon be back.
It is a dreary night.'

"It _was_ a dreary night, dark and still and terribly cold; the white
flakes were falling slowly to the earth, and covering the mother's
footsteps on the path.

"Leontine walked over to the window and looked out; the fire-light was
dancing and flickering on the snow outside, and making a cheerful patch
of ruddy light in the darkness, which would guide the mother's steps for
her home-coming. Through the darkness the howling of the wolves seemed
nearer.

"'Ah, they are coming closer,' said Marcelle, starting upright. 'Can you
see them, Leontine? I am afraid.'

"Leontine was leaning close to the glass, pressing her face against it.

"'Yes, I see shadows,' she said; 'they are coming to the light,
Marcelle. No! it is only one shadow, after all; we must not frighten
each other.'

"She turned with a faint smile to Marcelle's shuddering face, and tried
to draw the curtains with her trembling hands, but the shadow on the
snow was very near.

"'Do not be afraid, my dear,' she said, kneeling down upon the hearth
again, and drawing Marcelle's cold hands into her own strong ones; 'be
brave; we are quite safe, you know; the door is strong, and God is so
good, Marcelle.'

"But Marcelle was sobbing.

"Her sobbing woke the baby, and it cried--little moaning cries that
fretted Leontine, and that brought the dark shadow nearer to the door.

"Leontine rocked the baby, but could not hush its wailing cries; she
knelt beside the cradle, singing her strange, weird songs in a voice
that never trembled, and all the time that foolish Marcelle was sobbing
and trembling at her feet.

"'Hush, for God's sake!' said Leontine at last, lifting her clear eyes,
and trying to still the faltering of her voice. 'You frighten me,
Marcelle, and you keep baby fretful. Mother will soon be home, and the
night is not long, and we are quite safe, thank God.'

"But the words were still in her mouth when she heard a heavy shuffling
in the snow outside, and a terrible howl that seemed to shake the little
cottage to its foundations. Then--ah! think of it, madame--the
door--this door against which you lean--was burst open, and out of the
darkness a great wolf came bounding in, and paused for a minute on the
threshold.

"Leontine was upright in an instant, standing before the cradle. Even
Marcelle rose also, and stood shrieking on the hearth.

"But the great, lean, hungry wolf came slinking on--and it passed
Leontine, and took the little baby from the cradle.

"Leontine had stood as if rooted to the spot, with her burning eyes
fascinated by the awful sight; but now she strode to the table, and took
a knife. And yet she dared not throw it, because of the baby, madame.

"They seemed so helpless all of a sudden, those two girls, while the
great beast crept past them again, trotting to the door. Marcelle had
taken a fagot from the fire, and cast it at him, but he only shook it
off, and growled savagely, bounding out into the snow.

"Ah, madame, it was terrible--terrible; and yet, as Leontine always
says, God is good.

"For while Marcelle was crying by the empty cradle, and the snow was
sweeping into the room and putting out the fire, Leontine had sprung to
the door, and had flung herself to the ground, with her brave white face
not two inches from the wolf's glaring eyes; she stretched out her hands
and caught him by his shaggy coat, twisting her strong fingers into his
matted hair. She still held her knife firmly, but she dared not use it.

"She succeeded in her wish, madame, however; the wolf was surprised and
angry. With a low, fierce growl, that made Marcelle's heart beat to
suffocation, he dropped the baby.

"Leontine has told me often that she never knows how she came living out
of that terrible struggle; she says she remembers crying aloud to God to
keep the baby safe, and to take the life she offered up so willingly
instead. She remembers striking with her knife at the great body that
fell upon her, blinding and suffocating her; then there came to her ears
a dim faint sound like music, and my cries--_I_ was the baby, you have
guessed, madame--and then silence, such silence as Leontine says she
thinks will be like the silence of death.

"But it was not death. Ah, no--there is Leontine, you see, coming up
with her pitcher from the well; and the wolf, the last wolf killed in
St. Privat, lies buried not a foot from where we stand; but Leontine
will carry her trophy of victory to her dying day. Some people say that
her face would be very beautiful but for the scar; but for me, madame, I
think that it is the scar that makes her face so beautiful."




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX]


Our young friends must not be impatient if their communications are not
noticed immediately. Our space is limited, and we answer or print
letters in the order in which they are received. The following pleasant
note comes from a young correspondent in Paterson:

     DEAR "YOUNG PEOPLE,"--If all the boys and girls were as glad to see
     you as I was, you must have received a very flattering welcome. We
     have felt the want of a cheap, first-class weekly paper so much
     that we are able to appreciate you now that we have you. There are
     several weeklies published for the "young," but the great objection
     to them is that half are too dry, and the other half too
     sensational. You are neither, but very interesting.

In answer to a question accompanying the above note, we would say that
there is no limit to the age of our contributors.

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE S. VAIL.--We will accept original puzzles if they are very good.
They must, in all cases, be accompanied by a full solution. Your chicken
story is very pretty, but we have no room to print it.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHESTER B. FERNALD.--The full operation in figures should be sent with
all answers to mathematical puzzles.

       *       *       *       *       *

LYMAN C.--Your land-turtle will eat pieces of pear or sweet apple,
bread, cake, and many other things. It will also live many months
without eating at all. You can keep it in a box, and it will be happier
if you give it a little earth to dig in. If the earth is deep enough, it
will make a burrow and sleep in it until next spring. We knew a little
girl who received a present of two land-turtles, which she placed in the
yard. In a few days she was unable to find them, and gave them up for
lost. The next spring, six months afterward, she was digging in her
flower beds, when, to her astonishment, she found her two lost pets, who
opened their eyes on being disturbed, and crawled sluggishly out of
their hole. They had been asleep all through the cold weather, for
turtles are very long lived, and they can easily give a whole winter to
a single nap. Rev. Mr. Wood, in a note to White's _Natural History of
Selborne_, gives a very interesting account of a tame turtle which he
allowed to crawl about his study. This turtle showed a great genius for
climbing, and at one time actually succeeded in scrambling upon a
footstool. He says: "Its food consisted of bread and milk, which it ate
several times a day, drinking the milk by scooping up some of it in its
lower jaw, and then by throwing its head back the milk ran down its
throat."

       *       *       *       *       *

YOUNG CHEMIST.--Spread on your paper first a solution of iodide of
potassium, then a solution of nitrate of silver. Iodide of silver forms,
and saturates the paper. The excess of nitrate of silver and the heavy
yellow powder which forms are now washed off, and the paper is ready for
the camera. The picture may be developed by a solution of gallic acid
mixed with a very small quantity of an aqueous solution of acetic acid
and nitrate of silver. The picture is fixed by washing with hyposulphite
of soda. If you wish to derive any pleasure from photography, you would
better drop the old-fashioned paper process, and turn your attention to
ferrotypes, or negatives on glass, as with them good results are more
easily obtained than with paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

We acknowledge very pretty and neatly written letters from St. Clair
Nichol, Listowel, Ontario, and Charles L. Benjamin (nine years old),
Washington, D. C., both containing correct information respecting Sir
Rowland Hill.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLARISSA H. H.--Your answer to No. 4 of the mathematical puzzles is
right. If you look carefully you will discover why the others are wrong.

       *       *       *       *       *

G. A. Page sends correct answers to Nos. 1, 3, and 4 of the mathematical
puzzles in our second number; also to numerical charade. Many thanks to
"an instructor and lover of young people" for her kind note. We are
sorry it is anonymous.

       *       *       *       *       *

A correspondent sends answers to puzzles which we have not considered,
as no signature accompanies them. Our young friends will please sign
their full names to communications, which we will not print if so
requested.




_Harper's Young People._


HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates:

Four cents a number.

Single subscriptions for one year, $1.50; five subscriptions, one year,
$7.00: payable in advance. Postage free.

Subscriptions may begin with any number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by Post-office Money Order, or Draft, to
avoid risk of loss.

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.




A LIBERAL OFFER FOR 1880 ONLY.


HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE _and_ HARPER'S WEEKLY _will be sent to any address
for one year, commencing with the first number of_ HARPER'S WEEKLY _for
January, 1880, on receipt of $5.00 for the two Periodicals_.




[Illustration]

  "Little Polly, will you go a-walking to-day?"
  "Indeed, little Susan, I will, if I may."
  "Little Polly, your mother has said you may go:
  She was nice to say 'Yes;' she should never say 'No.'"




[Illustration]

  Six little people out for a walk;
  They would let you know where, if they only could talk.




[Illustration]

  Three tabbies took out their cats to tea,
  As well-behaved tabbies as well could be:
  Each sat in the chair that each preferred,
  They mewed for their milk, and they sipped and purred.
  Now tell me this (as these cats you've seen them)--
  How many lives had these cats between them?




[Illustration]

  Yes, it is sad of them--
    Shocking to me;
  Bad--yes, it's bad of them--
    Bad of all three.

  Warnings they've had from me,
    Still I repeat them--
  Cold is the water--the
    Fishes will eat them;

  Yet they will row about;
    Tho' I say "Fie!" to them;
  Fathers may scold at it,
    Mothers may cry to them.




[Illustration]

  Will you be my little wife,
    If I ask you? Do!
  I'll buy you such a Sunday frock,
    A nice umbrella too.

  And you shall have a little hat,
    With such a long white feather,
  A pair of gloves, and sandal shoes,
    The softest kind of leather.

  And you shall have a tiny house,
    A bee-hive full of bees,
  A little cow, a largish cat,
    And green sage cheese.




[Illustration]

  Poor Dicky's dead!--The bell we toll,
  And lay him in the deep, dark hole.
  The sun may shine, the clouds may rain,
  But Dick will never pipe again!
  His quilt will be as sweet as ours--
  Bright buttercups and cuckoo-flowers.





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, December 2, 1879, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, DEC 2, 1879 ***

***** This file should be named 28246.txt or 28246.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/4/28246/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
