The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Christmas Fairy, by 
John Strange Winter and Frances E. Crompton and Mrs. Molesworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Christmas Fairy
       and Other Stories

Author: John Strange Winter
        Frances E. Crompton
        Mrs. Molesworth

Release Date: March 11, 2009 [EBook #28306]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRISTMAS FAIRY ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)












THE CHRISTMAS FAIRY

          by
          John Strange Winter
          &
          Other stories
          by
          Frances E. Crompton
          &
          Mrs. Molesworth

[Illustration]




A Christmas Fairy

[Illustration: "A tall handsome lady came in, and Shivers flew to her
arms."]





A Christmas Fairy

          by
          JOHN STRANGE WINTER
          AND OTHER STORIES BY
          FRANCES E. CROMPTON
          AND
          MRS. MOLESWORTH

          London    New York
          Ernest Nister    E.P. Dutton & Co.


          Printed in Bavaria
          1878.

[Illustration]




Contents


          A Christmas Fairy        _John Strange Winter_  5
          Not Quite True               _Mrs. Molesworth_ 15
          In the Chimney Corner    _Frances E. Crompton_ 41




A CHRISTMAS FAIRY

By John Strange Winter.


IT was getting very near to Christmas-time, and all the boys at Miss
Ware's school were talking excitedly about going home for the holidays,
of the fun they would have, the presents they would receive on Christmas
morning, the tips from Grannies, Uncles, and Aunts, of the pantomimes,
the parties, the never-ending joys and pleasures which would be theirs.

"I shall go to Madame Tussaud's and to the Drury Lane pantomime," said
young Fellowes, "and my mother will give a party, and Aunt Adelaide will
give another, and Johnny Sanderson and Mary Greville, and ever so many
others. I shall have a splendid time at home. Oh! Jim, I wish it were
all holidays like it is when one's grown up."

"My Uncle Bob is going to give me a pair of skates--clippers," remarked
Harry Wadham.

"My father's going to give me a bike," put in George Alderson.

"Will you bring it back to school with you?" asked Harry.

"Oh! yes, I should think so, if Miss Ware doesn't say no."

"I say, Shivers," cried Fellowes, "where are you going to spend your
holidays?"

"I'm going to stop here," answered the boy called Shivers, in a very
forlorn tone.

"Here--with old Ware?--oh, my! Why can't you go home?"

"I can't go home to India," answered Shivers--his real name, by the bye,
was Egerton, Tom Egerton.

"No--who said you could? But haven't you any relations anywhere?"

Shivers shook his head. "Only in India," he said miserably.

"Poor old chap; that's rough luck for you. Oh, I'll tell you what it is,
you fellows, if I couldn't go home for the holidays--especially at
Christmas--I think I'd just sit down and die."

"Oh! no, you wouldn't," said Shivers; "you'd hate it, and you'd get ever
so home-sick and miserable, but you wouldn't die over it. You'd just get
through somehow, and hope something would happen before next year, or
that some kind fairy or other would----"

"Bosh! there are no fairies nowadays," said Fellowes. "See here,
Shivers, I'll write home and ask my mother if she won't invite you to
come back with me for the holidays."

"Will you really?"

"Yes, I will: and if she says yes, we shall have such a splendid time,
because you know, we live in London, and go to everything, and have
heaps of tips and parties and fun."

"Perhaps she will say no," suggested poor little Shivers, who had
steeled himself to the idea that there would be no Christmas holidays
for him, excepting that he would have no lessons for so many weeks.

"My mother isn't at all the kind of woman who says no," Fellowes
declared loudly.

In a few days' time, however, a letter arrived from his mother, which he
opened eagerly.

          "My own darling boy," it said, "I am so very sorry
          to have to tell you that dear little Aggie is down
          with scarlet fever, and so you cannot come home
          for your holidays, nor yet bring your young friend
          with you, as I would have loved you to do if all
          had been well here. Your Aunt Adelaide would have
          had you there, but her two girls have both got
          scarlatina--and I believe Aggie got hers there,
          though, of course, poor Aunt Adelaide could not
          help it. I did think about your going to Cousin
          Rachel's. She most kindly offered to invite you,
          but, dear boy, she is an old lady, and so
          particular, and not used to boys, and she lives so
          far from anything which is going on that you would
          be able to go to nothing, so your father and I
          came to the conclusion that the very best thing
          that you could do under the circumstances is for
          you to stay at Miss Ware's and for us to send your
          Christmas to you as well as we can. It won't be
          like being at home, darling boy, but you will try
          and be happy--won't you, and make me feel that you
          are helping me in this dreadful time. Dear little
          Aggie is very ill, very ill indeed. We have two
          nurses. Nora and Connie are shut away in the
          morning-room and to the back stairs and their own
          rooms with Miss Ellis, and have not seen us since
          the dear child was first taken ill. Tell your
          young friend that I am sending you a hamper from
          Buszard's, with double of everything, and I am
          writing to Miss Ware to ask her to take you both
          to anything that may be going on in Cross
          Hampton. And tell him that it makes me so much
          happier to think that you won't be alone.--

                                       "Your own MOTHER."

          "This letter will smell queer, darling; it will be
          fumigated before posting."

It must be owned that when Bertie Fellowes received this letter, which
was neither more nor less than a shattering of all his Christmas hopes
and joys, that he fairly broke down, and hiding his face upon his arms
as they rested on his desk, sobbed aloud. The forlorn boy from India,
who sat next to him, tried every boyish means of consolation that he
could think of. He patted his shoulder, whispered many pitying words,
and, at last, flung his arm across him and hugged him tightly, as, poor
little chap, he himself many times since his arrival in England, had
_wished_ someone would do to him.

At last Bertie Fellowes thrust his mother's letter into his friend's
hand. "Read it," he sobbed.

So Shivers made himself master of Mrs. Fellowes' letter and understood
the cause of the boy's outburst of grief. "Old fellow," he said at last,
"don't fret over it. It might be worse. Why, you might be like me, with
your father and mother thousands of miles away. When Aggie is better,
you'll be able to go home--and it'll help your mother if she thinks you
are _almost_ as happy as if you were at home. It must be worse for
her--she has cried ever so over her letter--see, it's all tear-blots."

The troubles and disappointments of youth are bitter while they last,
but they soon pass, and the sun shines again. By the time Miss Ware, who
was a kind-hearted, sensible, pleasant woman, came to tell Fellowes how
sorry she was for him and his disappointment, the worst had gone by, and
the boy was resigned to what could not be helped.

[Illustration]

"Well, after all, one man's meat is another man's poison," she said,
smiling down on the two boys; "poor Tom has been looking forward to
spending his holidays all alone with us, and now he will have a friend
with him. Try to look on the bright side, Bertie, and to remember how
much worse it would have been if there had been no boy to stay with
you."

"I can't help being disappointed, Miss Ware," said Bertie, his eyes
filling afresh and his lips quivering.

"No, dear boy, you would be anything but a nice boy if you were not. But
I want you to try and think of your poor mother, who is full of trouble
and anxiety, and to write to her as brightly as you can, and tell her
not to worry about you more than she can help."

"Yes," said Bertie; but he turned his head away, and it was evident to
the school-mistress that his heart was too full to let him say more.

Still, he was a good boy, Bertie Fellowes, and when he wrote home to
his mother it was quite a bright every-day kind of letter, telling her
how sorry he was about Aggie, and detailing a few of the ways in which
he and Shivers meant to spend their holidays. His letter ended thus:--

"Shivers got a letter from his mother yesterday with three pounds in it:
if you happen to see Uncle Dick, will you tell him I want a 'Waterbury'
dreadfully?"

The last day of the term came, and one by one, or two by two, the
various boys went away, until at last only Bertie Fellowes and Shivers
were left in the great house. It had never appeared so large to either
of them before. The school-room seemed to have grown to about the size
of a church, the dining-room, set now with only one table instead of
three was not like the same, while the dormitory, which had never before
had any room to spare, was like a wilderness. To Bertie Fellowes it was
all dreary and wretched--to the boy from India, who knew no other house
in England, no other thought came than that it was a blessing that he
had one companion left. "It is miserable," groaned poor Bertie as they
strolled into the great echoing school-room after a lonely tea, set at
one corner of the smallest of the three dining-tables; "just think if we
had been on our way home now--how different!"

"Just think if I had been left here by myself," said Shivers--and he
gave a shiver which fully justified his name.

"Yes--but----" began Bertie, then shamefacedly and with a blush, added,
"you know, when one wants to go home ever so badly, one never thinks
that some chaps haven't got a home to go to."

The evening went by--discipline was relapsed entirely and the two boys
went to bed in the top empty dormitory, and told stories to each other
for a long time before they went to sleep. That night Bertie Fellowes
dreamt of Madame Tussaud's and the great pantomime at Drury Lane, and
poor Shivers of a long creeper-covered bungalow far away in the shining
East, and they both cried a little under the bed-clothes. Yet each put a
brave face on their desolate circumstances to the other, and so another
day began.

[Illustration]

This was the day before Christmas Eve, that delightful day of
preparation for the greatest festival in all the year--the day when in
most households there are many little mysteries afoot, when parcels come
and go, and are smothered away so as to be ready when Santa Claus comes
his rounds; when some are busy decking the rooms with holly and
mistletoe; when the cook is busiest of all, and savoury smells rise from
the kitchen, telling of good things to be eaten on the morrow.

There were some preparations on foot at Minchin House, though there was
not the same bustle and noise as is to be found in a large family. And
quite early in the morning came the great hamper of which Mrs. Fellowes
had spoken in her letter to Bertie. Then just as the early dinner had
come to an end, and Miss Ware was telling the two boys that she would
take them round the town to look at the shops, there was a tremendous
peal at the bell of the front door, and a voice was heard asking for
Master Egerton. In a trice Shivers had sprung to his feet, his face
quite white, his hands trembling, and the next moment the door was
thrown open, and a tall handsome lady came in, to whom he flew with a
sobbing cry of "Aunt Laura! Aunt Laura!"

Aunt Laura explained in less time than it takes me to write this, that
her husband, Colonel Desmond, had had left to him a large fortune and
that they had come as soon as possible to England, having, in fact, only
arrived in London the previous day. "I was so afraid, Tom darling," she
said in ending, "that we should not get here till Christmas Day was
over, and I was so afraid you might be disappointed, that I would not
let Mother tell you we were on our way home. I have brought a letter
from Mother to Miss Ware--and you must get your things packed up at once
and come back with me by the six o'clock train to town. Then Uncle Jack
and I will take you everywhere, and give you a splendid time, you dear
little chap, here all by yourself."

For a minute or two Shivers' face was radiant; then he caught sight of
Bertie's down-drooped mouth, and turned to his Aunt.

"Dear Aunt Laura," he said, holding her hand very fast with his own,
"I'm awfully sorry, but I can't go."

"Can't go? and why not?"

"Because I can't go and leave Fellowes here all alone," he said stoutly,
though he could scarcely keep a suspicious quaver out of his voice.
"When I was going to be alone, Fellowes wrote and asked his mother to
let me go home with him, and she couldn't, because his sister has got
scarlet fever, and they daren't have either of us; and he's got to stay
here--and he's never been away at Christmas before--and--and--I can't go
away and leave him by himself, Aunt Laura--and--"

[Illustration]

For the space of a moment or so, Mrs. Desmond stared at the boy as if
she could not believe her ears; then she caught hold of him and half
smothered him with kisses.

"Bless you, you dear little chap, you shall not leave him: you shall
bring him along and we'll all enjoy ourselves together. What's his
name?--Bertie Fellowes! Bertie, my man, you are not very old yet, so I'm
going to teach you a lesson as well as ever I can--it is that kindness
is never wasted in this world. I'll go out now and telegraph to your
mother--I don't suppose she will refuse to let you come with us."

A couple of hours later she returned in triumph, waving a telegram to
the two excited boys.

          "_God bless you, yes, with all our hearts_," it
          ran; "_you have taken a load off our minds._"

And so Bertie Fellowes and Shivers found that there was such a thing as
a fairy after all.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Not Quite True]

by

Mrs. Molesworth




_Part 1_


HELENA FRERE and her two younger brothers, Willie and Leigh, were on the
whole very good children. They were obedient and affectionate and very
truthful. Perhaps it was not very difficult for them to be good, for
they had a happy home, wise and kind parents, and a quiet regular life.
None of them had ever been at school, for Mrs. Frere liked home teaching
best for girls, and the little boys were as yet too young for anything
else. Willie was only seven and a half, and Leigh six. Helena was nearly
ten.

They lived in the country--quite in the country, and a rather lonely
part too. So they had almost no companions of their own age, and the few
there were within reach they seldom saw. One family in the
neighbourhood, where there were children, always spent seven months
abroad; another home was saddened by the only son being a cripple and
unable to walk or play; and the boys and girls of a third family were
rather too old to be playfellows with our little people.

"It really seems," said Helena sometimes, "it really seems as if I was
never to have a proper friend of my own. It's much worse for me than for
Willie and Leigh, for they've got each other," which was certainly true.

Still, she was not at all an unhappy little girl, though she was very
sorry for herself sometimes, and did not always quite agree with her
Mother when she told her that it was better to have no companions than
any whom she could not thoroughly like.

"I don't know that, Mamma," Helena would reply. "It would be nice to
have other little girls to play with, even if they weren't quite
perfection."

You can easily believe therefore that there was great excitement and
delight when these children heard, one day, that a new family was coming
to live in the very next house to theirs--only about half a mile off, by
a short cut across the Park--and that in this family there were
children! There were four--Nurse said three, and old Mrs. Betty at the
lodge, who was Nurse's aunt, and rather a gossip, said four. But both
were sure of one thing--that the newcomers--the children of the family,
that is to say--were just about the right ages for "our young lady and
gentlemen."

And before long, Helena and her brothers were able to tell Nurse and
Mrs. Betty more than they had told them. For Mrs. Frere called at
Hailing Wood, which was the name of the neighbouring house, and a few
days afterwards, Mrs. Kingley returned her call, and fortunately found
the children's Mother at home. So all sorts of questions were asked and
answered, and when Helena and the boys came in from their walk, Mrs.
Frere had a whole budget of news for them.

There were _four_ Kingleys, but the eldest was a girl of sixteen, whom
the children put aside at once as "no good," and listened impatiently to
hear about the others.

"Next to Sybil," said their Mother, "comes Hugh; he is four years
younger--only twelve--and then Freda, nearly eleven, and lastly Maggie,
a 'tom-boy,' her Mother calls her, of eight."

[Illustration]

"I shall like her awfully if she's a tom-boy," said Helena very
decidedly, while Willie and Leigh looked rather puzzled. They had never
heard of a tom-boy before, and could not make out if it meant a boy or a
girl, till afterwards, when Helena explained it to them, and then Willie
said he had thought it must mean a girl, "'cos of Maggie being a girl's
name."

"I hope you will like them all," said Mrs. Frere. "By their Mother's
account they seem to be very hearty, sensible children; indeed, she
says they are just a little wild, for she and Mr. Kingley have been a
great deal abroad, and the three younger children were for two years
with a lady, who was rather too old to look after them properly."

"How dreadfully unhappy they must have been," said Helena, in a tone of
pity.

"No," said her Mother, "I don't think they were unhappy. On the
contrary, they were rather spoilt and allowed to run wild. Of course I
am telling you this just as a very little warning, in case Hugh and his
sisters ever propose to do anything you do not think I should like. Do
not give in for fear of vexing them; they will like you all the better
in the end if they see you try to be as good and obedient out of sight,
as when your Father and I are with you. Do you understand, dears?"

"Yes," said Helena, "of course we won't do anything naughty, Mamma,"
though in her heart she thought that "running wild" sounded rather nice.

"And you, boys?" added their Mother, "do you understand, too?"

"Yes, Mamma," they said, Willie adding, "If you're not there or Nurse,
we'll do whatever Nelly says."

"That's right," said Mrs. Frere. "Nelly, you hear?--the responsibility
is on your shoulders, you see, dear," but she smiled brightly. For she
felt sure that Helena was to be trusted.

It had been arranged by the two Mammas that the three Kingley children
were to spend the next afternoon at Halling Park, the Freres' home. They
were to come early, between two and three, and their Mother and Sybil
would drive over to fetch them about five. Some other friends of Mrs.
Frere's were expected too, which would give Mrs. Kingley an opportunity
of meeting her new neighbours.

"Must we have our best things on then, Mamma?" asked Helena, rather
dolefully.

Mrs. Frere glanced at her. It was full summer-time--late in June. The
little girl looked very nice in a pretty pink-and-white cotton, though
it could not have passed muster as perfectly fresh and spotless.

"No," she said, "a clean frock like the one you have on will do quite
well--or stay, yes, a white frock would be nicer. And tell Nurse that
the boys may wear their white serge suits--it is so nice and dry
out-of-doors I don't think they could get dirty if they tried."

And, as I have said already, the little Freres were not at all "wild"
children.

To-morrow afternoon came at last, and with it, to the delight of Helena
and her brothers, the expected guests. They arrived in a pony-cart,
driven by Hugh, who seemed quite in his element as a coachman, and they
all three jumped out very cleverly without losing any time about it.
Mrs. Frere and _her_ three were waiting for them on the lawn, but anyone
looking on would have thought that the Kingleys were the "at home" ones
of the party, for they shook hands in the heartiest way, and began
talking at once, while the little Freres all seemed shy and timid, and
almost awkward.

Their Mother felt just a little vexed with them. Then she said to
herself that she must remember how very seldom they had had any
playfellows, and that it was to be expected they would feel a little
strange.

"I daresay you will enjoy playing out of doors far more than in the
house, as it is such a lovely day," she said. "Your Mamma and Sybil will
be coming before very long, will they not?" she added, turning to Freda.

"About four o'clock," Freda replied; "but I don't want four o'clock to
come too soon; we should like a good long time for playing first."

Mrs. Frere smiled.

"Well, it is scarcely half-past two yet," she said. "When four o'clock
or half-past four comes, I daresay you will _not_ feel sorry, for you
will have had time to get hungry by then."

"All right," said Freda; "come along then, Nelly," for she had already
caught up Helena's short name. "Hugh and Maggie and I have got heaps of
fun in our heads."

She caught hold of Helena's hand as she spoke and started off, the
others following. Mrs. Frere stood looking after them with a smile,
though there was a little anxiety in her face too.

"I hope they will be careful," she thought; "I can trust Helena, but
these children _are_ rather overpowering. Still, it would scarcely have
done to begin checking them the moment they arrived."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

_Part 2_


The grounds of Halling Park were very large, the lawns and flower-beds
near the house were most carefully kept, and just now in their full
summer beauty. The first thought of the little Freres was to show their
new friends all over this ornamental part, for the Halling roses were
rather famed, and Helena knew the names of the finest and rarest among
them.

But Freda Kingley flew past the rosebeds without stopping or letting
Helena stop, and, excited by her example, the three boys and Maggie came
rushing after them, till the run almost grew into a race, so that when
at last the very active young lady condescended to pull up to take
breath, Helena was redder and hotter than she had ever been before in
her life. Indeed, for a moment or two, she was almost frightened--her
heart beat so fast, and there was such a "choky" feeling in her throat.
She could not speak, but stood there gasping.

Freda burst out laughing.

"I say," she exclaimed, "you're in very bad condition; isn't she,
Hugh?"

Helena stared, which made Freda laugh still more, Hugh joining her.

"I don't understand what you mean," said the little girl at last, when
she could speak.

"Oh, it's nothing you need mind," said Hugh good-naturedly. "It only
means you're not up to much running--you've not been training yourself
for it. Freda was nearly as bad once, before I went to school; she
didn't understand, you see. But the first holidays I took her in hand,
and she's not bad now--not for a girl. I'll take you in hand if you
like."

"Thank you," said Helena; "no, I don't think I want to be taken in hand.
I don't care to run so fast. Won't you come back again to see the
flowers near the house? And the tennis-court is very nice for
puss-in-the-corner or Tom Tiddler's ground."

"We know a game or two worth scores of those old-fashioned things--don't
we, Freda?" said Hugh. "But I daresay the tennis-ground's rather jolly,
if it's a good big one; we can look it up later on. First of all I want
to see the stream. We caught sight of it; it looks jolly enough."

"And there's a bridge across it," said Maggie, speaking for the first
time, "a ducky little bridge. It would be fun to stand on it and throw
stones down to make the fishes jump."

Willie broke in at this.

"The fish aren't so silly," he said. "The water-hens would scatter away,
I daresay, if you threw stones. But Papa doesn't like us to startle
them, so it would be no good trying."

"Water-hens!" exclaimed the Kingley children all together. "What are
they like? Do let's go and look at them. We've never seen any."

"And most likely we won't see them now," said Helena. "They're very shy
creatures. And we mustn't startle them, as Willie says."

"Oh, bother!" said Freda; "it wouldn't hurt them for once. And who would
know? Anyway, let's go to the bridge."

And off she set again, though not quite so fast. Indeed, it would have
been impossible to race as she had done across the lawn, for the way to
the stream from where they were standing, lay across very high ground,
though there was a proper path, or road, leading to the bridge if they
had not come by the "cross-country" route.

It was very pretty when they got there, so wild and picturesque--you
could have imagined yourself miles and miles away from any house, in
some lonely stretch of country. Even the restless Kingley children were
struck by it, and stood still in admiration for about a quarter of a
minute.

"I say, it's awfully jolly here," said Hugh. "I wish we had a stream and
a bridge like this in our grounds."

But almost immediately he began fidgeting about again--leaning over,
till Helena felt sure he would tumble in, and twisting himself about to
see what there was to be seen below them.

"I know what _would_ be fun," said Freda suddenly.

"What?" exclaimed the others.

"Wading," she replied. "If we clamber down the side of the bank--it
isn't so very steep--we could get right under the bridge. There's a bit
of dry ground at each side of the water, isn't there, Hugh? We could
make that our dressing-room, or our bathing-van, whichever you like to
call it."

"But," interrupted Helena, "you couldn't undress; we've no
bathing-dresses, and----"

"How stupid you are!" interrupted Freda, in her turn. "We'd have to take
off our shoes and stockings, of course, and we can't do that on the
sloping bank; under the bridge is just the place. And we can pretend
it's the sea, and that we're going to bathe properly, and shiver and
shudder and push each other in. Oh! it'll be great fun--come along, all
of you, do."

And somehow she got them all to go--not that she had any difficulty in
persuading her own brother and sister; they were, as they would
themselves have expressed it, "up to anything"; but the three Freres
knew quite well that it was not the sort of play--especially for
Helena--that their Mother would have approved of. It was very muddy down
under the bridge, and the paddling about in cold fresh water, when one
is already overheated, is not a very wholesome thing to do. Nor were
they dressed for this sort of play.

But Freda and Hugh had got the upper hand of them. Helena could not bear
to be laughed at, and Willie was terribly afraid of being thought "soft"
by a real schoolboy like Hugh.

It was not so easy to get down by the bank without accidents, and before
they reached the "dressing-room," frocks and knickerbockers already told
a tale.

"Never mind," said Freda, "it'll brush off when it's dry, and even if it
doesn't quite, you can't be expected never to get the least bit dirty.
Now let's get off our shoes and stockings as quick as we can," and down
she plumped and began unbuttoning her own boots without further ado.

"I think I'd rather not wade," said Helena.

"Oh, what rubbish!" cried Freda. "In I'll go first and show you how
jolly it is," and in another moment, in she went, paddling about on the
firmer ground in the middle of the stream, after some very muddy slips
or slides to get there.

"It's all right once you get out here," she called back. "Awfully
jolly--as cold as ice; come along."

[Illustration: "_It was not so easy to get down by the bank._"]

And in a few minutes all six children were waddling about in the not
very clear water, for the stirred-up mud at the edge had quite spoiled
the look of things for the time being, and I am sure the waterfowl, and
the fish, and even the water-rats were extraordinarily frightened at the
strange things that were happening, poor dears!

All went well, or fairly well, for some time, though little Leigh's face
began to look very blue, and his teeth chattered, and but for his fear
of being thought a baby, I rather think he would have begun to cry.

Helena did not notice him for some time; she was feeling a little giddy
and queer herself, and found it not too easy to keep her skirts, short
as they were, out of the water, and herself on her feet. There were some
sharp pebbles among those that made the bed of the stream, and she had
never before tried walking barefoot out of doors, even on a smooth
surface, and therefore found it very difficult.

But when at last she happened to catch sight of her little brother, she
started violently and nearly lost her balance. "Go back at once, Leigh,"
she cried. "Look at him, Freda--he's all white and blue."

Freda was a kind-hearted girl, and she too was startled.

"I'll take him to the bank--he'll be all right when I've rubbed his
feet," she exclaimed, and she hurried forward. But for all her good
intentions she only made matters worse.

Instead of taking hold of the child to help him, she managed to push him
over--and in another second Leigh was floundering in the mud at the edge
of the little stream!




_Part 3_


[Illustration]

POOR Leigh! What an object he was!

At first the three Kingleys burst out laughing.

But when Helena and Willie turned upon them sharply, they quickly grew
serious, for they were far from unkind children, and the sight of their
little friend's real distress and fear made them anxious to help to put
things to right.

[Illustration]

"He's as white as a sheet," said Helena, who was almost in tears. "And
shivering so. Oh! Leigh dear, do you feel very bad?"

"N-no, don't cry, Nelly," said the little boy. "It's--it's my jacket and
knickerbockers I mind about."

Freda turned him round promptly.

"It's only on one side," she said; "and a lot of it will brush off the
jacket, at least, and after all, the knickerbockers can be washed. What
I mind about is you're shivering so. Sit down, young man--here's a nice
dry place, and I'll give your feet a good rub."

So she did, using for that purpose one of her brother Hugh's long rough
stockings, quite heedless of his grumbling. She was certainly a very
energetic girl. In a few minutes Leigh's feet were in a glow, and the
colour crept back to his face again, and he left off shivering.

"There now," she said, "you are all right again, or at least you will
be, when you've run home and got a clean jacket. After all, you're quite
dry underneath--the mud is thick and hasn't soaked through. Now, what
had we best do, Nelly?"

"Get him home as quick as possible some back way, so that we won't meet
anyone, I should say," said Hugh, as he drew on his stockings, very glad
to have recovered his property.

But just as he spoke, there came a well-known sound--well known at least
to the Frere children, for it was their Mother's voice calling them.

"Nell-ly! Nell-ly! Will-ie! Will! where are you?" it said.

They looked at each other.

"It's Mamma," said Willie.

"What can have made her come out so soon?" said Helena. "She was going
to wait till the other ladies came to tea, and then she said she and
Sybil would stroll out with them, and see what we were doing in the
garden. But I never thought they'd come down here--we scarcely ever do,
'cos Nurse thinks we'll fall into the water."

Nurse's fears were not without reason, were they?

"We mustn't be seen like this," said Freda, "that's certain. Let's
crouch in here quite quietly for a minute or two, till they're out of
the way--don't speak or anything. Hush! perhaps we can hear their
voices."

Hiding from Mamma was a new experience to Helena and her brothers, and
they did not like the feeling of it. But just now there was nothing else
to do, and Freda had taken it all into her own hands. So they did as she
said.

[Illustration]

No sound of voices reached them for some moments, but they heard
footsteps overhead. Several people were crossing the bridge. "Goodness
gracious," said Freda, in a whisper, "we've only just hidden ourselves
in time. Do come closer, and don't speak, whatever you do," though no
one had been speaking but herself.

Then the steps stopped, and a faint murmur was heard, but not loud
enough to distinguish the words; and then the newcomers' steps moved on
again.

The children began to breathe more freely.

"Better stay quiet another minute or two," said Freda.

But Helena was not happy in her mind about little Leigh.

"It's so damp and chilly in here under the bridge," she said to Freda.
"He's sure to catch cold unless he gets a run in the sunshine."

"He must be awfully delicate then," said Hugh, with some contempt in his
voice. "You should see the wettings _we_ get--even Maggie, and she's a
_girl_."

At this Leigh grew very red, and Helena found he was going to burst out
crying, which would not have been a very good way of showing he was a
man, I consider.

But Freda told Hugh not to talk nonsense, for she was sensible enough to
know that what Helena said was true.

"I'll peep out now," she said, "and if the coast is clear, I'll 'cooey'
to you very softly, like we do at 'I spy,' and then you can all come
out. I'll wait for you at the top of the bank. It's a bother to go up it
and down and up again--it's such slippery work."

She peeped out as she said--cautiously at first; then again encouraged,
she made her way half way up the bank and glanced round her.

It seemed safe enough.

The group of ladies was to be seen at some little distance now; they
were returning towards the house by the proper road, which it would be
easy for the children to avoid.

And in her satisfaction, Freda gave a loud "cooey"--much louder than was
needed, as her companions were close by.

[Illustration]

Out popped all the heads from below the bridge, but before their owners
had time to begin to climb the bank, they were stopped by a "Hush," and
an energetic shake of the head from Freda, who next, greatly to their
surprise, flopped straight down among the high grass at the top, and lay
there motionless and quite flat.

The reason of this was soon explained. Again came the cry--"Nell-y!
Will-ie! Nell-y!" from Mrs. Frere, and a whistle, which Hugh Kingley
whispered to the others was his sister Sybil's.

"They've heard Freda's 'cooey,'" he said. "What a goose she was to call
so loud!"

Again there was nothing for it but to stay quiet, which was becoming
very tiresome.

The Frere children began to think that their ideas of "great fun," and
the Kingleys', did not at all agree.

"Wasting all the afternoon in this nasty damp hole, and risking Leigh's
getting really ill," thought Helena.

And at last she sprang up and called out to Freda.

"I won't stay here any longer," she cried. "Whether we are scolded or
not, I won't. It isn't safe for Leigh."

"How cross you are!" said Freda coolly. "I was just going to tell you to
come out. I think it's all right now; they've moved on. We can make a
rush for the house across the grass somehow, can't we? There must be
some back way in, where we shouldn't meet anyone. Then you and I can
take Leigh up to the nursery and say he had an accident, which is quite
true--and when he's clean again he can come out to us and your Mamma
needn't know anything about it. The rest of us are all quite tidy--quite
as tidy as can be expected after running about."

Helena did not reply. She was feeling too annoyed and vexed, and she did
not like Freda's wish to hide what had really caused their troubles.

But she took Leigh by the hand--Freda, it must be allowed, taking him
kindly by the other, and they all set off as fast as they could to the
house. They could not go quite straight for fear of being seen; they had
to "dodge" once or twice, but in the end they got safely there without
meeting anyone more formidable than a tradesman's cart driving away from
the stables, or an under-gardener laden with a basketful of vegetables.

Nurse looked grave, as she well might do, when she saw Leigh's plight.
But Freda had a very pleasant bright manner, and Nurse was quite
satisfied with her explanations.

And as the run home had brought back the colour to the little boy's
cheeks, nothing much was said as to the fear of his having caught cold.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

_Part 4_


SOME half an hour or so afterwards, all the party, the children
included, assembled on the lawn for tea.

Nurse had seized the opportunity of Helena's running in with Leigh, to
"tidy her up a bit," and Freda too had not objected to a little setting
to rights, so that both the girls looked quite in order.

And Willie and Hugh had also removed all traces of their adventures;
only Maggie was still rather rumpled and crumpled, but as she was
counted a tom-boy at all times, it did not so much matter.

"What became of you all, this afternoon?" asked Mrs. Frere. "We walked
down to the bridge to look for you, as one of the men said he had seen
you going that way. And I am _sure_ I heard one of you 'cooeying'--did I
not? Yet when I called, no one replied."

The children looked at each other. Mrs. Frere felt surprised.

"What is the mystery?" she said, though with a smile.

"Oh," began Freda, "there wasn't any mystery--we were only----" She
stopped, for she felt that Helena's eyes were fixed on her, and Freda
was not by nature an untruthful child. It was through her heedlessness
and wildness that she often got into what she would have called
"scrapes," from which there seemed often no escape but by telling
falsehoods, or at least allowing what was not the case to be believed.

She grew red, and Mrs. Frere, feeling that it was not very kind to
cross-question a guest, finished her sentence for her.

"Hiding?" she said. "Were you hiding?" though she wondered why Freda
should blush and hesitate about so simple a thing.

"Yes," said Helena quickly, replying instead of Freda, "yes, Mamma, we
_were_ hiding--under the bridge."

At the moment she only felt glad to be able to say what _in words_ was
true.

For hiding they certainly had been. And Mrs. Frere, thoroughly trusting
Helena, turned away and thought no more about it, only adding that it
must have been rather dirty under the bridge; another time she would
advise them to find a cleaner place.

"I suppose it was 'I spy' you were playing at," she said, and she did
not notice that no one answered her.

The rest of the afternoon passed quietly enough.

Hugh and Freda were rather unusually quiet, at which their Mother and
elder sister rejoiced.

"I do hope," said Sybil, as she drove home with Mrs. Kingley, leaving
the younger ones to follow as they had come, "I do hope those Frere
children, though they are younger, will have a good influence upon Hugh
and the girls, Freda especially. She has been getting wilder and wilder.
And Helena is such a lady-like, well-bred little girl."

"I hope so too," said her Mother. "I own I was a little afraid of our
children startling the Freres, but they seem to have got on all right."

[Illustration]

"Good night, dears," said Mrs. Frere to her three children an hour or so
later. "You were happy with your new friends, I hope? I think they seem
nice children, and they were very quiet and well-behaved to-day. Leigh,
my boy, you look half asleep--are you very tired?"

"My eyes are tired," said Leigh, "and my head, rather."

"Well, off with you to bed, then," she said cheerfully. She would not
have felt or spoken so cheerfully if she could have seen into her little
daughter's heart.

Nurse too noticed that Leigh looked pale and heavy-eyed.

She said she was afraid he had somehow caught cold. So she gave him
something hot to drink after he was in bed, and soon he was fast asleep,
breathing peacefully.

"He can't be very bad," thought Helena, "if he sleeps so quietly."

But though she tried not to be anxious about him, she herself could not
succeed in going to sleep.

She tossed about, and dozed a little, and then woke up again--wider
awake each time, it seemed to her. It was not _all_ anxiety about Leigh;
the truth was, her conscience was not at peace; she felt as if she
deserved to be anxious about her little brother, for she saw clearly
now, how she had been to blame--first, for giving in to the Kingleys in
doing what she knew her Mother would not have approved of, and besides,
and even worse than that--in concealing the wrong-doing, and telling
what was "not quite true" to her trusting Mother.

The tears forced their way into Helena's eyes when she owned this to
herself, and at last she felt that she could bear it no longer.

She got softly out of bed without waking Nurse, and made her way to the
little room where Willie slept alone.

"Willie," she said at the door, almost in a whisper, but Willie heard
her. He, too, for a wonder, was not able to sleep well to-night, and he
at once sat straight up in bed.

"Yes, Nelly," he said, in a low, though frightened voice, "what is it?
Is Leigh ill?"

"No," Helena replied; "at least, I hope not, though I'm awfully unhappy
about him. It's partly that and partly--everything, Willie--all we did
this afternoon. And worst of all," and here poor Nelly had hard work to
choke down a lump that began to come in her throat, "I didn't tell Mamma
the truth, when she asked what we were doing, you remember, Willie."

"Yes," said Willie, "I remember. You said we were hiding, and so we
were."

"But it wasn't quite true the way I let her think it," persisted Helena.
"Even if the words were true, the _thinking_ wasn't. And it has made me
so dreadfully unhappy. I didn't know how to wait till the morning to
tell her--I know I shan't go to sleep all night," and she did indeed
look very white and miserable.

Willie considered; he had good ideas sometimes, though Helena often
called him slow and stupid.

"I know what," he said. "You shall write a letter to Mamma--now, this
minute. I've got paper and ink and pens and everything, in my new
birthday writing-case, and I've got matches. Since my birthday, Papa
said I might have them in my room."

For Willie was a very careful little boy. If there was no likelihood of
his "setting the Thames on fire," his Father had said once, "there was
even less fear of his setting the _house_ on fire," and though Willie
did not quite understand about the "Thames"--how could a _river_
burn?--he saw that Papa meant something nice, so he felt quite pleased.

And the next morning, the first thing Mrs. Frere saw on her toilet-table
was a note addressed rather shakily in pencil, to "dear Mamma."

It was only a few lines, but it made her hurry to throw on her
dressing-gown and hasten to the nursery.

"How is Leigh?" were her first words to Nurse.

[Illustration: "_Willie at once sat straight up in bed._"]

"He's got a little cold in his head, ma'am, but nothing much," was the
cheerful reply, and Mamma saw by the child's face that there were no
signs of anything worse.

"But, Miss Helena," Nurse went on, "has had a bad night, and her head is
aching, so I thought it better to keep her in bed to breakfast."

Poor Nelly! she had not much appetite for breakfast, and the first thing
she did when Mamma's dear face appeared at the door was to burst into
tears.

But such tears do good, and still more relief was the telling the whole
story, ending up with--

"Oh, Mamma, dear Mamma, I couldn't bear to think I had told you what was
_not quite true_. And Willie feels just the same."

For Willie had crept in too, looking very grave, and winking his eyes
hard to keep from crying.

It was all put right, of course; there was really no need for their
Mother to show them where they had been wrong. They knew it so well. And
Leigh did not get ill, after all.

Freda Kingley had had a lesson too, I am glad to say.

That very afternoon she and Hugh walked over to Halling Park, to "find
out" if Leigh was all right.

And this gave Mrs. Frere a good opportunity of showing the kind-hearted
but thoughtless children the risk they had run of getting themselves and
their little friends into real trouble--above all, by concealing their
foolish play, and causing Nelly and her little brothers for the first
time in their lives to act at all deceitfully.

"You will be afraid to let them play with us any more," said Freda very
sadly, "and I'm sure I don't wonder."

"No, dear," said her new friend. "On the contrary, I shall now feel sure
that I _may trust_ you and Hugh and Maggie."

Freda grew red with pleasure.

"You may indeed," she said; "I promise you we won't lead them into
mischief and--and if ever we do, we'll tell you all about it at once."

Mrs. Frere laughed at this quaint way of putting it.

"I don't think my children will be any the worse for a little more
'running wild' than they have had," she said.

"And we won't be any the worse for having to think a little before we
rush off on some fun," said Freda. "I really never did see before how
very easy it would be to get into telling regular _stories_, if you
don't take care."

[Illustration]




[Illustration: In the Chimney Corner]

by

Frances E. Crompton


"IT'S a welly anxietious thing, yoasting chestnuts is," Rupert said,
shaking his head seriously.

Rupert is only four years old, but he is very fond of grand words. He
speaks quite plainly and nicely, Nurse says (excepting the _v_'s and
_r_'s), only, of course, he cannot remember always just the shape of the
big words; but he uses much grander ones than I do, though I am nearly
six.

But he is the nicest little boy in all the world, and we do love each
other better than anybody else at all, after Mother and Father.

We made what Rupert calls an "arranglement" about always being friends
with each other; that was the night we roasted the chestnuts.

It was one of the most interesting things we had ever done--and then to
be allowed to do it alone! You see, this was the way.

It was the dreadfullest day we can remember in all our lives.

Because you know, first of all, Mother was so ill. And then there was a
birthday party we were to have gone to.

And Sarah, who is the housemaid, said she didn't see why we couldn't go
just the same, and Nurse said very sharply:

"I'm not going to let them go, I can tell you, with things as they are."

And then she said, in another kind of voice:

"Just suppose they had to be sent for to go in to the mistress----"

And then she went away again into Mother's dressing-room.

That was another horrid thing, that nobody seemed to be able to look
after us at all; we could have got into all sorts of mischief if we had
wanted, but everything was so dreadful that it made us not want.

There were two doctors, who went and came several times, and someone
they called Nurse, but she wasn't our Nurse.

And our Nurse could not be in the nursery with us, but kept shutting
herself up in Mother's dressing-room, and that made us be getting into
everybody's way.

So at last, when evening came, Nurse sent us down to the drawing-room,
because somebody had let the nursery fire go almost out, and she told us
to stay there and be good, and Father said he would perhaps come and sit
with us by-and-by.

But I don't know what we should have done there so long if Sarah had
not brought us a plate of chestnuts, and shown us how to roast them.

(We feel sure that Nurse would not have allowed it by ourselves, and
would have called it "playing with fire," but Father looked in at us
once, and did not stop us at all, but only said we were very good, and
Cook and Sarah kept looking in too, and they were very kind, only rather
quiet and queer.)

[Illustration]

So that was how it was that we came to be allowed to be roasting
chestnuts in the drawing-room by ourselves, which does seem a little
funny, if you did not know about that dreadful day.

"There's only two left now," Rupert said.

We hadn't eaten all the plateful, of course, because so many of them,
when they popped, had popped quite into the fire, and we were not to try
to get them out.

We had roasted one each for Sarah, and for Cook, and for Nurse, and for
Father, and of course the biggest of all for Mother.

We thought she might enjoy it when she got better. And they were all
done, and there were only two left besides what we had eaten and lost.

So we put them together on the bar to roast, and Rupert said:

"One for you, and one for me. Yours is the light one, and mine is the
dark one."

And I said:

"Yes, and let us do them as Sarah did with two of them, and try if they
will keep together till they are properly done, and then it will be as
if we kept good friends and loved each other always."

So that was what Rupert called the "anxietious" part, because, you know,
one of them might have flown into the fire before the other was roasted,
and we were so excited about it that I believe we should have cried.

But they were the nicest chestnuts of all the plateful, and that was the
nicest thing of all that long day that had so many nasty ones in it.

For the dark chestnut and the light one kept together all the time, and
split quite quietly and comfortably, and began to have a lovely smell,
and then we thought it was fair to rake them off.

"Those chestnuts were welly fond of each other," said Rupert, in his
solemnest way, while they were cooling in the fender. "Like you and me,
Nella."

[Illustration: "Rupert knelt down on the rug."]

"And so we'll promise on our word-of-honours to be friends like them
and love each other for always and always," I said.

And we held each other's hands, and when the chestnuts were cooled and
peeled, ate them up, and enjoyed them most of all the chestnuts.

But after we had made that play last as long as we could, and it grew
later and later, it began to seem miserabler than ever.

And nobody came to take us to bed, although it did feel so dreadfully
like bedtime, and nobody brought us any bread-and-milk, and chestnuts do
not really make a good supper, even if you have roasted them yourself.
And I tried to tell Rupert "The Steadfast Tin Soldier," but he grew
cross because I couldn't tell it as well as Mother.

So I said:

"Well, let us lie down here on the rug, and perhaps if we make believe,
it will seem like going to bed."

But Rupert said, how could he go to bed without saying his prayers, and
he was so tired and cross that I said:

"Well, you say yours, and I'll hear them."

And so Rupert knelt down on the rug, and said his prayers, and I heard
them; at least, I mean, we tried; but I couldn't always remember what
came next, and then _he_ remembered that he wanted Mother, and burst out
crying.

So I did not know what to do any more, and I could only huggle him, as
he calls it, and wipe his eyes on my frock, and we sat there and huggled
each other.

And I think we fell asleep in the chimney corner after that.

At least, the next thing we remember is being picked up by Father and
Nurse, and Nurse carried Rupert upstairs, and Father carried me.

And I said:

"We've tried to be good, Father, but we were obliged to go to sleep on
the floor--just there; we really and truly couldn't keep awake any
longer."

[Illustration]

And Father did not think it naughty, I am sure, for he kissed us both
ever so many times at the nursery door, with a great big hug, although
he went away without speaking.

And Nurse undressed us as quickly as she could, and as Rupert calls it,
"'scused" our baths, for we were so dreadfully sleepy; and I did think
once that Nurse seemed to be crying, but I was too tired to notice any
more.

And that was the end of the dreadfullest day we have ever known.

It began to be happier quite soon next day, for Granny came, and stayed
with us, and had time to love us very much.

We told her about the chestnuts, and she thought it ever so nice.

And she told us something too, two things, and one was very beautiful,
and one was very dreadful.

And the beautiful thing was that God had sent us a baby sister on that
dreadful evening. But then He saw that He could take better care of her
than even Mother and Nurse, and He loved her so much that He sent an
angel to fetch her away again.

And though we were sorry not to have the little sister (and that was
another reason to make Rupert and me love each other all the more,
Granny said), yet she told us how beautiful it was to know that Baby
Lucy would never do a naughty thing, or say a naughty word, but always
be kept quite safe now.

And the dreadful thing was--but I can only say it in a whisper--that
God had almost taken _Mother_ away, to be with Baby Lucy too.

But He looked down at us, and at Father, Granny said, and was sorry for
us; and I think the time when He was sorry was when Rupert was crying,
and I was trying to hear his prayers, because He must have seen that I
could not be like Mother to Rupert, not however much I tried.

And so He was sorry for us, and Mother stayed.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Title page, "878" changed to "1878"

A table of contents was created for this book by the transcriber.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Christmas Fairy, by 
John Strange Winter and Frances E. Crompton and Mrs. Molesworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRISTMAS FAIRY ***

***** This file should be named 28306.txt or 28306.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/3/0/28306/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
