The Project Gutenberg EBook of Golden Stars in Tatting and Crochet, by
Eleonore Riego de la Branchardiere

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Golden Stars in Tatting and Crochet

Author: Eleonore Riego de la Branchardiere

Release Date: March 31, 2009 [EBook #28457]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOLDEN STARS IN TATTING ***




Produced by Janet Keller, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note: Most of this book is set with a hanging indent
that has not been retained in the text version.

Punctuation, hyphenation and spelling have not been modernized.
However, the oe ligature has been represented by [oe] in the word
"[oe]illet."]


  ETOILE DOREE

  IN

  TATTING
  BY
  M^LLE. RIEGO.

  GOLDEN STARS
  IN
  TATTING AND CROCHET.

  BY

  MLLE. RIEGO DE LA BRANCHARDIERE.


  Price One Shilling.


  LONDON:

  SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, AND CO.,

  AND ALL BERLIN WAREHOUSES.


     Entered at Stationers' Hall.]
                   1861.
  [The right of Translation is reserved.




NOTICE.


These Designs are Registered under the 5th & 6th Vic. c. 100, and the
Public are hereby cautioned against making any of them for the purpose
of Sale, without permission from the Authoress. Any person infringing
upon the Copyright will be proceeded against, and, by sect. 8, they
are liable to a penalty of from L5 to L30 for each offence.


1, PRINCES STREET, CAVENDISH SQUARE.




ETOILE DOREE.




Rules and Explanation of Terms.


The following Designs are formed by a very simple combination of
Tatting and Crochet, the more elaborate style of both Works being
avoided, so that any Lady with a knowledge of the first rules of each
Art will be able to accomplish the patterns without the least
difficulty, the Stars and Diamonds being made in Tatting and
afterwards worked round with loops of chain Crochet.

The numerous purposes to which the work can be applied far exceed the
limits of this Book, as it admits of being made in every material. The
Stars have a good effect for spotting and trimming Dresses, and, when
worked in black or white Silk, are suitable for Cloak and Bonnet
Trimmings. For Antimacassars and Doyleys, white and colored Cotton can
be substituted for the Gold and Wool; most of the Designs are adapted
for Church Needlework.

The Gold Tatting Twine can be obtained in two qualities; the least
expensive should be used for Doyleys and Antimacassars, but for Church
Needlework, or Collars and Sleeves, the better make is most suited.

The new Tatting Silk is a substitute for the Gold, and is made in two
sizes, No. 1 being the coarser.

In these Designs the knots should be made on the right side of the
work, the reverse side having the best effect.

"To Commence," in Crochet--Put the needle into a stitch or pearl loop,
and, leaving an end, bring the wool through in a loop.

"To Join," in Crochet--Take the needle out of the loop, put it into
the stitch to be joined, and bring the loop through this stitch,
always joining to the centre of a loop of chain.




TATTING.

THE STARS AND DIAMONDS.


For which a Shuttle and Ring and Pin will be required. The Shuttle is
to be filled with the materials as directed.

"A Pearl Loop," in Tatting--Turn the thread which forms the foundation
loop over the pin and continue the stitches.

"A Double Stitch," in Tatting--Is formed by a single and a reverse
stitch worked alternately.

OCTAGON STAR--Commence a loop, work 1 double stitch, then (1 pearl and
2 double stitches alternately 7 times), 1 pearl, 1 double, draw the
loop quite close, place the two ends together, knot them firmly and
cut off the ends; it is better to knot the gold twice to make it very
secure.

SEXAGON STAR--Commence a loop, work 1 double, then (1 pearl and 2
double 5 times), 1 pearl, 1 double; draw close &c. as for the previous
Star.

THE DIAMOND 1st Oval--Commence a loop, work 4 double stitches, then 1
pearl, 2 double, 1 pearl, 2 double, 1 pearl, 4 double; draw quite
close, and work 3 Ovals more the same, commencing them close to the
last; and to fasten off firmly, pass the first end through the last
oval, and then through the other three; knot the two ends together.




THE ZEPHYR SLEEVE.

DESIGN No. 1.


_Materials--2 skeins of extra coarse Gold-colored Netting Silk, or
Gold Twine; 2 skeins of Cerise ordinary Coarse Silk; Walker's Penelope
Crochet Needle No 3-1/2; a Shuttle; Ring and pin No. 3. Andalusian
Wool and Tatting Silk can be used if preferred._

The foundation of the Sleeve in the Engraving is of Tulle or Brussels
Net, made up into puffs, but the style can be varied according to the
dress, and the work without the net is suited for Cuffs to tight
Sleeves.


THE STARS.

With the gold silk or twine make 20 Octagon Stars as page 4.

THE WRISTBAND, 1st STAR--Take one of the gold stars and with the
cerise silk and crochet needle commence in one of the pearl loops of
it, work 9 chain and 1 plain in each of the 8 pearl loops, fasten off,
knotting the ends together.

2nd STAR--Commence in a pearl loop of another gold star, work (9 chain
and 1 plain in a pearl loop as before, 6 times), then 5 chain, join to
the centre of the 4th loop of chain of the 1st star, 4 chain, 1 plain
in the next pearl, 5 chain, join to the next loop of the 1st star, 4
chain, 1 plain in the next pearl, and fasten off.

Work 6 Stars more the same as the last, which finishes the Band.

THE LARGE STAR--Work as the 1st Star, but at the end of the round
instead of fastening off work 4 single on the first loop of chain,
then (10 chain, miss 9 and 1 plain in the 9 chain of the 1st round, 6
times), 5 chain, join to the centre of the 2nd loop of chain of the
last star of the band, 5 chain, miss 9, 1 plain as before, 5 chain,
join to the next loop of the 1st star, 5 chain, miss 9, 1 plain, and
fasten off.

Work 3 Stars more the same, joining them to every other star of the
Wristband.

Work the 8 remaining Stars the same as the 1st, and sew them
separately to the net.




THE ZEPHYR COLLAR.

DESIGN No. 2.


_Materials--The same as previous Sleeve._


Work 9 Stars the same as the 1st Star in the preceding direction; and
for the Band--with the gold make a crochet chain of about 14 inches,
turn, and along the chain work a row of 1 chain, miss 1, and 1 treble.
Fasten off.

The Collar is formed by doubling the Net and drawing it into a narrow
band to shape it. The Stars and Band are then to be tacked on.




ZOUAVE SLEEVE.

DESIGN No. 3.


_Materials--2 skeins of coarse Gold-colored Netting Silk, or Gold
Twine; 2 skeins of Black or Colored ordinary size Silk; Walker's
Penelope Crochet Needle, No. 3-1/2; a Shuttle; Ring and pin No. 3.
Andalusian Wool and Tatting Silk No. 2 can be used._

The foundation of the Sleeve is of Tulle or Brussels Net.


THE WRISTBAND.

IN TATTING.

1st [OE]ILLET--Fill the shuttle with the gold silk or twine and
commence a loop, work 2 double stitches, then (1 pearl and 2 double 3
times), draw the loop quite close; and for the

2nd [OE]ILLET--Commence a loop half an inch from the last and work 2
double, then join to the last pearl loop, work 2 double, 1 pearl, 2
double, 1 pearl, 2 double, draw close. Join to the Silk left between
the [oe]illets, which will keep it firm; and there will now be about a
quarter of an inch between the [oe]illets, which is just sufficient to
keep the work straight, Repeat the 2nd [oe]illet until there are 21,
then leave a quarter of an inch of silk and join to the last pearl,
leave another quarter and join to the next pearl, which is the centre
one of the [oe]illet. Turn the work and join to the centre pearl loop
of each [oe]illet, leaving a quarter of an inch between to make a
straight line to correspond with the first side. Fasten off.

With the black or colored silk and crochet needle commence in one of
the spaces of gold left between the [oe]illets, work 5 chain and 1
plain in the centre pearl loop of the next [oe]illet, 5 chain, 1 plain
in the next space; repeat round both sides of the Band and fasten off.
In the first side the plain stitch must be worked in the joining
stitch at the end of the [oe]illet.


THE STARS AND DIAMONDS.

With the gold make 8 Octagon Stars and 8 Diamonds as page 4.

1st DIAMOND--Take one of the gold diamonds and with the black silk and
crochet needle commence in the centre pearl loop of one of the ovals,
+ work 4 chain, 1 plain in the next pearl, 9 chain, 1 plain in the
same pearl as the last plain. Repeat from + 10 times more. Then 4
chain, 1 plain in the 1st pearl, 5 chain, take the wristband and join
to the centre of the 1st loop of chain of it, 5 chain, 1 plain. Fasten
off.

2nd DIAMOND--The same as the last, joining it to the 12th loop of
chain of the Band. Work 2 diamonds more the same, always leaving 11
loops of the Band between them.

1st STAR--Take a gold star and with the black silk commence in a pearl
loop of it, work 8 chain and 1 plain in each of the 8 pearl loops,
then 4 single on the first 4 chain, 10 chain, miss 8, 1 plain in the
10 chain, 5 chain, join to the 6th or centre loop of the Band,
between the diamonds, 5 chain, miss 8, 1 plain in the next 8 chain,
then 10 chain, miss 8, 1 plain as before, 5 chain, join to the centre
of the third 9 chain of the next diamond, 5 chain, miss 8, 1 plain as
before, (10 chain, miss 8 and 1 plain, 3 times), 5 chain; join to the
opposite 9 chain of the next diamond, 5 chain, 1 plain. Fasten off.

Work three Stars more the same, joining them between the diamonds.

5th STAR--Work as the 1st Star to the end of the 1st round, then (10
chain, miss 8 and 1 plain in the 8 chain, 7 times), 5 chain, join to
the centre 9 chain of one of the diamonds opposite to the one joined
to the Band, then 5 chain, 1 plain; fasten off.

5th DIAMOND--Work as the 1st Diamond, joining it to the centre of the
4th 10 chain of the last star. Repeat the last Star and Diamond on
each of the other three Diamonds which are attached to the Band.

A COLLAR to correspond can be made the same as No. 2.




ANTIMACASSAR, CUSHION, SQUARE DOYLEY, ETC.

DESIGN No. 4.


_Materials--Two shades of Green, one of light Mauve, and the Gold,
&c., according to the following directions:--_

For a Doyley 7 inches square, use _Single Berlin Wool and Gold Twine
or Gold-Colored Crochet Silk; Penelope Needle No. 2; Tatting Pin No.
3, and a small Shuttle_.

For Cushions, Antimacassars, and Couvre-Pieds, use _Double Berlin
Wool; Gold-Colored Wool or Filoselle; Steel Penelope Needle No. 0, or
Ivory No. 10 Bell Guage; Tatting Pin or Mesh which measures No. 9,
Bell Guage_.

For Dress and Mantle Trimmings, Headdresses, &c., use _Andalusian Wool
or Netting Silk; and Gold Twine or Tatting Silk No. 2; Penelope Needle
No. 3; Tatting Pin, No. 2_.


FIRST STRIPE OF DIAMONDS.

1st DIAMOND--With the gold twine or silk work a diamond as page 4; and
for the 1st round--With the light green wool and crochet needle
commence in one of the pearl loops of the diamond, work 4 chain and 1
plain in the next pearl; repeat 11 times more, and fasten off, always
knotting the ends together.

2nd round--With the dark green commence in a loop of the light green,
which is between the 2nd and 3rd pearls of one of the ovals, work 6
chain, miss 4 and 1 plain in the next 4 chain; repeat all round;
fasten off.

2nd DIAMOND--Work as the 1st, but in the 2nd round make only 11 loops
of chain, and for the 12th, work 3 chain, take the 1st diamond and
join to the centre of the 6th loop of 3 chain, 1 plain; fasten off.

Work as the last diamond until the length required is made.

THE STARS.--With the gold work an Octagon Star as page 4, then with
the mauve wool and crochet needle commence in one of the pearl loops
of the star, work (6 chain and 1 plain in each pearl, 4 times), and
for the 5th loop, 3 chain; take the last diamond and join to the
centre of the 2nd loop of it, 3 chain, 1 plain in the next pearl; work
3 loops more as the last, joining first to the 1st loop of the
diamond, and then to the next two loops of the next diamond; fasten
off.

Repeat this Star between the Diamonds.


SECOND STRIPE OF DIAMONDS.

1st DIAMOND.--Work a Diamond as in the 1st Stripe, but in the 2nd
round make only 8 loops of chain, and for the 9th loop, 3 chain, join
to the 3rd loop of the last diamond, 3 chain, 1 plain in the next loop
of the 1st round; then work 2 loops more the same, joining to the next
two loops of the star; and for the 12th loop, 6 chain, 1 plain, fasten
off.

2nd DIAMOND.--As the 1st, but in the 2nd round, make only 5 loops of
chain, and for the 6th loop, 3 chain, join to the 12th loop of the
last diamond, 3 chain, 1 plain as before; work 5 loops more as the
last, joining them to the next 2 loops of the star, then to the next
loop of the diamond of the 1st stripe, and then to the next 2 loops of
the 2nd star; 6 chain, 1 plain; fasten off.

Repeat the last diamond to the end of the Stripe. Then work the Stars
and the 2nd Stripe of Diamonds until the width is made.

THE EDGE, (TATTING).--Fill the shuttle with gold, keep the work on the
wrong side and commence in a loop of one of the diamonds to the left
of the one already joined, and for a + Small [OE]illet, commence a
loop, work 5 double stitches, draw it close; then join to the next
loop of the next diamond, and for the large [OE]illet commence a loop,
work 2 double, then (1 pearl and 2 double 5 times), draw it nearly
close, and join to the next loop of the diamond. Work 3 large
[oe]illets more the same, joining after each; then repeat from + all
round. At the corners it will require 7 large [oe]illets.




ANTIMACASSAR, CUSHION, SQUARE DOYLEY, ETC.

DESIGN No. 5.


_Colours--Azoff Blue, Black or White, and 2 Shades of Magenta Wool;
the gold and other materials the same as No. 4._


THE DIAMONDS.

1st DIAMOND--With the gold twine or silk work a diamond as page 4, and
for the

1st round--With the light magenta wool and crochet needle commence in
one of the pearl loops of the diamond, work 4 chain and 1 plain in the
next pearl; repeat 11 times more, and fasten off, always knotting the
ends together.

2nd round--With the dark magenta commence in one of the loops of the
1st round, work 6 chain, miss 4, 1 plain in the next loop; repeat all
round and fasten off.

Work as many more Diamonds as required for the size.


THE STARS.

With the gold make an Octagon Star, as page 4, and for the

1st round--With white or black wool commence in a pearl loop of the
star, work 5 chain and 1 plain in each of the 8 pearl loops; fasten
off.

2nd round--With blue wool commence in a loop of the last round, work 7
chain, miss 5 and 1 plain in the 5 chain; repeat all round and fasten
off.

Work as many Stars as will be required.


THE JOINING.

1st STRIPE--With the gold take a diamond and commence in a loop of
chain over the centre of one of the ovals of it, + work 4 chain, 1
plain in the next loop of chain, then 1 chain; take a star and join to
the centre of one of the blue loops of it, 1 chain, 1 plain in the
same loop of the diamond as before, 4 chain, 1 plain in the next loop,
1 chain, join to the next loop of the star, 1 chain, 1 plain in the
same loop as before, 4 chain, 1 plain in the next loop; take another
diamond and work 1 plain in one of the loops over an oval of it; 4
chain, 1 plain in the next loop of the 2nd diamond, 1 chain, join to
the next loop of the star, 1 chain, 1 plain in the same loop of the
diamond as before, 4 chain, 1 plain in the next loop, 1 chain, join to
the next loop of the star, 1 chain, 1 plain in the same loop as
before, 4 chain, 1 plain in the next loop, 1 _chain_, 1 plain in the
same loop as before. Repeat from + until the length required is made,
at the end omit the last 1 chain and 1 plain; and to form the

2nd STRIPE--Take another Diamond and work 1 plain in a loop over an
oval of it, then repeat from + in the 1st Stripe, making the first
four joinings to the last blue star, and after the "1 _chain_" in
italics, join to the 1 chain between the 2 plain of the opposite
diamond of the 1st stripe; at the end of the stripe fasten off.

3rd STRIPE--Is worked as the 1st Stripe, commencing in the 6th loop of
the last diamond counting from the last gold stitch, and continuing to
the end of the 2nd Stripe.


THE EDGING.

1st round--With the gold commence in a loop of chain of one of the
diamonds, work 4 chain, miss 6 and 1 plain in the next loop; repeat
all round, but where the diamonds join omit the 4 chain and work
another plain stitch in the next loop.

2nd round, White or Black--Commence in the stitch between the
diamonds, work 5 chain, miss 5, 1 plain in each loop of the 1st round,
but between the diamonds omit the 5 chain, and work another plain in
the next loop as before.

3rd round, Blue--Commence between the diamonds, 6 chain, miss 5 and 1
plain in the next loop, 6 chain, 1 plain in the same loop as the last;
repeat all round, omitting the chain between the diamonds as before.
Fasten off.




VANDYKE SLEEVE.

DESIGN No. 6.


_Materials--2 skeins each of Blue and Gold-color Netting Silk;
Walker's Penelope Crochet Needle No. 3-1/2. For the Tatting, a
Shuttle, and Ring and Pin No. 3._

The foundation of the Sleeve is composed of Brussels net.


THE STARS.

With the gold make 19 Stars as page 4.

THE WRISTBAND--With the blue silk work the same as the Wristband in
Sleeve No. 1.

THE LARGE STARS--With the blue silk make 4 chain. Take a gold star and
work 1 plain in a pearl loop of it, then 7 chain and 1 plain in each
of the 7 pearl loops, 3 chain, 1 single in the 1st stitch of the 4
chain, then (10 chain, miss 7 and 1 plain in the 7 chain, 6 times), 5
chain; take the Band and join to the 1st loop of the 6th star of it, 5
chain, 1 plain as before, 5 chain, join to the next loop of the 5th
star, 5 chain, 1 plain; fasten off.

2nd LARGE STAR--Work as the last, joining it to the 2nd and 1st loops
of the 4th star.

3rd LARGE STAR--As the last, joining it to the 1st loop of the 3rd
star of the Band, and then to the next loop of the 2nd star.

4th LARGE STAR--As the last, but making only 5 loops of 10 chain; then
5 chain, join to the 2nd loop of the 1st large star, 5 chain. 1 plain
as before, 10 chain, 1 plain, 5 chain, join to the 5th loop of the 2nd
large star, 5 chain, 1 plain; fasten off.

5th LARGE STAR--As the 4th, joining first to the 2nd loop of the 2nd
large star, and then to the 5th loop of the 3rd large star.

6th LARGE STAR--As the 4th joining it to the 4th and 5th large stars.

Work 5 Small Stars as the 1st Star in the Wristband, and tack them on
the net as in the Engraving.




ROUND DOYLEY.

DESIGN No. 7.


_Materials--2 shades of Green Single Berlin Wool, Penelope Needle, No.
2. For the Stars, Gold Tatting Twine, or a skein of Crochet Silk,
Tatting Pin No. 3, and a small Shuttle._


THE STARS.

With the gold work 12 Octagon Stars as page 4.

1st STAR, 1st round--With the light green wool and crochet needle
commence in a pearl loop of one of the stars, work 5 chain and 1
plain in each of the 8 pearl loops; fasten off.

2nd round--With the dark green commence in one of the light green
loops, work (7 chain, miss 5 and 1 plain in the next loop 8 times);
fasten off.

Work the other 11 Gold Stars the same.

CENTRE DIAMOND--With the gold commence in the centre of the 1st loop
of chain of one of the stars, work 4 chain, miss 6, 1 plain in the
next loop; take another star, work 1 plain in the first loop of it,
then 4 chain, 1 plain in the next loop; take a third star and work 1
plain in the 1st loop of it, 4 chain, 1 plain in the next loop; take a
4th star and work 1 plain in the 1st loop of it, 4 chain, 1 plain in
the next loop, then join to the 1st stitch to make it round; fasten
off.

JOINING CIRCLE--With the gold commence in one of the loops of a 5th
star, work (6 chain, miss 7 and 1 plain in the next loop 5 times),
then 4 chain, miss 7, 1 plain in the next loop; take one of the four
stars already joined and work 1 plain in the 7th loop of it, 4 chain,
miss 7, 1 plain in the next loop of the 4th star, then 1 plain in the
next loop of the next star of the four centre stars, 4 chain, miss 7,
1 plain in the next loop of the same star. Take a 6th star and work 1
plain in a loop of it, 4 chain, 1 plain in the next loop of the 6th
star, then missing the last 20 gold stitches join to the plain stitch
after the 5th loop of the 5th star; then on the 6th star work (6
chain, miss 7 and 1 plain in the next loop, 5 times), 4 chain, miss 7,
1 plain in the next loop; then 1 plain in the next loop of the 4
centre stars, 4 chain, miss 7, 1 plain in the next loop; take another
star and work 1 plain in a loop of it, 4 chain, miss 7, 1 plain in the
next loop, then miss the last 15 gold stitches and join to the plain
stitch after the 5th loop of the 6th star. Repeat from the
commencement of the circle, and fasten off.

LIGHT GREEN CIRCLE--Commence in the 1st 6 chain of the gold circle,
work 4 chain, miss 4, 1 plain in the next 6 chain, 4 chain, 1 plain in
the same 6 chain as the last; repeat twice more; then 4 chain, miss
4, 1 plain, and between the stars miss 6, 1 plain in the next 6 chain;
repeat from the commencement of the circle, and fasten off.

DARK GREEN CIRCLE--Commence in the 1st loop of the last circle, work
(5 chain, miss 4 and 1 plain in the 4 chain 6 times), then between the
stars miss 6, 1 plain in the next 4 chain; repeat all round, and
fasten off.




ROUND DOYLEY.

DESIGN No. 8.


_Materials--White, Mauve, and Green Single Berlin Wool; Penelope
Needle No. 2. For the Stars, Gold Tatting Twine or a skein of Crochet
Silk, Tatting Pin No. 3, and a small Shuttle._


THE STARS.

With the gold make 17 Octagon Stars as page 4.

_The Mauve Centre Star_--With the mauve wool and crochet needle
commence in one of the pearl loops of a gold star, and to form a
Point, work 5 chain, turn, and on these 5 chain miss 2, 1 plain, 2
treble; then work 1 plain in the next pearl loop. Repeat 7 times more,
and fasten off on the right side of the crochet.

1st GREEN STAR--Commence in a pearl loop of another gold star, work 5
chain and 1 plain in the next pearl loops 7 times; then 3 chain, join
to the top of one of the points of the centre star, 2 chain, 1 plain
in the 1st pearl loop; fasten off.

1st WHITE STAR--Commence as before, work 5 chain and 1 plain in the
next pearl loops, 5 times; 3 chain, join to the centre of the 2nd loop
of the green star, 2 chain, 1 plain in the next pearl, 3 chain. Join
to the 1st loop of the green star, 2 chain. 1 plain in the next
pearl, 3 chain, join to the next point of the centre star, 2 chain; 1
plain in the next pearl; fasten off.

2nd GREEN STAR--Work as the White Star, joining to it.

Repeat the White and Green Stars alternately until there are eight of
them. In working the last, the 5 chain and 1 plain is only to be made
three times, and the two last loops joined to the 1st star to make it
round.

2nd MAUVE STAR--Work as the centre star until there are 6 points; and
for the 7th Point--4 chain, join to the 3rd loop of a white star; and
on the 4 chain, miss 1, 1 plain, 2 treble, then 1 plain in the next
pearl. Work the 8th Point the same as the 7th, joining it to the next
loop of the green star; fasten off.

3rd MAUVE STAR--Work as the last, joining it first to the 3rd loop of
the green star and then to the white star. Work the same for 6 Stars
more.

1st GOLD CIRCLE--Commence on the top of the 2nd point of a mauve star,
work 5 chain and 1 plain in the next points of the star 4 times, then
3 chain, 1 plain in the centre loop of the small star, 3 chain, 1
plain in the 1st point of the next mauve star, then 6 chain, join to
the centre of the last 5 chain of gold, work 3 plain in the 6 chain,
then 2 chain, 1 plain on the second point of the mauve star. Repeat
all round, and fasten off.

WHITE CIRCLE--Commence on the centre of the 3 plain between the stars,
work 3 chain, miss 3, 1 plain in the gold stitch over the 2nd point of
the star, + 4 chain, miss 2, 2 treble, both in the centre stitch of the
5 gold chain, 4 chain, miss 2, 1 plain on the gold stitch over the
next point of the star. Repeat from + twice more, then 3 chain, 1
plain in the centre of the gold 3 plain. Repeat from the commencement
of the circle all round, and fasten off.

2nd GOLD CIRCLE--Commence at the 1 plain between the stars, 3 chain,
miss 6, 1 plain in the 4 chain of the last circle (5 chain, miss 4 and
1 plain in the 4 chain of last circle 5 times), 3 chain, miss 6, 1
plain in the centre stitch over the 3 plain gold. Repeat from the
commencement all round.

MAUVE CIRCLE--Commence in the 1st 3 chain of the last circle between
the stars, work (6 chain, miss 5 and 1 plain in the 5 gold chain 6
times), 1 chain, miss 3, 1 plain in the 3 chain. Repeat all round, and
fasten off.




ROUND DOYLEY.

DESIGN No. 9.


_Materials--White and Magenta Single Berlin Wool, Penelope Needle No.
2. For the Stars, Gold Twine or a skein of Crochet Silk, Tatting Pin
No. 3, and a small Shuttle._


CENTRE DIAMOND.

With the gold work a Diamond as page 4.

1st round--With the magenta wool and crochet needle commence in one of
the pearl loops of the diamond, work 3 chain and 1 plain in each of
the twelve pearl loops; fasten off.

2nd round--With white wool commence in one of the three chains between
the ovals of the diamond, work 4 chain, 1 plain in the same 3 chain; 2
chain, miss 1, 1 plain in the next 3 chain; 4 chain, miss 1, 1 plain
in the next 3 chain; 2 chain, miss 1, 1 plain in the next 3 chain;
repeat 3 times more, and fasten off.

With the gold work 16 Sexagon Stars as page 4.

1st WHITE STAR--Commence in a pearl loop of one of the gold stars,
work (5 chain and 1 plain in the next pearl loops 5 times), 3 chain,
take the diamond and join to the centre of the 4 chain over one of the
ovals of it, 2 chain, 1 plain in the 1st pearl; fasten off.

Work 3 Stars more the same, always joining over the ovals of the
diamond.

1st MAGENTA STAR--Commence in a pearl loop of a gold star, work (5
chain and 1 plain in the next pearls 3 times), 3 chain, join to the
1st loop of chain of a white star, 2 chain, 1 plain in the next pearl,
3 chain, join to the next 4 chain of the diamond, 2 chain, 1 plain in
the pearl, 3 chain, join to the next loop of the 2nd white star, 2
chain, 1 plain in the pearl; fasten off.

2nd MAGENTA STAR--Commence in a pearl of a star, work (5 chain and 1
plain as before 4 times), 3 chain, join to the 2nd loop of chain of
the 1st white star, which is to the left of the magenta star, 2 chain,
1 plain as before, 3 chain, join to the next loop of the magenta star,
2 chain, 1 plain; fasten off.

3rd MAGENTA STAR--Work as the last star, making the first joining to
the 1st loop of the 1st magenta star, and the second joining to the
next white star.

Repeat these 3 Magenta Stars 3 times more, that is, between each of
the white stars.

Then with the gold, work 8 Octagon Stars, as page 4.

1st LARGE MAGENTA STAR--Commence in a pearl loop of one of the stars,
work (6 chain and 1 plain in a pearl loop 5 times), 3 chain; take the
3rd magenta star, which is to the left of a white one, and join to the
1st loop of it, 3 chain, 1 plain as before, 3 chain, join to the loop
of the white star, 3 chain, 1 plain, 3 chain, join to the 4th loop of
the next magenta star, 3 chain, 1 plain; fasten off.

Work 3 Stars more the same.

1st GOLD CIRCLE--Commence in the centre loop of the 1st Sexagon Star,
work 3 chain, 1 plain in the next loop of the next Sexagon Star, then
(5 chain and 1 plain in the next loops of the stars 10 times); 3
chain, 1 plain in the centre loop of the 1st star; repeat from
commencement and fasten off.

LARGE WHITE STAR--Commence in a gold star, work (6 chain and 1 plain 4
times), 3 chain, join to the centre of the 2nd 5 chain of the last
circle, 3 chain, 1 plain in the next pearl, 3 chain, join to the next
5 chain, 3 chain, 1 plain, 3 chain, join to the next 5 chain, missing
the two loops between the stars; 3 chain, 1 plain, 3 chain, join to
the next 5 chain, 3 chain, 1 plain; fasten off.

Work 3 stars more the same, leaving 6 loops of the gold between them.

2nd GOLD CIRCLE--Take the last loop of a white star and commence in
the gold loop to which it was joined, work (5 chain, miss 5 and 1
plain in a white loop 4 times), 5 chain, 1 plain in the gold loop to
which the next white loop was joined, (5 chain, miss 5 and 1 plain in
a gold loop 7 times); repeat from the commencement of the circle.

WHITE CIRCLE--Commence in the 1st loop of gold, (5 chain, miss 5 and 1
plain in the next gold loops 4 times), (2 chain, miss 5, 1 plain in
the next gold loops twice); repeat all round.

MAGENTA CIRCLE--Commence in the 1st 2 chain of last round, 1 chain, 1
plain in the next 2 chain, then (6 chain, miss 5 and 1 plain in the
next white loops 5 times); repeat and fasten off.




ROUND DOYLEY.

DESIGN No. 10.


_Materials--Blue and White Single Berlin Wool; Penelope Needle No. 2.
For the Stars, Gold Twine or a skein of Crochet Silk, Tatting Pin No.
3, and a small Shuttle._


With the gold work 9 Octagon Stars as page 4.

WHITE CIRCLE--With the wool and crochet needle commence in one of the
pearl loops of a gold star, work 5 chain and 1 plain in each of the 8
pearl loops; fasten off. Repeat the same round the other 8 stars.


CENTRE STAR.

BLUE CIRCLE--Commence in a white loop of one of the stars, work 7
chain, miss 5 and 1 plain in the next white loop; repeat all round,
and fasten off.

1st GOLD CIRCLE--Commence in one of the blue loops, and to form a
Point, work 5 chain, turn, and on these 5 chain, miss 2, 1 plain, 1
treble, 1 long; then miss 7, 1 plain in the next blue loop; repeat all
round and fasten off.


CIRCLE OF STARS.

1st BLUE CIRCLE--Take one of the white and gold stars and commence in
a loop of it, work (7 chain, miss 5 and 1 plain in the next loop 7
times), 4 chain; take the centre star and join to one of the gold
points of it, 3 chain, 1 plain in the next loop; fasten off.

2nd BLUE CIRCLE--Take another star and commence in a loop of it (7
chain, miss 5 and 1 plain 5 times), 4 chain, take the centre star and
join to the next gold point to the left of the last star, 3 chain, 1
plain in the next loop, 4 chain, join to the next blue loop of the
star, 3 chain, 1 plain as before, 4 chain, join to the next blue loop,
3 chain, 1 plain; fasten off. Repeat as the 2nd circle 6 times more,
but in working the 8th Circle, the 7 chain and 1 plain must be made
only 3 times, and the two loops joined to the 1st star to make it
round.

2nd GOLD CIRCLE--Commence in the 1st unattached blue loop of one of
the stars, work (4 chain and 1 treble 4 times, all in the centre loop
of the blue star), then 4 chain, miss 5, 1 plain in the next blue
loop; and to form a Point, work 5 chain, turn, miss 2, 1 plain, 1
treble, 1 long; then 1 plain in the next blue loop; repeat all round
and fasten off.

WHITE CIRCLE--Commence in one of the gold points, work 5 chain, 1
plain in the 4 gold chain, 5 chain, miss 4, 1 plain in the next 4
chain; 5 chain, miss 4, 1 treble in the next 4 chain then 5 chain, 1
treble in the same 4 chain as before, (5 chain, miss 4 and 1 plain in
the 4 chain twice), 5 chain, 1 plain in the next point. Repeat and
fasten off.

BLUE CIRCLE--Commence in the 1st 5 chain, work (5 chain, miss 5 and 1
plain in the 5 chain 6 times), then 2 chain, miss 5, 1 plain in the
next 5 chain. Repeat and fasten off.




ANTIMACASSAR, SQUARE DOYLEY, ETC.

DESIGN No. 11.


_Colours--Magenta and Green, Azoff Blue and White, or any two colours
that contrast; the gold and other materials the same as No. 4._


With the gold work as many Octagon Stars (page 4) as will be required
for the size.

1st MAGENTA STAR--With the wool and crochet needle commence in a pearl
loop of one of the stars, work 5 chain and 1 plain in each of the 8
pearl loops; fasten off. Work several Stars the same.

1st GREEN STAR--Take one of the gold stars and commence in a pearl
loop of it, + 3 chain, take a magenta star and join to the centre of
one of the loops of it, 2 chain, 1 plain in the next pearl, 3 chain,
join to the next loop of the magenta star, 2 chain, 1 plain in the
next pearl; repeat from + 3 times more, joining on another magenta
star each time: fasten off. Four magenta stars will now be joined, the
green being in the centre.

2nd GREEN STAR--The same as the last, but joining on only two more
magenta stars, and making the other joinings to the last two stars of
the four already joined. Repeat the Green Star.


LONDON: PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND GREENING, GRAYSTOKE PLACE, FETTER LANE,
HOLBORN, E.C.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: A. Goater, Taylor & Goater, Nottingham.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Golden Stars in Tatting and Crochet, by
Eleonore Riego de la Branchardiere

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOLDEN STARS IN TATTING ***

***** This file should be named 28457.txt or 28457.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/4/5/28457/

Produced by Janet Keller, Susan Skinner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
