The Project Gutenberg eBook, Our Children, by Anatole France, Illustrated
by Boutet de Monvel


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Our Children
       Scenes from the Country and the Town


Author: Anatole France



Release Date: May 5, 2009  [eBook #28695]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR CHILDREN***


E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from digital material generously made available
by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 28695-h.htm or 28695-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/28695/28695-h/28695-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/28695/28695-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/ourchildrenscene00fran





OUR CHILDREN

by

ANATOLE FRANCE

Illustrations by Boutet de Monvel


[Illustration]


OUR CHILDREN

Scenes from the Country and the Town

by

ANATOLE FRANCE

Illustrated in color and in pen and ink by Boutet de Monvel.







[Illustration]

New York
Duffield & Company
1923

Copyright, 1917, by
Duffield & Company

Printed in U. S. A.




CONTENTS


    FANNY                       1

    THE FANCY DRESS PARTY      10

    THE SCHOOL                 12

    MARY                       14

    PAN-PIPES                  16

    ROGER'S STABLE             18

    COURAGE                    20

    CATHERINE'S DAY            22

    THE LITTLE SEA DOGS        24




OUR CHILDREN

FANNY


I

[Illustration]

Fanny started off early one morning, like little Red Riding Hood, to
visit her grandmother, who lives quite at the other end of the village.
But Fanny did not stop like Red Riding Hood to pick hazel nuts. She went
straight on her way, and did not see any wolf.

Even when quite a long way off, she could see her grandmother seated on
her stone doorstep, the dear grandmother who smiled with her toothless
mouth and opened her old arms thin as grape vines to welcome her little
granddaughter. Fanny's heart was filled with delight at the prospect of
spending a whole day at her grandmother's. And her grandmother, having
no longer any cares or tasks, but living like a cricket near the fire,
is happy too to see the little daughter of her son, a sweet reminder of
her youth.

They have many things to say to each other, for one of them is at the
end of life's voyage and the other is just setting out upon it.

"You grow bigger every day, Fanny," says her grandmother, "and I am
getting littler. Just look! I need hardly stoop to press my lips to your
forehead. What difference does it make how old I am when I still have
youth's roses in your cheeks, Little Fanny."

[Illustration]

But Fanny is exploring for the hundredth time, with new joy, all the
curious things in the little house--the paper flowers blooming beneath
the glass globe, the old paintings of French generals in fine uniforms
overthrowing their enemies, the gold cups, some with handles and some
without, and grandfather's old gun which hangs on the chimney breast on
a nail from which grandfather himself fastened it--for the last time,
thirty years ago.

[Illustration: TREES AND GRASS AND FLOWERS AND LITTLE BIRDS THERE WERE
IN GRANDMOTHER'S YARD. FANNY DID NOT BELIEVE THERE WAS A PRETTIER YARD
THAN THIS IN ALL THE WORLD. SHE TAKES HER KNIFE FROM HER POCKET
PROMPTLY, AND CUTS HER BREAD AS THE VILLAGE PEOPLE DO.

_Printed in France_]

But the hours pass and the first thing one knows it's time to get
ready for the noonday dinner. Grandmother stirs up the wood fire that
has been slumbering quietly, and then she breaks some eggs in the black
tiled hearth, while Fanny watches with great interest the omelette and
bacon that turns gold and sings in the flame. Grandmother knows better
than any one how to make ham omelettes and tell stories. Fanny, seated
on the little stove, her cheek no higher than the table, eats the
steaming omelette and drinks sparkling cider. Grandmother, however, as
her habit is, eats standing near the corner of the hearth. She holds her
knife in her right hand, and in the other her snack spread on a crust of
bread. When they have finished, both of them, Fanny says:

"Grandmother, tell me the story of the blue bird."

And grandmother tells her story of the blue bird, how a wicked fairy
changed a beautiful young prince into a bird the color of the deep sky,
and of the great sorrow the princess felt when she saw the change and
beheld her lover flying all ruddy and dripping toward the window of the
tower in which she was shut up.

Fanny is very thoughtful when she hears this story.

"Was it a long, long time ago, Grandmother, that the blue bird flew
toward the tower where the princess was shut up?"

Grandmother replies that it was all a good while ago, those things, in
the days when animals could talk.

"Were you young then?" asks Fanny. "I wasn't born yet," says
Grandmother. And Fanny says to her: "I suppose a great many things
happened before you were born, didn't they, Grandmother?"

When they are through with their little talk Grandmother gives Fanny an
apple and some bread.

"Now run away, pet, and eat this in the yard."

And Fanny goes out into the yard, where there are trees and grass and
flowers and little birds.


II

[Illustration]

Trees and grass and flowers and little birds there were in
grandmother's yard. Fanny did not believe there was a prettier yard than
this in all the world. Already she takes her knife from her pocket to
cut her bread as the village people do. She crunches into the apple
first thing of all and then begins to munch her bread. Just then a
little bird comes fluttering near her, then another, and then a third,
then ten, twenty, thirty of them, all circling about her, some of them
gray, some red, some brown and green and blue, all of them so pretty,
and all singing. Fanny could not guess at first what they all wanted.
But soon she perceives that they are after bread, like little beggars.
They are indeed beggars, but they are also songsters. Fanny was too
kindhearted to refuse them bread when they paid for it with songs. She
was only a little farmer's girl and she did not know that once upon a
time, in a country where white rocks bathe in the blue sea, a blind old
man earned his bread singing songs to the shepherds, songs that learned
men admire even to this day. But her heart heard the little birds, and
she threw them crumbs that scarcely touched the earth before they caught
them in the air.

[Illustration: SOON SHE PERCEIVED THAT THEY WERE AFTER BREAD, LIKE
LITTLE BEGGARS. THEY WERE INDEED BEGGARS, BUT THEY WERE ALSO SONGSTERS.
FANNY WAS TOO KINDHEARTED TO REFUSE THEM BREAD WHEN THEY PAID FOR IT
WITH SONGS.

_Printed in France_]

Fanny saw that the birds were not all of the same nature. Some of them,
ranged in a circle at her feet, waited till the crumbs fell near their
little beaks. They were philosophers. There were others who circled
neatly around her in the air, and one even who came and actually pecked
at the slice of bread in her hand.

[Illustration]

She crumbled the bread and threw the crumbs to them all. But they didn't
all eat it, because as Fanny could see, the boldest and cleverest left
nothing for the others.

"It isn't right," she said to them; "each one must take his turn."

They hardly heard her. One is not always heard when one speaks of
justice. She tried in every way to favor the weaker ones, and encourage
the timid, but she did not succeed with them. No matter how she tried
she fed the fat at the expense of the thin. It made her very sorry:
simple child that she was, she did not know it was the way of the world.

Crumb by crumb the slice of bread all went to the little singers, and
Fanny went into her grandmother's house again quite pleased.


III

At evening the grandmother took the basket in which Fanny had brought
the cake to her, and filling it with plums and raisins put the handle
over her arm, and said:

"Now, Fanny, run straight home, and don't stop to amuse yourself and
play with any of the village scamps. Be a good girl always. Good-bye."

[Illustration]

She kissed her, but Fanny stood a while very thoughtful at the
threshold.

"Grandmother," said she.

"Yes, Fanny dear."

"I should like so much to know," said Fanny, "if there were any fine
princes among the birds that ate my bread."

"No," said grandmother; "nowadays there are no more fairies, and the
birds are all creatures."

"Good-bye, Grandmother."

"Good-bye, Fanny."

[Illustration: AS SHE WENT ON HER WAY WITH EVEN STEPS AND LOOKING VERY
WISE AND GOOD SHE HEARD A PRETTY SOUND OF BIRDS CRYING BEHIND HER, AND
TURNING HER HEAD SHE RECOGNIZED THE LITTLE BEGGARS THAT SHE HAD FED WHEN
THEY WERE HUNGRY. THEY HAD BEEN FOLLOWING HER. "GOOD NIGHT, LITTLE
FRIENDS," SHE CALLED TO THEM. "GOOD NIGHT. IT'S TIME TO GO TO BED NOW.
GOOD NIGHT."

_Printed in France_]

And Fanny went away across the fields toward home. She could see the
chimney of her house smoking in the distance against the red sunset sky.

On the way she met Antony, the gardener's little boy, who said to her:
"Are you coming to play with me?"

"No," replied Fanny, "I'm not coming to play with you because my
grandmother told me not to stop. But I'll give you an apple, because I
like you very much."

Antony took the apple and kissed Fanny nicely.

[Illustration]

They loved each other dearly, these two. He would say: "She's my little
wife." And she would agree: "He's my little man."

As she went on her way with even steps and looking very wise and good
she heard a pretty sound of birds crying behind her, and turning her
head she recognized the little beggars that she had fed when they were
hungry. They had been following her.

"Goodnight, little friends," she called to them. "Good night. It's time
to go to bed now. Good night!"

And the little winged singers replied in cries that meant, in bird
language: "God keep you safe."

Thus Fanny came back home to her mother, followed by bird music in the
air.


IV

[Illustration]

Fanny went to bed before candle time in a little bed that a
cabinet-maker of the village had made a long time ago, with a frame of
walnut and graceful banisters. Long ago the good man had gone to sleep
in the shadow of the church, under a black cross, in a bed with a
coverlet of grass, for Fanny's bed had been her grandfather's when he
was a little baby, and the little girl slept now in the same place as
her ancestor. She slept. A cotton curtain with a pattern of roses
protected her slumbers. She slept and dreamed. She saw the blue bird
flying toward the castle of his love. He looked as beautiful as a star,
but she did not expect for a moment to see him perch on her shoulder.
She knew she was not a princess, and couldn't expect visits from a
prince changed into a bird the color of deep sky. However, she told
herself that all birds are not princes, that the birds in the village
are villagers and among them may well enough have been some country boy
changed into a sparrow by a wicked fairy, and having a love for Fanny in
his heart beneath his gray feathers. Such an one, if she should find
him, she would give not only bread, but cakes and kisses too. She would
like to see him. And now she does see him! He comes and perches on her
shoulder. He's just a little cock sparrow, not fine or rare, but very
alert and lively. To tell the truth his appearance is a little tousled:
one tail feather is missing, lost in a fight, that is unless he has
encountered some bad fairy in the village. Fanny suspects him of having
a bad head; but she is a girl, and it does not worry her that her cock
sparrow has a bad head if his heart is good. She pets him and calls him
pretty names. All of a sudden he grows bigger and longer: his wings
change into two arms. He turns into a boy, and Fanny recognizes Antony
the gardener's little boy, who says to her: "Let's come and play
together."

[Illustration: SHE JUMPS OUT OF BED IN HER NIGHTGOWN, OPENS THE WINDOW,
AND THERE IN THE GARDEN, AMONG THE ROSES AND GERANIUMS AND MORNING
GLORIES, ARE THE LITTLE BIRD BEGGARS, THE LITTLE MUSICIANS OF LAST
NIGHT, SITTING IN A ROW ON THE GARDEN FENCE AND GIVING HER A MORNING
SONG TO PAY FOR THEIR CRUMBS OF BREAD.

_Printed in France_]

She claps her hands with joy and starts to go--then suddenly wakes up.
She rubs her eyes. No sparrow, no Antony! She is alone in the little
room. The dawn, shining through the little flowered curtain, spreads its
innocent light on the bed. She hears the birds singing in the garden.
She jumps out of bed in her nightgown, opens the window, and there in
the garden, among the roses and geraniums and morning glories, are the
little bird beggars, the little musicians of last night, sitting in a
row on the fence rail and giving her a morning song to pay for their
crumbs of bread.

[Illustration]




THE FANCY DRESS PARTY


[Illustration]

Here are little boys like knights of old, and little girls who are
heroines. Here are shepherdesses with dresses looped up in paniers and
garlands of roses, and shepherds in satin suits with knots of ribbons on
their shepherd's crooks. Dear me, what pretty white sheep such shepherds
must have in their flocks! And here are Alexander and Zarius, Pyerhus
and Merope, Mahomet, Harlequin, Scapin, Blaise and Babette. They have
come from everywhere, from Greece and Rome and blue distant countries,
to dance with one another. It's a fine thing, a fancy dress ball, and
very agreeable for an hour or two to be a great king or an illustrious
princess. It has no inconveniences. You have not to sustain your
costumes by actions or even by your words.

It would not be very amusing to wear a hero's dress if you had to show
his courage too. The hearts of heroes are torn in all sorts of ways. For
the most part they are famous through their misfortunes. If any of
them lived happily they are not remembered now. Merope never cared about
dancing. Pyerhus was wickedly killed by Orestes just as he was going to
be married, and the innocent Zarius perished at the hands of the Turk
his friend, a philosophical trick indeed. As to Blaise and Babette the
song says that their pangs of love were never-ending.

[Illustration: AND HERE ARE ALEXANDER AND ZAIRA, PYRRHUS AND MEROPE,
MAHOMET, HARLEQUIN, SCAPIN, AND THE PASTORAL BLAISE AND BABETTE. THEY
HAVE COME FROM EVERYWHERE, FROM GREECE AND ROME AND THE BLUE COUNTRIES,
TO DANCE WITH ONE ANOTHER.

_Printed in France_]

In the same way, if it comes to Pierrot and Scapin, you know as well as
I that they were perfect rascals, and that people more than once tweaked
their ears for them. No, glory comes very high, even the glory of an
Harlequin. On the other hand it's very nice to be a little boy or girl
and masquerade as these old characters. That's why there's no fun like a
fancy ball where the costumes are fine enough. You feel grand just by
wearing them. See how well all the pretty company wears its plumes and
cloaks. What a fine and gallant air they have, how well they look and
how much old time grace they can display.

[Illustration]

On the balcony, in the part that you don't see in the picture, the
musicians tune their violins with a sweet and plaintive sound. The music
of a quadrille in the grand style is open on the leader's desk. They are
going to strike up this piece. At the first notes of it our heroes and
masks will step forth and dance.




THE SCHOOL


I declare I believe Miss Genseigne's school is the best school for girls
anywhere in the world. I maintain that those who believe and say the
contrary are false and misleading. All Miss Genseigne's scholars are
well-behaved and diligent. There is nothing so pleasant as to see them,
with their little stiff bodies and their heads so erect. You would say
they were so many little bottles into which Miss Genseigne was pouring
knowledge.

[Illustration]

Miss Genseigne sits up perfectly straight on her platform; very grave
and sweet. Her braided head band and her black cape inspire respect and
sympathy.

Miss Genseigne, who is very well educated, is giving a lesson in
arithmetic to her little pupils. She says to Rose Benoit: "Rose Benoit,
if I take four from a dozen how many have I left?"

"Four!" replies Rose Benoit. Miss Genseigne is not quite satisfied with
this answer.

"And you, Emmeline Capel, if I take four from a dozen how many have I
left?"

"Eight," replies Emmeline Capel.

[Illustration: ALL MISS GISSING'S SCHOLARS ARE WELL-BEHAVED AND
DILIGENT. THERE IS NOTHING SO PLEASANT AS TO SEE THEM, WITH THEIR LITTLE
STIFF BODIES AND THEIR HEADS SO ERECT.

_Printed in France_]

"You hear, Rose Benoit? I have eight left," adds Miss Genseigne.

Rose Benoit lapses into a deep revery. She hears Miss Genseigne say she
has eight left, but whether it is eight hats or handkerchiefs, or for
that matter eight apples or pens she does not know. The thing worries
her for quite a long while. She understands very little about
arithmetic.

On the other hand she is very well up in sacred history. Miss Genseigne
has not a single scholar who can describe the garden of Eden or Noah's
Ark like Rose Benoit. Rose Benoit knows all the flowers of paradise and
all the animals that were in the ark. She knows as many fables as Miss
Genseigne herself. She knows all the story of the Crow and the Fox, of
the Ass and the Little Dog, of the Cock and the Pullet. It never
surprises her to hear it said that the animals talked in the olden days.
She would be more surprised to hear that they did not talk any more. She
is quite sure that she understands the language of her big dog Tom, and
of little Cheep her canary. And she is right, too. Animals have always
talked, and always will talk, but they talk only to their friends. Rose
Benoit loves them and they love her. That's why she understands them. To
be understood there is nothing like sympathy.

[Illustration]

To-day Rose Benoit has recited her lesson without a fault. She receives
a good mark. Emmeline Capel too receives a good mark for her recitation
in arithmetic.

When the class is out she tells her mother about her good mark, and then
she asks: "What's the use of a good mark, Mamma?"

"A good mark is no use at all," says her mother. "That's just the reason
why you should be proud to have it. You will know one day, child, that
the rewards men think the most of are those that give them honor rather
than profit."




MARY


Little girls have a natural desire to gather flowers and stars. But
stars won't let themselves be picked and so seem to teach little girls
that in this world there are some desires that are destined never to be
satisfied.

Miss Mary went out in the park, where she discovered a basket of
hortensias. She knew that the flowers of hortensias are pretty, and so
she picked one. It was very hard to pick too. She seized the plant in
both hands, at great risk of sitting down hard when the stem broke. She
was very pleased and proud at what she'd done. But her nurse saw her:
and scolded and darted at Miss Mary, seizing her by the arm. To make her
do penance she did not put her in the dark closet this time, but posted
her underneath a great chestnut tree, in the shade of a big Japanese
umbrella.

[Illustration]

There Miss Mary sits, surprised and astonished, and thinks it all over.
Her flower in her hand, with the stripes of the umbrella making rays
around her, she looked like some queer little foreign idol.

[Illustration: THE LITTLE PENITENT, PERFECTLY STILL BENEATH HER SHINING
FRAME, LOOKS AROUND HER AT THE SKY AND THE EARTH. THEY ARE LARGE, THE
EARTH AND SKY, AND CAN AMUSE A LITTLE GIRL FOR A WHILE. BUT THE
HYDRANGEA INTERESTS HER MORE THAN ANYTHING.

_Printed in France_]

Her nurse said: "Mary, I forbid you to carry that flower in your mouth.
If you disobey me your little dog Toto will eat your ears up for
you"--with which warning she departed.

The little penitent, perfectly still beneath her shining frame, looks
around her at the sky and the earth. They are large, the earth and sky,
and can amuse a little girl for a while. But the hortensia flower
interests her more than anything. She reflects: "A flower should smell
good." And she raises nearer to her nose the beautiful rosy, blue
tempered ball. She tries to smell it but can smell nothing. She is not
clever at smelling perfumes. Not so very, very long ago she used to
breathe over the roses instead of sniffing them in. We must not laugh at
her for that: one can't learn everything at once. Besides, she might
have had, like her mother, a very subtle sense of smell that could smell
nothing. The flower of the hortensia has no odor. That is why one grows
tired of it, in spite of its beauty. But Miss Mary thinks: "This flower
is made of sugar, maybe." With that she opens her mouth wide, and starts
to raise the flower to her lips.

[Illustration]

A cry recalls her. Yap!

It is the little dog Toto, who, darting round a border of geraniums,
comes and sets himself, his ears straight up, before Miss Mary and looks
at her warningly with his round bright eyes.




PAN PIPES


Three children of the same village, Peter, James and John, are standing
up looking off at something. Ranged side by side they form together the
outline of a Pan Pipes with three reeds. Peter, at the left, is a big
boy; John, at the right, is small; James, between the two, may consider
himself big or little, according as he regards his neighbor on the left
or right. It is a situation upon which I invite you to meditate, for it
is yours, as it is mine or any one in the world's. Each one of us, just
like James, may consider himself great or small, according as his
neighbor cuts a big or little figure in the world.

[Illustration]

That's why one can truthfully say that James is neither big nor little;
that he is both big and little. It is as God wishes it to be. He is the
last reed of all in our living Pan Pipes.

[Illustration: THREE CHILDREN OF THE SAME VILLAGE, PETER, JAMES AND
JOHN, ARE STANDING UP LOOKING OFF AT SOMETHING. RANGED SIDE BY SIDE THEY
FORM TOGETHER THE OUTLINE OF A PAN PIPES WITH THREE REEDS.

_Printed in France_]

But what are his two comrades doing? They are gazing off
into space, all three of them. At what? At something which has
disappeared below the horizon, something which they can't see any more
but still see in their mind's eye, and which still dazzles them. Little
John has forgotten his eel-skin whip with which just now he incessantly
beat up his wooden shoes in the dusty road. Peter and James, their hands
behind their backs, gaze stolidly.

What they saw, all three, was the wagon of a travelling peddler, a wagon
drawn by his own arms, which had stopped in the village street.

The peddler pulled back the oilcloth that covered his wagon, and in a
minute any quantity of knives, scissors, little guns, puppets, soldiers
of wood and lead, cologne bottles, cakes of soap, pictures, a thousand
dazzling things were exposed to the admiring view of all the men, women
and children in the town. The servants from the farm and the mill were
pale with longing; Peter and James were red with joy. Little John lost
his tongue. Everything in the wagon seemed beautiful and precious to
them. But the most desirable things of all were the unknown articles of
which they could not guess either use or reason: as for example the
bowls polished like mirrors that reflected your face comically deformed;
paintings of Epinol, covered with faces more lively than reality; needle
cases and mysterious boxes that contained unimaginable things.

[Illustration]

The women made purchases of guimpes and lace by the yard, and the
peddler rolled the black oilcloth back again over the riches in his
wagon, and putting himself in the traces once more started on his
further way; and now the wagon and the waggoner have disappeared below
the horizon.




ROGER'S STABLE


It's a great care to keep up a stable. The horse is a delicate animal
and requires a thousand attentions. If you don't believe me ask Roger.

Just now he is grooming his beautiful chestnut, who would be the pearl
of wooden horses, the flower of the Black Forest steeds, if he had not
lost half his tail in battle. It's a matter of some moment with Roger to
know if wooden horses' tails grow in again.

[Illustration]

Again having made believe groom his horses, Roger gives them some
imaginary oats, for it is an understood thing that the little wooden
animals on which small boys ride through the land of dreams are always
fed in this way.

Behold Roger starting out for his ride. He has mounted his horse. Even
though the poor beast has no more ears, and all his mane looks like an
old broken comb, Roger loves him. Why?

[Illustration: JUST NOW HE IS GROOMING HIS BEAUTIFUL CHESTNUT, WHO WOULD
BE THE PEARL OF WOODEN HORSES, THE FLOWER OF THE BLACK FOREST STUD, IF
HE HAD NOT LOST HALF HIS TAIL IN BATTLE.

_Printed in France_]

It would be hard to say. This red horse was a present from a poor man,
and maybe there is some secret grace in the gifts of the poor. Remember
our Lord who blessed the widow's mite.

Roger is gone. He is quite far away. The flowers on the carpet already
seem to him like flowers in tropical, distant countries. A pleasant
journey, little Roger! May your hobby horse conduct you safely through
the world. May you never have a hobby more dangerous. Little or great we
all ride. Who has not his hobby?

[Illustration]

Men's hobbies ride like mad through all the ways of life; one makes a
bid for glory, another for pleasure; many of them jump from high places
and break their rider's necks. I hope when you are grown up, little
Roger, you will bestride two hobby horses that will keep you always in
the right path: one lively, the other quiet; both beautiful--courage and
kindness.




COURAGE


Louisa and Frederick have gone to school along the village street. The
sun is shining and the two children sing. They sing like the nightingale
because their hearts are gay. They sing an old song that their
grandmothers sang when they were little girls and which one day their
children's children will sing, for songs are frail immortals which fly
from lip to lip throughout the ages. The lips that sing them lose their
color and are silent one after the other, but the songs are always on
the wing. There are songs that come down to us from a time when all the
men were shepherds and all the women shepherdesses--which tell us of
nothing but sheep and wolves.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Louisa and Frederick sing, their mouths round as flowers, and their song
rises shrill and clear on the morning air. But suddenly the sound
catches in Frederick's wind pipe.

What power invisible has strangled the song in this schoolboy throat?
It is fear. Each day inevitably, at the end of the village street, he
meets the dog that belongs to the big butcher, and each day his heart
shrivels and his legs grow weak at the sight. It is not the pig man's
dog ever attacks or menaces him. He just sits peaceably on the
threshold of his master's shop. But he is black, and his eyes are
fixed and bloodshot, and sharp, white teeth show beneath his baboon
jaws. He is terrifying. And then he sits there in the midst of all
sorts of meat cut up for pies and hashes, and seems the more terrible
on that account. Of course no one supposes he has been the cause of
all this carnage, but he presides over it. He's a fierce dog, the pig
man's. And so, as far away as Frederick can see him in the doorway, he
picks up a big stone, following the example of men he has seen arm
themselves in this way against surly dogs, and goes hugging the wall
of the house across the street from the pig butcher's closely.

[Illustration: THEY SING LIKE THE NIGHTINGALE BECAUSE THEIR HEARTS ARE
GAY. THEY SING AN OLD SONG THAT THEIR GRANDMOTHERS SANG WHEN THEY WERE
LITTLE GIRLS AND WHICH ONE DAY THEIR CHILDREN'S CHILDREN WILL SING, FOR
SONGS ARE FRAIL IMMORTALS WHICH FLY FROM LIP TO LIP THROUGHOUT THE AGES.

_Printed in France_]

This time he has followed this practice, but Louisa mocks at him.

She has taken none of these violent precautions, against which people
always arm themselves more violently still. No, she doesn't even speak
to him, but keeps on singing, only changing her tone in such a mocking
way that Frederick grows red to his ears. Then there is great travail in
his little head. He understands that he must fear fear as much as
danger. And he is afraid to be afraid.

[Illustration]

And so, when school is out, and he sees the pig man's dog again, he
stalks by that astonished animal proudly.

History adds that he looked at Louisa out of the corner of his eye to
see if she were looking. It must be admitted that with no ladies or
young maidens in the world men might be less brave.




CATHERINE'S DAY


Five o'clock, and Miss Catherine is receiving her dolls. It is her day
at home. The dolls don't talk: the little genius that gave them smiles
refused them speech. It must have been done for the good of the world,
for if dolls could talk people would listen to no one else. However, the
circle to-day is very animated. Miss Catherine talks for her visitors as
well as for herself. She makes the questions and gives the answers.

[Illustration]

"How are you, madame?--Very well, madame. I broke my arm yesterday
morning going to buy some gloves, but it's cured now.--Oh, that's good.
And how is your little girl?--She has the whooping cough.--Oh, what a
pity! Does she cough much?--No, it's a whooping cough that has no cough.
You know, madame, I had two children last week?--Really? That makes
four.--Four or five, I don't know which. When you have so many you get
confused.--You have a very pretty dress on.--Oh, I have still nicer ones
at home--Do you go to the theatre?--Every evening.--I went yesterday
to the opera, but Punch did not act, because a wolf ate him up.--I, my
dear, go to a dance every day.--That's very amusing.--Yes, I wear a blue
dress and I dance with all the young people, the very nicest, generals,
princes, confectioners.--You are as pretty as heart could wish to-day,
little one.--It's the springtime.--Yes, but too bad it snows.--I like
the snow, because it's so white.--Oh, but this is black snow.--Yes,
isn't it a horrid kind?"

[Illustration: THE LITTLE GENIUS THAT GAVE THEM SMILES REFUSED THEM
SPEECH. IT MUST HAVE BEEN DONE FOR THE GOOD OF THE WORLD. FOR IF DOLLS
COULD TALK PEOPLE WOULD LISTEN TO NO ONE ELSE. HOWEVER, THE CIRCLE
TO-DAY IS VERY ANIMATED. MISS CATHERINE TALKS FOR HER VISITORS AS WELL
AS FOR HER SELF.

_Printed in France_]

This fine conversation Miss Catherine maintains with much skill. I have
only one fault to find with it: she talks always to the same caller, who
is pretty and has a pretty dress. That is wrong. A good hostess is
equally polite to all her guests. She treats them all with
consideration, and if she shows any preference it is for those who are
most modest and least fortunate. One must flatter the unfortunate: it is
the only flattery that is permissible. But Catherine has found this out
herself. She has found the true politeness--which comes from the heart.
She serves tea to her guests, and remembers every one. Indeed, she
insists especially with those dollies that are poor or unhappy or shy
that they take some invisible cakes or sandwiches made of dominos.

[Illustration]

Catherine will one day be a hostess in whose drawing room no doubt
politeness of the real old-fashioned kind will flourish.




THE LITTLE SEA DOGS


[Illustration]

They are little sailors, real little sea dogs, every one. Look how they
pull their caps down low on their necks so that the sea wind, misty and
whistling, shall not split their ears with its terrible groanings. They
wear suits of heavy wool, for protection against the cold and damp.
Their made-over pea jackets and breeches were their elder brothers'
before them. Their garments in turn were made out of their fathers' old
suits. Their hearts too are of the same stuff as their father's--simple,
patient and full of courage. Since they came into the world they have
been simple and big of heart. Who has made them so? After God and their
fathers and mothers it is the ocean. The ocean teaches sailors courage
through danger--a rude benefactor.

[Illustration: THEY LOOK FOR THE BOATS THAT SAILED FOR THE FISHING
GROUNDS, AND THAT MUST NOW SOON APPEAR ON THE HORIZON LOADED TO THE
GUNWALES, AND BRINGING BACK UNCLES AND OLDER BROTHERS AND FATHERS.

_Printed in France_]

That is why the little sailors, in their childish hearts, bear such
brave thoughts. Stooping over the parapet of the stockade they look
off over the sea. They see more than the thin blue line of boundary
between the sky and sea. The ocean does not interest them for its fine
changing colors, nor the sky for the huge grotesque shapes of its
clouds. What they see off there in space is something more real to them
than the tint of waters and the face of the clouds: something that they
love. They look for the boats that sailed for the fishing grounds, and
that must now soon appear on the horizon bringing back besides their
full cargoes of shrimps, uncles and older brothers and fathers. The
little fleet will soon show its white or weather-stained sails down
there, between the ocean and God's good sky. To-day the sky is clear,
the ocean still: the tide brings the fishers gently to the shore. But
the ocean is a changeable old veteran, who takes many forms and sings in
many tones. To-day he smiles: to-morrow he will scold beneath his foamy
beard. He will capsize the ablest ships, ships that have been blest by
the priest with songs and Te Deums: he will drown his sturdiest patrons.
It is his fault that one sees, outside the doors where the chaluts dry
in the baskets, so many women wearing the black caps of widows.

[Illustration]




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's Note:

    Inconsistencies in names between the body text and illustration
    captions--Zarius/Zaira, Pyerhus/Pyrrhus, Gissing's/Genseigne's,
    hydrangea/hortensia--have been retained as they appear in the
    original publication.

    Changes have been made as follows:

    Page 2

       exploring for the hundreth _changed to_
       exploring for the hundredth

    Page 6

       but Fanny stoood _changed to_
       but Fanny stood

    Page 12

       And you, Emmaline Capel, if I _changed to_
       And you, Emmeline Capel, if I

    Page 12 insert

       Full stop added to the end of the caption,
       THEIR HEADS SO ERECT.

    Page 13

       would be more suprised _changed to_
       would be more surprised

    Page 15

       "A flower should smell good" And _changed to_
       "A flower should smell good." And

    Page 21

       and sees the more terrible _changed to_
       and seems the more terrible

    Page 24

       Full stop added to the end of the caption,
       OLDER BROTHERS AND FATHERS.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR CHILDREN***


******* This file should be named 28695.txt or 28695.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/8/6/9/28695



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

