The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Story of Tim, by Anonymous, Translated by
George Borrow


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Story of Tim


Author: Anonymous



Release Date: May 12, 2009  [eBook #28770]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF TIM***


Transcribed from the 1913 Thomas J. Wise pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                             THE STORY OF TIM


                      _Translated from the Russian_
                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION
                                   1913




INTRODUCTION


The Russians have three grand popular tales, the subjects of which are
thievish adventures.  One is called the _Story of Klim_, another is
called the _Story of Tim_, and the third is called the _Story of Tom_.
Below we present a translation of the _Story of Tim_.

That part of the tale in which Tim inquires of the drowsy Archimandrite
as to the person to whom the stolen pelisse is to be awarded, differs in
no material point from a portion of a tale narrated in the Turkish
story-book of the lady and the forty vizirs.  The concluding part,
however, in which we are told how Tim's comrades twice stole the pig from
him, and how he twice regained it, is essentially Russian, and is
original.




THE STORY OF TIM


In a certain village there lived an old man who had lost almost the whole
of his hair, partly from age, and partly from the friction of his fur
cap, which he never laid aside, either by day or night.  He had a
helpmeet as ancient as himself, but who differed from him in having a
hump.  Our story, however, does not relate to them, but to a son of
theirs, called Timoney, who was a sharp lad enough, but who had learnt
nothing but to play on the fife.  The old man thinking that music,
however sweet, would never fill the belly, and that it was quite
impossible to live on an empty stomach, determined to have the boy taught
some trade, but ere fixing on what it should be, he deemed it expedient
to consult his old woman on the subject; and, accordingly, requested her
opinion, adding that he would wish to see the boy either a blacksmith, or
a tailor.

"No!" cried the old woman.  "I'll have him neither the one nor the other.
The blacksmith by always going amidst fire and soot is so begrimed that
he looks rather like a devil than a man.  Would you make a monster of
him?  As for a tailor--I don't deny that tailoring is a rare art, but
sitting doubled up, in a little time brings on a consumption."

"Then what would you make of him?" cried the old man.

"Make of him?" said she; "why a goldsmith or a painter, or something
similar."

"And do you know," said the old man, "how much money one must lay down to
have him bound either to a goldsmith or a painter?  Why he would swallow
up all we have, or more."

They disputed so long, that they almost came to blows.  The old woman had
already armed herself with the fire-pan.  At last, however, they agreed
to bind their son to the first master they should meet, whatever his
trade might be.  So the old man, taking with him the sum of ten roubles,
which he destined for the binding his son out as an apprentice, set out
leading Tim by the hand.  It happened, that the first people he met were
two born brothers, who maintained themselves by levying taxes on the
highway, and besides being tax-gatherers were expert tailors, using their
needles so adroitly, that with a stitch or two they could make for
themselves a coat or mantle; in plain language, they were robbers.

The old man, after saluting them, said:

"Are you craftsmen?"

"Oh, yes! and very skilful ones," replied the highwaymen.

"And what may be your trade?" inquired the old man.

"What is that to you?" they replied.

"Why, I wish to give my son a trade," said the old man.

"Oh! we will take your son with pleasure," they cried, "and instruct him
in what we understand ourselves.  As for our trade, we have particular
reasons for not telling you what it is.  Know, however, that you will
never repent entrusting your son to our hands."

"But what must I give you for your trouble, good people?" cried the old
man.

"Why, you can hardly give us less than twenty roubles," replied the
craftsmen.

"O! where shall I get so much money?" cried the old man.  "I have but ten
roubles in all the world."

"O, very well! hand them over," said they, "We'll take them, though they
be only ten roubles; we don't wish to higgle with you."

The old man gave them the money, and begging them to spare no pains in
teaching his son their trade, he trudged homeward.  Remembering, however,
that it was necessary to know where they dwelt, he turned back, and went
along with them.  After some time, they came to a house in a great wood,
where the thieves lived with a young girl who was their sister.  On their
arrival they took off from Tim his rough country craftan and breeches,
and clothed him in habiliments of the very best quality, and regaled the
old man with plenty of capital wine.  So the old man, after staying an
hour or two, left their dwelling quite happy and content.

As soon as it was night, the thieves thought that they would give Tim his
first lesson in their art, so arming him in the same manner as they did
themselves, with a pike and a long knife, they went out on the road.  As
soon as they were got there, one of the masters said to the pupil:

"Suppose, now, any people were to attack us, what would you do, Tim?"

"What's this for?" said he, grasping his knife; "with this I don't care a
straw for a dozen men."

"It will be of service to you, no doubt, some time or other," said the
thieves; "it will be best, however, that your first essay be in something
not quite so dangerous as levying taxes on the highways generally is.  We
will go to the neighbouring monastery, and break into the treasury of the
Archimandrite; we shall find there quite enough to enrich us."

"O! just as you please," cried Timoney; "where the master goes the
'prentice follows."

So away they went, all three in high spirits.  When they came to the
cloister, they flung an iron hook upon the roof of the treasure-room, and
Tim climbing up by means of a rope which was attached to it, at once gave
proof that he was anything but a dull pupil.  In a trice a hole was made
in the roof--the chests in the treasury were broken open--money-bags were
piled up upon the floor, and then flung down out of the treasury upon the
ground, where they were gathered up by Tim's comrades, and what had taken
a long series of years to acquire was in a few minutes lost to the
proprietor.  All would have gone on in the smoothest manner in the world,
provided Tim had been anything of a fool.  But he knew perfectly well
that his friends below would take all the money by virtue of being his
instructors, and would not give him a share; he, therefore, took from out
of a chest the cloak of the Archimandrite, which was made of the choicest
sable-skin, and flung it out of the hole upon the ground, intending it
for himself, but had no sooner done so, than one of his masters took it
up and put it on.  Tim then, letting himself down began to feel for the
cloak upon the ground, for it was very dark.

"What are you groping for?" said his masters.

"I am seeking for my cloak," answered Tim.

"What do you mean by calling it yours?" said one.  "I have put it on
myself.  How should it belong to you?"

"Because," said Tim, "I took it for myself, and not for you."

"But we are your instructors," said they, "consequently whatever you take
belongs to us."

"O! no," cried he, with a loud voice.  "I got the money for you, it is
true, and no share of that belongs to me, but the cloak is mine."

"You lie, fool," said they.

"O! if you talk in that manner," said Tim, "I will go and ask the
Archimandrite, and the one to whom he adjudges it shall have the cloak."

"Let's see how you'll go to work," said they.

"You shall," said he, "only don't be afraid."

Thereupon, he went to the window of the cell in which the Archimandrite
and his servant slept, the latter a very lively lad, and a great teller
of pleasant stories.  Tim peeping in, perceived that the Archimandrite
was asleep, and snoring like a hedgehog, but the lad was awake.  Tim
tapped with his finger against the window, whereupon the lad got up and
looked out.  But before he could ask who was there, Tim seized him by the
ears with both his hands, dragged him out, and tying a handkerchief over
his mouth, delivered him to the custody of his associates.  Then climbing
softly in at the window, he lay down in the young fellow's bed.  After
waiting a little time, he fell to arousing the Archimandrite.  His
masters who were listening under the window, hearing him try to awake the
ghostly man, begged him to come out.

"What are you about?" they cried.  "The devil take you and the cloak,
too!  Woe is us, that we ever came here with you!"

But without attending to them, he cried:

"Father Archimandrite! your reverence!"

"Hey! what!" replied the Archimandrite, in a voice half-suffocated with
sleep.

"I have had a very bad dream," said Tim, "I dreamt that thieves broke
into the treasure-room, and carried away all the money, and also your
cloak of sable.  He who climbed up to steal the treasure, took the cloak
out of the box, intending it for himself.  He gave his comrades all the
money, and only wanted to keep the cloak; but they refused to give it
him.  Now, who do you say should have the cloak?"

The Archimandrite imagining that it was his chamberlain who was speaking
to him, cried:

"Oh, how tiresome you are!  People are sure to dream at night.  Pray
don't trouble my rest."

Tim was silent for a time, but no sooner had the Archimandrite fallen
asleep again, than he again awoke him, crying:

"Whom is the cloak to be given to?"

"Oh, you tiresome fellow!" cried the Archimandrite.  "Well, if you must
know, I would have it given to him who broke in.  But, pray, let me
sleep."

Tim troubled him no more, and as soon as he was fast asleep got out of
the window and took possession of the cloak without any opposition from
his teachers, who extolled his cleverness to the skies.  They set out for
home, and the first thing they did when they arrived was to hide their
booty.  After this adventure, Tim's masters frequently discoursed with
each other about their apprentice.  His address and cleverness pleased
them exceedingly.  They hoped that he would be of the greatest assistance
to them, and in order to keep him with them, they determined to give him
their sister, who was rather a pretty girl.  When they declared their
mind to Tim, he was far from refusing so good a match, for they offered
plenty of money with her.  So he married, and ceasing to be their
apprentice, became their brother-in-law and comrade.

After some time his wife said to him:

"It is bad living with these brothers of mine who are thieves to the very
bone.  Moreover, you know the rhyme, 'Though the thief may thrive for
many a day, he becomes at last the hangman's prey.'  So it is my wish and
counsel that we separate from them at once and for ever, and go and live
at your father's house, where, though we may not be so rich, we shall at
any rate be in peace."

Tim approved of what she said, and communicated his intention to those
honest gentlemen--his brothers-in-law.  They were very much mortified at
what he told them, and endeavoured to persuade him to stay with them, but
in vain.  At last they said:

"We will let you go on the following conditions: we will give you a
swine, and if to-night we contrive to steal it from you, you shall pay us
two hundred roubles, or remain in our service till you have gained for us
that amount, and if we are unable to steal the swine, we will pay the
same sum to you."

"Very good," said Tim, "I will see whether you can steal her away from
me."

Then he loaded a cart with his property, and set off with his wife to the
house of his father.

As soon as he got home he mixed up in the trough a mess of barley-meal
and wine for the pig, who, after gorging herself with it, became
senselessly drunk.  Tim, then, dressing her in a sarafan or woman's long
night-gown, placed her on the petsch or stove in a corner, where she
stretched herself out and lay without motion.  He then went to bed with
his wife in the chamber above.  They were scarcely asleep when the
thieves arrived, and searched in every nook and corner round about the
house, but not finding what they were in quest of, they repaired to the
kitchen, and, listening, heard something snoring.  Forthwith one of them
crept in, and moving about softly touched the swine, but feeling the
nightgown at the same time, he jumped out of the kitchen almost
frightened out of his wits.

"Who are you?" cried his comrade.

"Your brother," he replied.  "Oh, I got into such a scrape.  The thing
which is snoring in the kitchen is the old beldame, Tim's mother.  I took
hold of her by the side, but so softly that I did not wake her, and such
a stench came from her that I really thought I should have fainted.  Now,
what to do I don't know--but, stay!  I will go and ask my sister where
the swine is.  Perhaps she will tell me whilst she is dozing."  He then
climbed softly on the top of the chamber, removed a board from the roof,
and, poking his sister gently with his stick, said: "Wife! where did we
put the sow?"

"Don't you remember," said she, "that we placed her in the kitchen, on
the petsch, dressed in a nightgown?"

No sooner did the thief hear this than he sprang like a madman from the
roof, and rushing into the kitchen, dragged off from the petsch the
drunken swine.  He and his brother then lugged her away from the house,
and when they had got to some distance, they tied her feet together, and
thrusting a stick under, they carried her off on their shoulders at full
trot.  This riding on a stick--which was very different from lying in a
cradle--soon brought the sow to her senses, who began to behave in a very
obstreperous and disagreeable manner, and the faster they went the more
obstreperous and disagreeable did she become.  The thieves now began to
repent of the expedient which they had devised for bringing back Tim to
their society; but, fearing to lose two hundred roubles, they bore all
the nuisance of the swine, and hastened on their way.

Tim awoke a little time after the swine had been carried away, and being
quite drowsy clean forgot what he had done with her.

"Wife! wife!" cried he, jogging his bedfellow on the side with his elbow,
"where did we hide the swine?"

"How long is it," said she, "since you asked me that?  Did I not tell you
that she lies on the petsch in the night-gown?"

"When did you tell me that?" cried he.

"Not long ago," said she; "but no doubt you were drowsy."

"Now, farewell to our swine!" said Tim.  "No doubt they have taken her
away."  And springing from the bed he ran into the kitchen, but found no
swine upon the petsch.  Tim felt his knees quake under him.  But the
prospect of living with the thieves, as their slave, compelled him to
cast aside all useless despondency, and to seek a remedy for the
misfortune.  Flinging himself upon his horse he galloped off in the hope
of overtaking the travelling swine, in which he succeeded.  He came up
with the party just as they were entering the wood, and rode gently after
them; the night, which was exceedingly dark, preventing the thieves from
seeing him.  By this time they were excessively weary, and wishing to
take some rest, they flung the swine upon the ground in a rage, and one
of them said:

"What a weight!  It's enough to kill one.  Yet one must not mind toiling
when two hundred roubles are at stake."

Quoth the other: "I would almost give up the roubles for a horse or
something to carry this load of carrion for us."

Meanwhile, Tim, leading his horse some way aside, tied it to a tree, then
drawing softly nigh he began to make a jingling with the bridle and
stirrups which he had taken off the horse.  One of the thieves hearing
the jingling said:

"Listen, brother! some horse is going about entangled in its harness."

As Tim still continued jingling, one of them fully persuaded that there
was a horse close at hand set off to catch it, whilst the other rested
himself sitting close by the swine.  Tim moved on before the thief, who
followed, expecting every moment to lay his hand upon the strayed horse.
Imperceptibly he led him to a great distance, and then leaving him
hurried back to the other.  When he was not more than twenty yards from
him he stopped and cried:

"Pray, brother, come and help me to untie this accursed brute."

The fellow, imagining that it was his brother, got up to help him,
saying:

"A pretty baby you, who cannot untie a horse."

Tim, however, pretending that he could not hold the horse, moved away,
and led him very far from the road.  Then leaving him to seek his brother
who was in vain pursuit of the horse he ran to where the swine lay, and,
seizing hold of her, placed her upon his horse and carried her off.  As
soon as he got home he tied her by the leg to the hand-mill which stood
in the middle of the kitchen, round which he strewed a quantity of rye.
Forthwith the swine fell to eating the rye, and, by moving round, set the
mill a grinding.  Tim then flung himself upon his bed, and without any
care resigned himself to sleep.

In the meanwhile the thieves met each other.

One said, "Where's the horse?"

The other answered, that he had never caught a glimpse of it.

"Then why did you call me to help you to untie it?" said the first.

"You are mad!" replied the other; "I never spoke a word."

"Well, then," said his comrade, "it is plain that fellow Tim has played
us a trick.  Let us go and see whether the swine is where we left her."

But, after seeking her for a long time in vain, they concluded that their
brother-in-law had carried her back with him home, whereupon they set off
for Tim's house with all speed.

On arriving at the court-yard, they went to the kitchen, and one of them
said:

"Brother, I am afraid we have lost our two hundred roubles.  The old
beldame, Tim's mother, is awake and up.  Don't you hear her getting the
mill in order?  She is going to grind.  However, I will go to my sister,
and ask her, as I did before, where the swine is hid; perhaps it is not
in the kitchen."

So he climbed up upon the roof as he had done before, and waking his
sister said:

"Wife, where is the swine?"

"You must be asleep," she replied; "have you forgotten that she is tied
to the hand-mill in the kitchen?"

The thief, having learnt where the swine was, ran to the kitchen, and
seizing his booty hastened away with his brother, saying:

"Master Tim has taught us a lesson; he will not deceive us again."

Shortly after this Tim awoke, and jumping up, ran to look after the
swine.  But on entering the kitchen, he perceived that she had been
stolen a second time.  Nothing now remained for him to do but to run and
overtake the thieves, and discover some means of deceiving them again.
He ran without any burden on his back, and besides, was all the fresher
for having rested, consequently he had no difficulty in overtaking the
tired thieves, who were carrying the swine between them.  He went softly
behind them till they came to the wood.

As soon as they had entered it one of the thieves said to his comrade:

"Let us rest awhile here."

But the other replied:

"No, brother; if Tim overtakes us here, he will trick us again by some
means or other.  But some way farther on you remember there is an empty
cottage, near the road, there we can rest without danger."

"Very good," said his comrade, "we will stop there."

Tim, hearing what they said, turned aside, and, getting before them,
daubed his face with clay; then, running as fast as he could to the
cottage, he sat down within the ruined petsch, holding in his hand a
brick.  He had not waited five minutes when they entered the cottage and
cast the swine down upon the floor.

"Now, brother," said one, "we have nearly finished the business, let us
smoke a pipe of tobacco."

"Capital!" replied the other, taking out his flint and steel; but though
he struck and struck, he could not make the tinder take light.  "Here's a
pretty affair," said he, "the tinder got damp as I ran amidst the dew of
the wood endeavouring to overtake that rascal Tim."

"Go to the mouth of the petsch," said the other, "perhaps a spark will
take hold of the soot."

The other went up to the petsch and began again to strike.  In the
meantime Tim, looking full at him, gnashed his teeth violently.  The
thief, hearing something gnashing, struck harder than before, and,
looking into the petsch by the light of the sparks, instantly fell to the
ground, for seeing the face of Tim he took him for the devil and was so
terrified that he could only utter with a broken voice:

"Oh, brother!--the devil!--the devil!"

Thereupon, Tim knocked violently upon the petsch, and hurled the brick at
the other thief, who made for the door, but, striking his forehead
against the lintel, he fell senseless.  Tim then seizing one of their
sticks began to belabour his brothers-in-law so lustily that they soon
recovered their recollection and betook themselves to flight.  Their legs
trembled so with the fright they were in that they stumbled more than
once; but Tim assisted them on their way by pelting them with bricks.
Having driven them off, he took the swine and carried her home, where he
arrived just as the day was beginning to break.

The first word which the thieves said on recovering their breath was
about the wager with their brother-in-law.

"Now," said they, "as the devil has run away with the swine, Tim cannot
produce her, so we will force him to come and live with us again."

Thereupon they set off straight for the house, because it was already
getting light; but on their arrival they found that they had lost their
wager, and that it was not the devil who had routed them in the deserted
cottage, but their brother-in-law.

"Oh, you precious rascal!" said they, "you nearly killed us with terror."

"There's no help, brothers," he replied, "you were thinking of taking two
hundred roubles from me, but now you have to pay them to me."

After some demur, he received the money from them, and began to live in a
highly respectable manner.

                                 LONDON:
               Printed for THOMAS J. WISE, Hampstead, N.W.

                   _Edition limited to Thirty Copies_.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF TIM***


******* This file should be named 28770.txt or 28770.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/8/7/7/28770



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

