The Project Gutenberg eBook, Letters to his mother, Ann Borrow, by George
Borrow, Edited by Thomas Wise


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Letters to his mother, Ann Borrow
       and Other Correspondents


Author: George Borrow

Editor: Thomas Wise

Release Date: May 13, 2009  [eBook #28784]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LETTERS TO HIS MOTHER, ANN
BORROW***


Transcribed from the 1913 Thomas J. Wise pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to Norfolk and Norwich Millennium Library,
UK, for kindly supplying the images from which this transcription was
made.





                                 LETTERS
                              TO HIS MOTHER
                                ANN BORROW
                         AND OTHER CORRESPONDENTS


                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION
                                   1913

               _Copyright in the United States of America_
           _by Houghton_, _Mifflin & Co. for Clement Shorter_.




LETTERS TO ANN BORROW
AND OTHER CORRESPONDENTS


LETTER I.
_To_ ANN BORROW.


                                                                    SPAIN,
                                       [_Post-mark February_ 9_th_, 1838.]

MY DEAR MAMA,

As I am afraid that you may not have received my last letter in
consequence of several couriers having been stopped, I write to inform
you that I am quite well.

I have been in some difficulties.  I was selling so many Testaments that
the Priests became alarmed, and prevailed on the government to put a stop
to my selling any more.  They were likewise talking of prosecuting me as
a Witch, but they have thought better of it.

I hear it is very cold in England.  Pray take care of yourself.  I shall
send you more in a few weeks.

                                                            God bless you,
                                                             My Dear Mama,
                                                                     G. B.



Letter II.
_To_ A Correspondent.


                                                                   OULTON,
                                                                LOWESTOFT,
                                                                  SUFFOLK.
                                                    _August_ 11_th_, 1843.

MY DEAR SIR,

Many thanks for your interesting and kind letter, in which you do me the
honour to ask my opinion respecting the pedigree of your island goblin,
_le feu follet Belenger_; that opinion I cheerfully give, with a promise
that it is only an opinion; in hunting for the etymons of these fairy
names we can scarcely expect to arrive at any thing like certainty.

I suppose you are aware that the name of Bilenger, or Billinger, is of
occasional though by no means frequent occurrence both in England and
France.  You have heard of Billings-gate, and of Billing-ham, the
unfortunate assassin of poor Percival.  Likewise of Billing-ton, all
modifications of the same root: Belingart, Bilings-home or Billing-ston.
But what is Billin_ger_?  Clearly that which is connected some way or
other with Billing.  You will find _ger_, or something like it, in most
European tongues--Boulan_ger_, horolo_ger_, tal_ker_ wal_ker_, ba_ker_,
bre_wer_, beg_gar_.  In Welsh it is of frequent occurrence in the shape
of _ur_ or _gwr_--hin_ur_ (an elder), her_wr_ (a prow_ler_); in Russian
the ger, gwr, ur, er, appears in the shape of _ik_ or _k_--Sapojgn_ik_, a
shoemaker, Chinobu_ik_, a man possessed of rank.  The root of all these,
as well as of _or_ in Senator, victor, etc., is the same as _ker_ or
_kir_; which means, Lord, master, maker, doer, possessor of something or
connected with something.

We want now to come at the meaning of Beling or Billing, which probably
means some action, or some moral or personal attribute.  Bolvile in
Anglo-Saxon means honest, Danish Bollig; Wallen, in German, to wanken or
move restlessly about; Baylan, in Spanish, to dance, connected with which
are to whirl, to fling, and possibly Walloon and Fleming.

Belenger therefore may mean a Billiger or honest fellow, or it may mean a
Walter-_ger_, a whirl_enger_, a flinger or something connected with
restless motion.

Allow me to draw your attention to the word "Will" in the English word
"Will of the wisp."   It must not be supposed that this "Will" is the
abbreviation of William; it is pure Danish, "Vild," pronounced "will,"
and signifies wild, "Vilden Visk; Vilden Visk," the wild or moving wisp.
I can adduce another instance of the corruption of the Danish "vild" into
"will."  The rustics of this part of England are in the habit of saying
"they are led will" (vild or wild), when from intoxication or some other
cause they are bewildered at night and cannot find their way home.  This
expression is clearly from the old Norse or Danish.  I am not at all
certain that "Bil" in Bilinger may not be this same "will" or "Vild," and
that the word may not be a corruption of Vilden, old or elder, wild or
flying fire.

It has likewise occurred to me that Bilinger may be derived from
"Volundr," the worship of the blacksmith or Northern Vulcan.

                                                          [GEORGE BORROW.]



LETTER III.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                           Constantinople.
                                                 _September_ 16_th_, 1844.

MY DARLING CARRETA,

I am about to leave Constantinople and to return home.  I have given up
the idea of going to Russia.  I find that if I go to Odessa I shall have
to remain in quarantine for fourteen days, which I have no inclination to
do; I am moreover anxious to get home, being quite tired of wandering,
and desirous of being once more with my loved ones.

This is a most interesting place, but unfortunately it is extremely dear.
The Turks have no inns, and I am here at an English one, at which, though
everything is comfortable, the prices are very high.  To-day is Monday,
and next Friday I purpose starting for Salonica, in a steamboat--Salonica
is in Albania.  I shall then cross Albania, a journey of about three
hundred miles, and get to Corfu, from which I can either get to England
across Italy and down the Rhine, or by way of Marseilles and across
France.  I shall not make any stay in Italy if I go there, as I have
nothing to see there.

I shall be so glad to be at home with you once again, and to see my dear
mother and Hen.  Tell Hen that I picked up for her in one of the bazaars
a curious Armenian coin; it is silver, small, but thick, with a most
curious inscription upon it.  I gave fifteen piasters for it.  I hope it
and the rest will get safe to England.  I have bought a chest, which I
intend to send by sea, and I have picked up a great many books and other
things, and I wish to travel light; I shall, therefore, only take a bag
with a few clothes and shirts.  It is possible that I shall be at home
soon after your receiving this, or at most three weeks after--I hope to
write to you again from Corfu, which is a British island with a British
garrison in it, like Gibraltar.

The English newspapers came last week.  I see those wretched French
cannot let us alone, they want to go to war; well, let them--they richly
deserve a good drubbing.  The people here are very kind in their way, but
home is home, especially such a one as mine, with true hearts to welcome
me.

Oh, I was so glad to get your letters; they were rather of a distant
date, it is true, but they quite revived me.  I hope you are all well,
and my dear mother.  Since I have been here I have written to Mr. Lord.
I was glad to hear that he has written to Hen.  I hope Lucy is well; pray
remember me most kindly to her, and tell her that I hope to see her soon.
I count so on getting into my summer-house again, and sitting down to
write; I have arranged my book in my mind, and though it will take me a
great deal of trouble to write it, I feel that when it is written it will
be first-rate.

My journey with God's help has done me a great deal of good--I am
stronger than I was, and I can now sleep.  I intend to draw on England
for forty or fifty pounds; if I don't want the whole of it, it will be
all the same.  I have still some money left, but I have no wish to be
stopped on my journey for want of it.  I am sorry about what you told me
respecting the railway, sorry that the old coach is driven off the road.
I shall patronise it as little as possible, but stick to the old route
and Thurton George.  What a number of poor people will these railroads
deprive of their bread.  I am grieved at what you say about poor M.  He
can take her into custody however, and oblige her to support the
children; such is law, though the property may have been secured to her,
she can be compelled to do that.

Tell Hen that there is a mosque here, called the mosque of Sultan
Bajazet; it is full of sacred pigeons; there is a corner of the court to
which the creatures flock to be fed, like bees, by hundreds and
thousands; they are not at all afraid, as they are never killed.  Every
place where they can roost is covered with them, their impudence is
great; they sprang originally from two pigeons brought from Asia by the
Emperor of Constantinople.  They are of a deep blue.

                                                   God bless you, dearest,
                                                                     G. B.



LETTER IV.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                                   OXFORD.
                                                  _February_ 2_nd_, [1846]

DEAR CARRETA,

I reached this place yesterday, and hope to be home to-night (Monday).  I
walked the whole way by Kingston, Hampton, Sunbury (Miss Oriel's place),
Windsor, Wallingford, &c.--a good part of the way by the Thames.  There
has been much wet weather.  Oxford is a wonderful place.  Kiss Hen, and
God bless you!

                                                          [GEORGE BORROW.]



LETTER V.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                          TUNBRIDGE WELLS,
                                                        _Tuesday evening_.
                                                                    [1846]

DEAR CARRETA,

I have arrived here safe.  It is a wonderful place, a small city of
palaces amidst hills, rocks, and woods, and is full of fine people.
Please to carry upstairs and lock in the drawer the little paper sack of
letters in the parlour; lock it up with the bank book, and put this along
with it--also be sure to keep the window of my room fastened and the door
locked, and keep the key in your pocket.  God bless you and Hen.

                                                          [GEORGE BORROW.]



LETTER VI.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                      _Tuesday afternoon_,
                                                                    [1848]

MY DEAR WIFE,

I just write you a line to tell you that I am tolerably well, as I hope
you are.

Everything is in confusion abroad.  The French King has disappeared and
will probably never be heard of, though they are expecting him in
England.  Funds are down nearly to 80.  The Government have given up the
income tax, and people are very glad of it.  I am not.  With respect to
the funds, if I were to sell out I should not know what to do with the
money.  J. says they will rise.  I do not think they will; they may,
however, fluctuate a little.

Keep up your spirits, my heart's dearest, and kiss old Hen for me.

                                                                     G. B.



LETTER VII.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                            53A PALL MALL.
                                                                    [1848]

DEAR CARRETA,

I hope you received my last letter written on Tuesday.

I am glad that I came to London.  I find myself much the better for
having done so, I was going on in a very spiritless manner.  Everybody I
have met seems very kind and glad to see me.  Murray seems to be
thoroughly staunch.  Cooke, to whom I mentioned the F. T. says that
Murray was delighted with the idea, and will be very glad of the 4th of
_Lavengro_.  I am going to dine with Murray today, Thursday.  W. called
upon me today.

I wish you would send me a blank cheque in a letter so that if I want
money I may be able to draw for a little.  I shall not be long from home,
but now I am here I wish to do all that's necessary.  If you send me a
blank cheque I suppose W. or M. would give me the money.  I hope you got
my last letter.  I received yours, and C. has just sent the two copies of
L. you wrote for, and I believe some engravings of the picture.  I shall
wish to return it by the packet if possible, and will let you know when I
am coming.  I hope to write again shortly to tell you some more news.
How is mother and Hen and how are the creatures?  I hope all well.  I
trust you like all I propose; now I am here I want to get two or three
things, to go to the Museum, and to arrange matters.

God bless you.

                                                          [GEORGE BORROW.]

Love to Mother and Hen.



LETTER VIII.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                             58 JERMYN ST,
                                                               ST. JAMES',
                                                                    [1848]

DEAR CARRETA,

I got here safe, and upon the whole had not so bad a journey as might be
expected.  I put up at the Spread Eagle for the night, for I was tired
and hungry.  I have got into my old lodgings as you see, those on the
second floor.  They are very nice ones with every convenience; they are
expensive it is true, but they are cheerful, which is a grand
consideration for me.  I have as yet seen nobody, for it is only now a
little past eleven.  I can scarcely at present tell you what my plans
are, perhaps tomorrow I shall write again.  Kiss Hen, and God bless you.

                                                                     G. B.



LETTER IX.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                             58 JERMYN ST,
                                                               ST. JAMES',
                                                              _Wednesday_,
                                                                    [1848]

DEAR CARRETA,

I was glad to receive your letter, I had expected one on Tuesday.  I am
upon the whole very comfortable, and people are kind.  I passed last
Sunday at Clapham with Mrs. Browne, I was glad to go there for it was a
gloomy day.  They are now glad enough to ask me.

I suppose I must stay in London through next week.  I have been invited
to two grand parties, and it is as well to have something for one's
money.  I called at the Bible Society--all remarkably civil, Joseph
especially so.  I think I shall be able to manage with my own Dictionary.
There is now a great demand for Morrison.

Yesterday I again dined at the Murray's, there was a family party--very
pleasant.  To-morrow I dine with an old schoolfellow.  Murray is talking
of printing a new edition {25} to sell for 5 shillings.  Those rascals
the Americans have it seems reprinted it, and are selling it for
_eighteen_ pence.  Murray says he shall print ten thousand copies; it is
chiefly intended for the Colonies.  He says the rich people and the
libraries have already got it, and he is quite right, for nearly three
thousand copies have been sold at 27_s._!  There is no longer the high
profit to be made on books there formerly was, as the rascals abroad
pirate the good ones, and in the present state of copyright there is no
help: we can, however, keep the American editions out of the Colonies,
which is something.

I have nothing more to say, save to commend you not to go on the water
without _I_; perhaps you would be overset; and do not go to the bridge
again, 'till I come.  Take care of Habismilk and Craffs.  Kiss the little
mare, and old Hen.

                                                          [GEORGE BORROW.]



LETTER X.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                                 PENQUITO,
                                                   _January_ 27_th_, 1854.

MY DEAR CARRETA,

I just write you a line to inform you that I have got back safe from the
Land's End.  I have received your two letters, and hope you received mine
from the Land's End.  It is probable that I shall yet visit one or two
places before I leave Cornwall.  I am very much pleased with the country.
When you receive this if you please to write a line _by return of post_ I
think you may; the Tredinnock people wish me to stay with them for a day
or two.  When you see the Cobbs pray remember me to them.  I am sorry
Horace has lost his aunt, he will _miss her_.  Love to Hen.

                                                      Ever yours, dearest,
                                                                G. BORROW.

(Keep this.)



LETTER XI.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                                PRESTEYNE,
                                                              RADNORSHIRE,
                                                         _Monday Morning_,
                                                                    [1854]

DEAR CARRETA,

I am just going to start for Ludlow, 18 miles, and hope to be at
Shrewsbury on Tuesday night, if not on Wednesday morning.  God bless you
and Hen,

                                                                J. BORROW.

When I get back I shall have walked more than 400 miles.



LETTER XII.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                            53A PALL MALL,
                                                                   LONDON.
                                                                    [1857]

DEAR WIFE CARRETA,

I arrived here at about five o'clock this morning.  Since I saw you I
have walked about 250 miles.  I walked the whole way from the North to
the South, then turning to the East traversed Glamorganshire and the
county of Monmouth, and came out at Chepstow.  My boots were worn up by
the time I reached Swansea, and I was obliged to get them new soled and
welted.  I walked every inch of the way.

I have seen wonderful mountains, waterfalls, and people.  On the side of
the Black Mountains I met a cartload of real Gypsies.  They were in a
dreadful rage, and were abusing the country right and left.  My last
ninety miles proved not very comfortable, there was so much rain.

Pray let me have some money by Monday, as I am nearly without any, as you
may well suppose, for I was three weeks on my journey.  I left you on a
Thursday, and reached Chepstow yesterday, Thursday evening.  I hope you,
my mother, and Hen are well.  I have seen M. and C.

                                                            God bless you,
                                                                    Yours,
                                                            GEORGE BORROW.

(_Keep this_)



LETTER XIII.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                                TRECASTLE,
                                                           BRECKNOCKSHIRE,
                                                              SOUTH WALES.
                                                    _August_ 17_th_, 1857.

DEAR CARRETA,

I write to you a few words from this place; tomorrow I am going to
Llandovery and from there to Carmarthen.  For the first three or four
days I had dreadful weather.  I got only to Worthen the first day, twelve
miles, on the next to Montgomery, and so on.  It is now very hot; but I
am very well, much better than at Shrewsbury.  I hope in a few days to
write to you again, and soon to be back to you.

God bless you and Hen.

                                                                G. BORROW.



LETTER XIV.
_To_ MARY BORROW.


                                                                INVERNESS,
                                                 _September_ 29_th_, 1858.

MY DEAR CARRETA,

I have got your letter, and glad enough I was to get it.  The day after
to-morrow I shall depart from here for Fort Augustus, at some distance up
the lake.  After staying a few days there, I am thinking of going to the
Isle of Mull, but I will write to you if possible from Fort Augustus.

I am rather sorry that I came to Scotland--I was never in such a place in
my life for cheating and imposition, and the farther north you go the
worse things seem to be.  And yet I believe it is possible to live very
cheaply here, that is if you have a house of your own and a wife to go
out and make bargains; for things are abundant enough, but if you move
about you are at the mercy of innkeepers and suchlike people.

The other day I was swindled out of a shilling by a villain to whom I had
given it for change.  I ought, perhaps, to have had him up before a
magistrate, provided I could have found one.  But I was in a wild place,
and he had a clan about him, and if I had had him up I have no doubt I
should have been outsworn.  I, however, have met one fine, noble old
fellow.  The other night I lost my way amongst horrible moors, and
wandered for miles and miles without seeing a soul.  At last I saw a
light, which came from the window of a rude hovel.  I tapped, at the
window, and shouted, and at last an old man came out.  He asked me what I
wanted, and I told him I had lost my way.  He asked me where I came from,
and where I wanted to go; and on my telling him he said I had indeed lost
my way, for I had got out of it at least four miles, and was going away
from the place I wanted to get to.  He then said he would show me the
way, and went with me for several miles over most horrible places.  At
last we came to a road where he said he thought he might leave me, and
wished me goodnight.  I gave him a shilling.  He was very grateful, and
said, after considering, that as I had behaved so handsomely to him he
would not leave me yet, as he thought it possible I might yet lose my
way.  He then went with me three miles farther, and I have no doubt that,
but for him, I should have lost my way again the roads were so tangled.
I never saw such an old fellow, or one whose conversation was so odd and
entertaining.  This happened last Monday night, the night of the day in
which I had been swindled of the shilling by the other; I could write a
history about those two shillings.

                                                          [GEORGE BORROW.]



LETTER XV.
_To_ MRS. MACOUBREY.


                                                                   OULTON,
                                                                LOWESTOFT.
                                                      _April_ 1_st_, 1874.

DEAR HENRIETTA,

I have received your letter of the 30th March.  Since I last wrote I have
not been well.  I have had a great pain in the left jaw, which almost
prevented me from eating.  I am, however, better now.

I shall be glad to see you and Dr. MacOubrey as soon as you can
conveniently come.  Send me a line to say when I may expect you.  I have
no engagements.

Before you come call at No. 36 to enquire whether anything has been sent
there.  Leverton had better be employed to make a couple of boxes or
cases for the books in the sacks.  The sacks can be put on the top in the
inside.  There is an old coat in one of the sacks in the pocket of which
are papers.  Let it be put in with its contents just as it is.  I wish to
have the long white chest and the two deal boxes also brought down.  Buy
me a thick under-waistcoat like the one I am now wearing, and a lighter
one for the summer.  Worsted socks are of no use--they scarcely last a
day.  Cotton ones are poor things, but they are better than worsted.

                                            Kind regards to Dr. MacOubrey.
                                                            God bless you!
                                                          [GEORGE BORROW.]

Return me this when you come.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
               Printed for THOMAS J. WISE, Hampstead, N.W.
                   _Edition limited to Thirty Copies_.




Footnotes:


{25}  Of _The Bible in Spain_.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LETTERS TO HIS MOTHER, ANN BORROW***


******* This file should be named 28784.txt or 28784.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/8/7/8/28784



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

