The Project Gutenberg EBook of Comments on the Taxonomy and Geographic
Distribution of Some North American Rabbits, by E. Raymond Hall and Keith R. Kelson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Comments on the Taxonomy and Geographic Distribution of Some North American Rabbits

Author: E. Raymond Hall
        Keith R. Kelson

Release Date: May 19, 2009 [EBook #28874]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAXONOMY SOME NORTH AMERICAN RABBITS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Greg Bergquist
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







Comments on
the Taxonomy and Geographic Distribution
of Some North American Rabbits

BY

E. RAYMOND HALL and KEITH R. KELSON

University of Kansas Publications
Museum of Natural History
Volume 5, No. 5, pp. 49-58
October 1, 1951

University of Kansas
LAWRENCE
1951


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard,
Edward H. Taylor, Robert W. Wilson

Volume 5, No. 5, pp. 49-58
October 1, 1951

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas

PRINTED BY
FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1951
[Illustration]
23-7436




Comments on the Taxonomy and Geographic Distribution of Some North
American Rabbits

BY

E. RAYMOND HALL AND KEITH R. KELSON


In preparing maps showing the geographic distribution of North American
lagomorphs, some conflicting statements in the literature have led us to
examine the pertinent specimens of the Florida cottontail and the
Audubon cottontail with results as given below. The study here reported
upon was aided by a contract between the Office of Naval Research,
Department of the Navy, and the University of Kansas (NR 161-791).
Unless otherwise indicated, catalogue numbers are of the United States
National Museum and most of the specimens are in the Biological Surveys
collection of the Fish and Wildlife Service. Grateful acknowledgment is
made to persons in charge of the collections for permission to use the
collections under their charge.


Sylvilagus floridanus similis Nelson

     1907. _Sylvilagus floridanus similis_ Nelson, Proc. Biol. Soc.
     Washington, 20:82, July 22.

Some confusion has existed concerning the subspecific identity of the
Florida cottontail in Nebraska because of the way in which Nelson
recorded specimens in his "The Rabbits of North America" (N. Amer.
Fauna, 29:fig. 11, and pp. 169-174, August 31, 1909). He (_op.
cit._:174) listed the following specimens under the western subspecies,
_S. f. similis_: Two topotypes (Nos. 87784 and 18738/25532) and of
course the type; the specimen (No. 116288) from the Snake River [= Snake
Creek of maps], 11 mi. NW Kennedy; two from Neligh (126074 and 151438);
and one (probably 18680/25410) from Kennedy. But, he listed (_op.
cit._:172) under _S. f. mearnsi_, the eastern subspecies, a specimen
(10721) from Brownlee, and two from Kennedy. One of the two from Kennedy
probably was the one that is recorded in the files of the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service as "identified by Cary. spec. in Univ. Nebraska". The
other, or third, specimen from Kennedy, we judge, did not exist at all
but was recorded by Nelson because a card in the reference file, under
Kennedy, Nebraska, in addition to No. 18680/25410, carried a second
entry, a number 3471X. The latter is the X-catalogue number of specimen
No. 116288 from the Snake River! The X-catalogue is used in place of a
field catalogue for specimens sent to the mammal collection of the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, by persons who do not keep
regular field numbers of their own. It seems that Nelson prepared (or
had prepared) his lists of specimens, at least in part, from cards
rather than from the labels on the specimens themselves. Some further
confusion as to names that Nelson intended to apply to cottontails in
Nebraska resulted from the fact that his map (_op. cit._:fig. 11)
indicated that the localities mentioned above for _S. f. mearnsi_ were
within the geographic range of _S. f. similis_.

Our comparison of each of the Nebraskan specimens with specimens of _S.
f. mearnsi_ in comparable pelage from Iowa and with the type and
topotypes of _S. f. similis_ reveals that each of the specimens of which
catalogue numbers are given above is clearly referable to _Sylvilagus
floridanus similis_.

Because some mammalogists have suspected that intergradation between
_Sylvilagus floridanus similis_ and _Sylvilagus nuttallii grangeri_
occurs along the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains, we have examined
specimens which may throw light on this matter.

From _S. f. similis_ (holotype and three topotypes), _S. n. grangeri_
(eight practical topotypes from Redfern, South Dakota) differ as
follows: Throat patch darker; hind foot shorter; ear (dry) from notch
longer; rostrum narrower; posterior extension of supraorbital process
enclosing a longer and wider space between it and the braincase;
superior border of premaxilla straight in profile instead of convex
dorsally; tympanic bullae more inflated; external auditory meatus larger
(diameter of the meatus more, instead of less, than crown length of
upper molars); posterior border of palate without, instead of with,
spine.

Specimens of the two species from places as near each other as extreme
southeastern Montana (_S. f. similis_ from Boxelder Creek, Capitol and
the Little Missouri River) and Devils Tower, Wyoming (_S. n. grangeri_),
seem not to differ in the length of the hind foot and the ear and in the
color of the spot on the chest. Also, the presence or absence of the
spine on the posterior margin of the palate is subject to individual
variation in these specimens but the other cranial differences,
mentioned above, still are apparent. These same cranial differences are
readily apparent between specimens of the two species taken only five
miles apart in eastern Wyoming (for the precise localities, see the
following paragraph). It is concluded, therefore, that _S. f. similis_
and _S. n. grangeri_ do not inter-grade along the eastern base of the
Rocky Mountains.

Data on specimens from Laramie County in eastern Wyoming show that _S.
f. similis_ is a heavier animal than _S. n. grangeri_ and also that
_similis_ molts earlier. For example, an adult female (K.U. No. 15936)
taken on July 13, 1945, three miles east of Horse Creek P.O., 6400 ft.,
weighed 1374 grams and is in fresh pelage, whereas an adult female of
_S. n. grangeri_ (K.U. No. 15935), taken on July 17, 1945, two miles
west of Horse Creek P.O., 6600 ft., weighed only 1149 grams, and still
has some of the worn winter pelage on the upper parts.


Sylvilagus floridanus holzneri (Mearns)

     1896. _Lepus sylvaticus holzneri_ Mearns, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus.,
     18:554, June 24.

     1904. _Sylvilagus floridanus holzneri_, Lyon, Smithsonian Miscl.
     Coll., 45:336, June 15.

Examination of cottontail rabbits from Arizona in the Biological Surveys
Collection and the United States National Museum indicates that
_Sylvilagus audubonii_ can be distinguished from _Sylvilagus nuttallii_
and _Sylvilagus floridanus_ by the larger (more inflated) tympanic
bullae. Topotypes of _Sylvilagus nuttallii pinetis_ and other specimens
from Alpine, Mt. Thomas, Springerville, the Prieto Plateau at 9000 feet
on the south end of the Blue Range, and the Tunitcha Mountains are
characterized by a posteriorly pointed supraoccipital shield and a long,
wide space between the braincase and the posterior extension of the
supraorbital process. The cottontails with equally small tympanic bullae
from more western and more southern localities are referable to
_Sylvilagus floridanus holzneri_ on the basis of a posteriorly truncate
or emarginate supraoccipital shield and a narrower and shorter space
(usually a "foramen") between the braincase and the posterior extension
of the supraorbital process. In _S. f. holzneri_ the posterior end of
the posterior process fuses with the braincase whereas the posterior end
of this process in Arizonan specimens of _S. n. pinetis_ merely lies
against the braincase or projects free of it. In specimens from Arizona
the difference in shape of the posterior border of the supraoccipital
shield and the difference in size of the space between the braincase and
the posterior extension of the supraorbital process are the only
differences of taxonomic worth found by us. Many other features of the
skull, of color of pelage, and of size of external parts all fell within
the range of individual variation of a series of specimens from one
locality.

Specimens from the following localities in Arizona are referable to
_Sylvilagus floridanus holzneri_ (Mearns).

     Hualpai Mts., Nos. 117461, 117462, 117488, 117490, 117495, 227735,
     and 227832; Ft. Whipple, No. 214157; Prescott, No. 34667/46752;
     Mayer, No. 247495; Reynolds Creek Ranger Station, Sierra Ancha
     Mts., Gila Co., No. 247734; Fish Creek, Tonto National Forest, 2000
     ft., No. 212833; north base Mt. Turnbull, 4500 ft., No. 214339; Ash
     Creek, 6100 ft., Graham Mts., No. 204363; Pinery Canyon, 7500 ft.,
     Chiricahua Mts., No. 247953; Thomas Canon, 2 mi. E Baboquivari
     Mts., No. 244420; Pine Springs, 15 mi. south of Colorado Canon, No.
     2425 Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist. On December 4, 1950, we removed the
     skull of No. 2425 to more certainly ascertain the identity of the
     individual.

The specimens listed above include those that Nelson (N. Amer. Fauna,
29:211, August 31, 1909) listed from the Hualpai Mountains, Pine
Springs, and Prescott under the name _Sylvilagus nuttallii pinetis_.
Nelson (_op. cit._:Pl. X, fig. 2) figured one of these skulls from the
Hualpai Mountains as _S. n. pinetis_ and the cranial measurements (_op.
cit._:201) that he records for _S. nuttallii pinetis_ likewise are of
these same specimens of _Sylvilagus floridanus holzneri_. Nelson's
description (_op. cit._:207-210) seems to have been affected by the
erroneous (as we see the matter) inclusion of these specimens of _S. f.
holzneri_ in the materials identified by him as _Sylvilagus nuttallii
pinetis_.

The specimens so far mentioned from Arizona can be identified with ease.
The identification becomes difficult, however, when the holotype of _S.
f. holzneri_, from the Huachuca Mountains, is examined. The difficulty
results from the holotype having a barely detectable emargination in the
posterior border of the supraoccipital shield. In this respect the
holotype is intermediate between _S. f. holzneri_ (as known by specimens
from more western localities in Arizona) and _S. n. pinetis_ from the
White Mountains to the northward. As noted above, _S. f. holzneri_ has a
deep notch and _S. n. pinetis_ has none. This intermediacy of the
holotype supports the possibility, mentioned by Nelson (_op. cit._:200),
that intergradation occurs between _S. f. holzneri_ and _S. n. pinetis_.
Additional evidence, however, is against this possibility; the notch in
the supraoccipital is deeper in specimens (No. 66136, from Chiricahua
Mts., and No. 204364, from Ash Creek in Graham Mts.) from mountains
geographically intermediate between the Huachuca Mountains and the White
Mountains. Also, the holotype of _S. f. holzneri_ differs from _S. n.
pinetis_ and agrees with other specimens of _S. f. holzneri_ from
farther southwest in Arizona in the robustness of the posterior
extensions of the supraorbital processes and in the considerable degree
of fusion of the tips of these processes with the squamosals.
Additionally, the rostrum of the holotype is wide and deep as in other
specimens of _S. floridanus_ from more eastern localities and is unlike
the narrow and shallow rostrum of _S. n. pinetis_.

If intergradation occurs in Arizona between the species _Sylvilagus
floridanus_ and _Sylvilagus nuttallii_, as Nelson (_op. cit._:200)
intimated it might, the intergrades probably will be found along the
Tonto Rim or in the territory between the Blue Range and the Graham
Mountains.


Sylvilagus floridanus cognatus Nelson

     1907. _Sylvilagus cognatus_ Nelson, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
     20:82, July 22.

We have examined the specimens recorded by Nelson (N. Amer. Fauna,
29:193, August 31, 1909) and conclude that Nelson (_op. cit._)
accurately described them. We differ from Nelson on one point of
interpretation; we prefer to use the trinomial, instead of the binomial,
for _cognatus_ because the kind and amount of difference between it and
subspecies of _Sylvilagus floridanus_ (_S. f. holzneri_ and possibly _S.
f. llanensis_) is on the order of magnitude that distinguishes
subspecies, and not full species, of _Sylvilagus_.

The specimen (W.D. Hollister, original No. 208) from the Datil
Mountains, lent to us by the Colorado Museum of Natural History, does
have, as Nelson (_op. cit._) pointed out, larger tympanic bullae and a
slenderer rostrum than do other specimens of _S. f. cognatus_.
Nevertheless, No. 208, agrees with _cognatus_ and differs from
_Sylvilagus nuttallii pinetis_ in the greater vertical depth of the
zygoma, the greater transverse width of the first pair of upper
incisors, the broader posterior extensions of the supraorbital
processes, the fusion (instead of freedom from, or mere touching to, the
braincase) of the tips of these extensions, the less upturned
supraorbital processes, and the more nearly truncate posterior margin of
the supraorbital shield. Therefore, the specimen is referable to
_Sylvilagus floridanus cognatus_. The slender rostrum and large tympanic
bullae of No. 208 are either individual variations or features peculiar
to the population of _Sylvilagus floridanus_ in the Datil Mountains.


Sylvilagus floridanus robustus Bailey

     1905. _Lepus pinetis robustus_ V. Bailey, N. Amer. Fauna, 25:159,
     October 24.

Nelson (N. Amer. Fauna, 29:194-195, August 31, 1909) described specimens
from the Big Bend area of Texas. This was the only area from which
Nelson had specimens. Our examination of these same specimens indicates
that his description of them was accurate. Davis and Robertson (Jour.
Mamm., 25:271, September 8, 1944) recorded a specimen, under the name
_Sylvilagus robustus_, from "The Bowl, Guadalupe Mountains, Culberson
County, Texas." Our examination of the skull of this specimen
([female] adult, No. 658, Mus. Zool., Louisiana State
University) indicates that it is, among named kinds of rabbits, best
referred to _robustus_. The specimen is morphologically as well as
geographically intermediate between _S. f. cognatus_ and _S. robustus_.
This morphological intermediacy is illustrated by certain of the
following cranial measurements of three adult females: No. 108695
(_robustus_), Chisos Mts.; No. 658 from the Guadalupe Mts.; and No.
128651, NE slope Capitan Mts. Basilar length, 59.2, 54.2, 54.4; length
of nasals, 33.9, 31.1, 32.2; breadth of rostrum above premolars, 19.3,
17.5, 17.0; depth of rostrum in front of premolars, 15.8, 14.8, 14.0;
interorbital breadth, 20.4, 19.1, 19.7; parietal breadth, 27.2, 27.1,
26.5; diameter of bulla, 13.3, 12.2, 10.7. Considering the intermediate
nature of specimen No. 648, and the kind and amount of difference
between _Sylvilagus floridanus cognatus_ and _S. robustus_, it seems
appropriate to us to use the name-combination _Sylvilagus floridanus
robustus_.

Actual intergradation, in the sense of interbreeding between individuals
of a continuously distributed population of animals, probably does not
occur regularly between _S. f. cognatus_ and _S. f. robustus_ nor
between several populations within either one of these subspecies; in
south-central Arizona and western Texas the animals are said to occur
only in the higher parts of the mountains. Consequently a given
population is separated from another by low-lying territory inhospitable
to the species _Sylvilagus floridanus_. This low-lying territory is
inhabited by another species, _Sylvilagus audubonii_. More intensive
collecting in the region concerned may, however, show a continuous
distribution of the species _Sylvilagus floridanus_ in several areas
where it seems now to have an interrupted distribution.


Sylvilagus audubonii neomexicanus Nelson

     1907. _Sylvilagus audubonii neomexicanus_ Nelson, Proc. Biol. Soc.
     Washington, 20:83, July 22.

Nelson (N. Amer. Fauna, 29:230, August 31, 1909) listed under
_Sylvilagus audubonii cedrophilus_ Nelson an adult female, skin with
skull (U.S. Nat. Mus., Biol. Surv. Coll., No. 108698) from fifteen miles
south of Alpine, Texas. Nelson (_loc. cit._) remarked that the
"bleached" color of the back and the great lateral breadth of the
tympanic bullae of No. 108698 were peculiarities not possessed by any
other specimen examined. Geographically, the locality of capture is far
south of other known occurrences of _S. a. cedrophilus_ and
approximately on the boundary separating the range of _S. a. minor_ from
that of _S. a. neomexicanus_. The large size, which may have induced
Nelson to refer the specimen to _S. a. cedrophilus_, is not surprising
considering that the individual is a female and fully adult. A
combination of new and old fur on the upper parts presents a pattern
that might be duplicated in other specimens of _S. a. neomexicanus_. The
lateral inflation of the tympanic bullae can be interpreted as
intergradation with the geographically adjacent _S. a. minor_ to the
south; _S. a. minor_ has large bullae. There are no features otherwise
which suggest that the specimen is anything other than _Sylvilagus
audubonii neomexicanus_ and we refer it to that subspecies.


Sylvilagus audubonii minor Mearns

     1896. _Lepus arizonae minor_ Mearns, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 18:557,
     June 24.

     1907. _S[ylvilagus]. a[uduboni]. minor_, Nelson, Proc. Biol. Soc.
     Washington, 20:83, July 22.

Nelson (N. Amer. Fauna, 29:230, August 31, 1909) listed, without
comment, under _Sylvilagus audubonii cedrophilus_ Nelson, a skin with
skull inside (Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 5419, [female] adult or sub-adult)
from San Diego, Chihuahua, Mexico. We locate San Diego approximately 230
miles south and 60 miles east of El Paso, Texas. Thus, the specimen is
from near the center of the geographic range of _Sylvilagus audubonii
minor_. With the permission of Mr. G.G. Goodwin of the American Museum
of Natural History we removed the skull. It differs in no essential
features from those of other specimens of _S. a. minor_. For example, of
specimens in the United States National Museum, Biological Surveys
Collection, a female (No. 132002) from Guzman in Chihuahua, and a male
(No. 51020) from Santa Rosalia in the same state, are almost
indistinguishable from the San Diegan specimen. The specimen is without
external measurements but the length of the hind foot and length of ear
from the notch in the dry state (80 and 57, respectively) agree with the
corresponding measurements of _S. a. minor_. Color of the skin furnishes
no diagnostic character as between _S. a. minor_ and _S. a.
cedrophilus_. We identify the specimen from San Diego as _Sylvilagus
audubonii minor_.

_Transmitted January 30, 1951._


24-7436





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Comments on the Taxonomy and
Geographic Distribution of Some North American Rabbits, by E. Raymond Hall and Keith R. Kelson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAXONOMY SOME NORTH AMERICAN RABBITS ***

***** This file should be named 28874.txt or 28874.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/8/7/28874/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Greg Bergquist
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
