The Project Gutenberg EBook of Comments on the Taxonomy and Geographic
Distribution of North American Microtines, by E. Raymond Hall and E. Lendell Cockrum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Comments on the Taxonomy and Geographic Distribution of North American Microtines

Author: E. Raymond Hall
        E. Lendell Cockrum

Release Date: June 22, 2009 [EBook #29201]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTH AMERICAN MICROTINES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Comments on
the Taxonomy and Geographic Distribution
of North American Microtines



BY

E. RAYMOND HALL AND E. LENDELL COCKRUM

University of Kansas Publications
Museum of Natural History
Volume 5, No. 23, pp. 293-312
November 17, 1952



University of Kansas
LAWRENCE
1952

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard,
Edward H. Taylor, Robert W. Wilson

Volume 5, No. 23, pp. 293-312
November 17, 1952

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas

PRINTED BY
FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1952



Transcriber's Note: The symbol "^" in some numbers in Table I is used
to indicate that the number following it are printed in superscript.



Comments on
the Taxonomy and Geographic Distribution
of North American Microtines

BY

E. RAYMOND HALL and E. LENDELL COCKRUM


In preparing maps showing the geographic distribution of North American
microtines, conflicting statements in the literature and identifications
that, if accepted, would result in improbable geographic ranges have
led to the examination of pertinent specimens with the results given
below. The studies here reported upon were aided by a contract between
the Office of Naval Research, Department of the Navy, and the
University of Kansas (Nr 161-791), by funds provided by the University
of Kansas from its Research Appropriation, and by grants for
out-of-state field work from the Kansas University Endowment
Association. Grateful acknowledgment is made to persons in charge of
the collections at each of the following institutions for permission to
use the collections under their charge: Biological Surveys Collection,
United States National Museum (herein abbreviated USBS); California
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ); Chicago Natural History Museum
(CNHM); University of Kansas Museum of Natural History (KU); Museum of
Comparative Zoology (MCZ); United States National Museum (USNM);
Department of Economic Zoology, University of Wisconsin (UWDEZ); and
Zoological Museum, University of Wisconsin (UWZM).


    Synaptomys cooperi saturatus Bole and Moulthrop

    1942. _Synaptomys cooperi saturatus_ Bole and Moulthrop, Sci.
    Publs. Cleveland Mus. Nat. Hist., 5:149, September 11, type from
    Bloomington, McLean County, Illinois.

When Bole and Moulthrop named _Synaptomys cooperi saturatus_, with type
locality in Illinois, they, in effect, divided the geographic range of
_Synaptomys cooperi stonei_ into two parts (see A. B. Howell, N. Amer.
Fauna, 50:10 (fig. 2), August 5, 1927) since Bole and Moulthrop (_op.
cit._) did not assign to any subspecies the specimens from southern
Wisconsin that Howell (_op. cit._) had identified as _S. c. stonei_.
Bole and Moulthrop's inclusion in their newly named subspecies of a
specimen from as far west as East Columbia, Missouri, left in doubt the
subspecific identity of specimens from Iowa and a specimen from
Arkansas. Howell (_op. cit._) had assigned this material from Iowa and
Arkansas to _S. c. gossii_.

Howell recognized that the one individual (168266 USBS) from Lake City,
Arkansas, was too young to be identified to subspecies with certainty
and assigned the specimen to _S. c. gossii_ "upon geographical grounds"
(_op. cit._:19). Keith R. Kelson and one of us (Hall) compared this
specimen with pertinent materials. As a result of this comparison we
refer the specimen, on the same grounds employed by Howell, to
_Synaptomys cooperi saturatus_.

Specimens from approximately the southern half of Wisconsin (from Kelly
Lake southward) were referred to _S. c. stonei_ by Howell (_op.
cit._:16). Now that _S. c. saturatus_ has been recognized, these
specimens from southern Wisconsin would be expected to be referable to
_S. c. saturatus_. When these specimens were examined and compared (by
Hall and Kelson) with other specimens in the United States National
Museum the skulls were found to be much larger than in _S. c. cooperi_,
smaller than in _S. c. gossii_, and nearly the size of those of
_Synaptomys cooperi saturatus_, to which subspecies we refer the
specimens in question.

Howell (_op. cit._:16) referred a specimen from Cassopolis, Michigan, a
locality that might be presumed to fall within the range of the more
recently named _S. c. saturatus_, to _S. c. stonei_. Bole and Moulthrop
did not mention this specimen when they described and named _S. c.
saturatus_ (1942). Neither did Burt, but Cassopolis is within the
geographic range ascribed to _S. c. cooperi_ on his map (The Mammals of
Michigan, Univ. Michigan Press, p. 213, 1946). Examination (by Kelson
and Hall) of the specimen (41777 MCZ) reveals that it resembles _S. c.
cooperi_ in shortness of hind foot (18 mm.), shortness of tail (18
mm.), narrowness across zygomata (16 mm.), and grayish pelage. In the
long braincase, heavy rostrum, greater condylobasilar length, greater
lambdoidal breadth, long rostrum, and longer incisive foramina, it
agrees closely with specimens of _S. c. saturatus_, to which subspecies
we refer the specimen.

Necker and Hatfield (Bull. Chicago Acad. Sci., 6:54, 1941) referred
specimens from Rosiclaire, Illinois, to _S. c. gossii_. These specimens
were not mentioned by Bole and Moulthrop (_op. cit._) when they named
_S. c. saturatus_ although the specimens presumably would be referred
to the newly-named subspecies. We have examined the pertinent specimens
(Nos. 15781-15786 and 16049-16054 CNHM) and find that on the basis of
dark color, long and slender skull, heavy incisors, and small
cheek-teeth, they are referable to _S. c. saturatus_ Bole and
Moulthrop. None, however, has a tail so short as the type of _S. c.
saturatus_. For that matter, the average length of the tail of six near
topotypes (5 mi. W, 2-1/2 mi. S Monticello, Piatt County, Illinois,
Nos. 32037-32042 KU) exceeds that of the type (17.4 mm., range 12-20,
as compared to 14 mm. for the type).


    Synaptomys cooperi gossii (Coues)

    1877. _Arvicola (Synaptomys) gossii_ Coues, Monogr. N. Amer.
    Rodentia, p. 235 (published as a synonym of _Synaptomys cooperi_,
    but name stated to apply to Kansan specimens of which description
    and measurements are on p. 236), type from Neosho Falls, Woodson
    County, Kansas.

    1897. _Synaptomys cooperi gossii_, Rhoads, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci.
    Philadelphia, 49:307, June.

In view of the taxonomic treatment accorded by Bole and Moulthrop (Sci.
Publs. Cleveland Mus. Nat. Hist, 5:149-151, September 11, 1942) to the
lemming mice of the species _Synaptomys cooperi_, as explained in the
preceding account, it has seemed desirable to examine Iowan specimens
of this species. Hall and Kelson examined the necessary material and
made the following conclusions. An adult male from Hillsboro (168453
USBS) has the lighter color and large skull of _S. c. gossii_ to which
Howell (N. Amer. Fauna, 50:19, August 5, 1927) referred the specimen.
The more western specimen from Knoxville, a young male (190358 USNM),
is almost exactly the same age as a male of _S. c. saturatus_ from
Bascom, Indiana (143701 USNM), and is but slightly older than a male
_S. c. gossii_ from Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas (91583 USBS). The upper
molariform tooth-row is the same length in the specimens from Kansas
and Iowa, but is longer in that from Indiana. The fact that the
specimen from Knoxville closely resembles the Kansan specimen in other
dimensions of the skull, which is larger than in the specimen from
Indiana, gives a basis for applying the name _Synaptomys cooperi
gossii_ to the specimen from Knoxville. This is the same name recently
used by Fichter and Hansen (Bull. Univ. Nebraska State Mus., 3(2):2,
September, 1947) for the Iowan specimens, although they seemingly
applied the name without being aware of Bole and Moulthrop's earlier
naming of _S. c. saturatus_ (Sci. Publs. Cleveland Mus. Nat. Hist.,
5:149, September 11, 1942).


    Synaptomys borealis sphagnicola Preble

    1899. _Synaptomys (Mictomys) sphagnicola_ Preble, Proc. Biol. Soc.
    Washington, 13:43, May 29, type from Fabyans, Coos County, New
    Hampshire.

    1927. _Synaptomys borealis sphagnicola_, A. B. Howell, N. Amer.
    Fauna, 50:30, August 5.

Howell (N. Amer. Fauna, 50:30-31, August 5, 1927) had only eight
specimens of this subspecies available when he revised the genus
_Synaptomys_. Of these eight (Maine: Mount Katahdin, 2; New Brunswick:
Near Bathurst, 1; New Hampshire: Fabyans, 1, the type; Quebec: St.
Rose, 4), only the type and one of the specimens from St. Rose are
adults. Concerning the others, Howell wrote (_op. cit._:31): "The
example from near Bathurst is not adult and has a damaged skull, so is
identified provisionally. All other specimens are too young for
positive diagnosis."

Since Howell's revision only one additional specimen has been reported.
Anderson (Ann. Rept. Provancher Soc. for 1939, p. 71, 1940) reported it
from Table Mountain, 3888 ft., Gaspe County, Quebec.

In the collection of the University of Kansas Museum of Natural History
there is still another specimen. It is an adult male topotype (No. 6483
KU, formerly No. 72 in the collection of Alfred E. Preble) obtained on
August 21, 1905, at Fabyans, New Hampshire. The measurements of this
specimen are as follows (measurements in parenthesis are those of the
type as given by Howell, _op. cit._): Total length, 135 (132); tail, 26
(24); hind foot, 22 (20); condylobasilar length, 25.1 (25.8); rostral
length, 6.5 (6.8); rostral breadth, 4.7 (4.9); interorbital breadth,
3.3 (2.8); zygomatic breadth, 15.4 (16.0); lambdoidal breadth, 12.1
(12.4); incisive foramina, 5.9 (5.7); height of skull, 9.1 (9.3).

Howell (_op. cit._:30) characterized _S. b. sphagnicola_ as: "Large and
high [skull] with narrow interorbital sharply ridged, the ridges of the
type being joined for a distance of 4 millimeters; interparietal narrow
and rectangular. The rostrum is long, tapering very little, and the
nasals, slightly constricted medially are quite narrow posteriorly. The
incisive foramina are long and wide." Howell further stated (_op.
cit._:30-31) that: "It is hard to predict what will be found to
constitute the most valuable cranial characters in distinguishing this
race from adult _medioximus_. The discernible differences now are in
the shape of the interparietals, rostral characters, and interorbital
differences that will probably not hold good when animals of the same
age are compared."

As can be seen from a comparison of the measurements given above for
the type and the topotype, some of the characteristics given by Howell
are not found in the topotype: The interorbital region is not narrow
(in fact it is wider than it ordinarily is in some other subspecies of
_Synaptomys borealis_) and the incisive foramina are not longer than in
other subspecies of _Synaptomys borealis_.

As far as present material permits us to judge, _Synaptomys borealis
sphagnicola_ is characterized, cranially, by: Skull large; interorbital
region sharply ridged (the ridges being joined for a distance of 4 mm.
in the type and of 4.5 mm. in the topotype); rostrum long, tapering
relatively little; nasals slightly constricted medially and unusually
narrow posteriorly; interparietal narrow and rectangular.


    Clethrionomys occidentalis caurinus (Bailey)

    1898. _Evotomys caurinus_ Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
    12:21, January 27, type from Lund, east shore Malaspina Inlet,
    British Columbia.

    1935. _Clethrionomys gapperi caurinus_, Racey and Cowan, Rept.
    British Columbia Prov. Mus. for 1935, p. H 25.

Prior to 1935 _caurinus_ was considered to be a monotypic species. In
1935 Racey and Cowan (Rept. British Columbia Provincial Museum for
1935, pp. H 25-H 26) examined material from southwestern British
Columbia of _C. caurinus_, including a series of 24 specimens from Alta
Lake, and compared it with _Clethrionomys gapperi occidentalis_ and
_C. g. saturatus_. They found _caurinus_ to be distinct from _C. g.
saturatus_ but were "not convinced that _occidentalis_ and _caurinus_
both merit systematic recognition; should they prove to be
indistinguishable, as the little available material indicates,
_occidentalis_ will take precedence on grounds of priority. It is our
opinion that further study of the distribution of the genus in British
Columbia will lead to the recognition of _occidentalis_ as the form
inhabiting coast-line and _saturatus_ the interior of British Columbia"
p. H 26. In the face of these opinions Racey and Cowan nevertheless
recognized _caurinus_ under the name _Clethrionomys gapperi caurinus_
(Bailey).

In spite of the treatment by Racey and Cowan (_op. cit._) of
_occidentalis_ and _caurinus_ as subspecies of _C. gapperi_, later
authors arranged _occidentalis_ as a member of the "_californicus_"
group although they retained _caurinus_ in the _gapperi_ group. For
example, Davis (The Recent Mammals of Idaho, The Caxton Printers, pp.
307-308, 1939) assigned _C. caurinus_ to the _gapperi_ group, although
he regarded _C. caurinus_ as a species (not a subspecies). He regarded
also _C. occidentalis_ as a species (not a subspecies) but assigned
it to the _californicus_ group. Dalquest (Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus.
Nat. Hist., 2:344, April 9, 1948) considered _occidentalis_ to be
conspecific with _Clethrionomys californicus_ and wrote (_op.
cit._:101): "The _californicus_ group, I feel, contains only the races
of _Clethrionomys californicus_, while the _gapperi_ group contains _C.
gapperi_ and its races, including _caurinus_, and possible other
species." Dalquest gave no indication that he had examined any
specimens of _caurinus_.

When Dalquest (_op. cit._:344) arranged _occidentalis_ and
_californicus_ as subspecies of the same species, he used the name
combination _Clethrionomys californicus occidentalis_ because he
ignored, or was unaware of, the page priority of _occidentalis_ over
_californicus_. We regard the anterior position of _occidentalis_ as
nomenclatural priority and therefore employ _occidentalis_ rather than
_californicus_ as the specific name.

Differences between the _gapperi_ group and the _occidentalis_ group
include: postpalatal bridge (complete in both groups) truncate
posteriorly in the _gapperi_ group and with a median, posteriorly
directed, spine in the _occidentalis_ group (this character is not
evident in all specimens; some _gapperi_ have a spine, and some
_occidentalis_ have the spine much reduced); dentition of the
_occidentalis_ group is heavier; enamel pattern of M3 and m1 in
_occidentalis_ more simplified--the number of salient and re-entrant
angles tends to be reduced in adults of the _occidentalis_ group.

An examination of specimens of _caurinus_ (British Columbia: Mt.
Seymour, 2 KU; Lund, Malaspina Inlet, 2 USBS; and Inverness, mouth
Skeena River, 1 USBS), reveals that, in the presence of the median
postpalatal spine and in the characters of the molars, _caurinus_
agrees with the _occidentalis_ group.


    Clethrionomys occidentalis nivarius (Bailey)

    1897. _Evotomys nivarius_ Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
    11:136, May 13, type from northwest slope of Mount Ellinor, 4000
    ft., Olympic Mts., Mason County, Washington.

The red-backed mouse of the Olympic Peninsula was originally accorded
specific rank. Currently it stands in the literature as a subspecies of
the wide-spread species _Clethrionomys gapperi_ because Dalquest (Univ.
Kansas Publ. Mus. Nat. Hist., 2:343, April 9, 1948) used the
name-combination _Clethrionomys gapperi nivarius_. Taylor and Shaw had
earlier (Occas. Papers Charles R. Conner Mus., 2:23, 1929) indicated
the same status by using the name _Evotomys gapperi nivarius_. Davis
(The Recent Mammals of Idaho, The Caxton Printers, Caldwell, Idaho, p.
306, April 5, 1939), however, indicated that the affinities of
_nivarius_ were with the _californicus_ [= _occidentalis_] group,
although he treated _nivarius_ as a distinct species. We have examined
two adult females (K. U. Nos. 10707 and 10708) of _nivarius_ from
Reflection Lake, 3800 ft., Jefferson County, Washington, and on the
basis of their thick, instead of thin, pterygoid processes concur with
Davis that the affinities of _nivarius_ are with the named kinds of
_Clethrionomys_ now arranged as subspecies of _Clethrionomys
occidentalis_, rather than with the kinds now arranged as subspecies of
_Clethrionomys gapperi_. Although we are aware that Dalquest (_op.
cit._:101-102) did not find actual intergradation between _nivarius_
and _Clethrionomys occidentalis occidentalis_--a ten-mile gap separated
their ranges--we prefer to use the name combination _Clethrionomys
occidentalis nivarius_. In doing so we recognize that intergradation
ultimately may be found between the two species _C. occidentalis_ and
_C. gapperi_; in that event the name _gapperi_ will apply as the name
of the species because it has priority over _occidentalis_.

The following named kinds of _Clethrionomys_ are considered to be
subspecies of _Clethrionomys occidentalis_:

    CLETHRIONOMYS OCCIDENTALS OCCIDENTALIS (Merriam).

        1890. _Evotomys occidentalis_ Merriam, N. Amer. Fauna, 4:25,
        October 8, type from Aberdeen, Chehalis County, Washington.

        1894. _Evotomys pygmaeus_ Rhoads, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci.
        Philadelphia, p. 284, October 23, type from mouth of Nisqually
        River, Pierce County, Washington.

        1929. _Evotomys gapperi occidentalis_, Taylor and Shaw, Occas.
        Papers Charles R. Conner Mus., Washington State College, 2:23.

        1948. _Clethrionomys californicus occidentalis_, Dalquest,
        Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist., 2:344, April 9.

    CLETHRIONOMYS OCCIDENTALIS CALIFORNICUS (Merriam).

        1890. _Evotomys californicus_ Merriam, N. Amer. Fauna, 4:26,
        October 8, type from Eureka, Humboldt County, California.

    CLETHRIONOMYS OCCIDENTALIS CAURINUS (Bailey).

        1898. _Evotomys caurinus_ Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
        12:21, January 27, type from Lund, east shore of Malaspina
        Inlet, British Columbia.

        1935. _Clethrionomys gapperi caurinus_, Racey and Cowan, Rept.
        British Columbia Prov. Mus. for 1935, p. H 25.

    CLETHRIONOMYS OCCIDENTALIS MAZAMA (Merriam).

        1897. _Evotomys mazama_ Merriam, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
        11:71, April 21, type from Crater Lake, 7000 ft., Mount Mazama,
        Klamath County, Oregon.

        1936. _Clethrionomys californicus mazama_, Bailey, N. Amer.
        Fauna, 55:192, August 29.

    CLETHRIONOMYS OCCIDENTALIS NIVARIUS (Bailey).

        1897. _Evotomys nivarius_ Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
        11:136, May 13, type from northwest slope of Mount Ellinor,
        4000 ft., Olympic Mts., Mason County, Washington.

    CLETHRIONOMYS OCCIDENTALIS OBSCURUS (Merriam).

        1897. _Evotomys obscurus_ Merriam, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
        11:72, April 21, type from Prospect, 2600 ft., upper Rogue
        River Valley, Jackson County, Oregon.

        1933. _Clethrionomys mazama obscurus_, Grinnell, Univ.
        California Publ. Zool., 40:185, September 26.

        1936. _Clethrionomys californicus obscurus_, Bailey, N. Amer.
        Fauna, 55:192, August 29.


    Clethrionomys gapperi pallescens, new name

    1940. _Clethrionomys gapperi rufescens_ R. W. Smith, Amer. Midland
    Nat., 24:233, July, type from Wolfville, Kings County, Nova Scotia
    (_nec Arvicola rufescens_ de Selys Longchamps, 1836, from
    Longchamps-sur-Ger, Belgium).

The name _rufescens_, as applied by R. W. Smith (Amer. Midland Nat.,
24:233, July, 1940) to the red-backed mouse of Nova Scotia, seems to be
unavailable under the rules of the International Code of Zoological
Nomenclature, since it is a homonym of _Arvicola rufescens_ de Selys
Longchamps, 1836, which in turn is a synonym of _Clethrionomys
glareolus glareolus_ Schreber, 1780 (Ellerman and Morrison-Scott,
Checklist of Palaearctic and Indian Mammals, 1758 to 1946, p. 663,
November 19, 1951).


    Clethrionomys gapperi phaeus (Swarth)

    1911. _Evotomys phaeus_ Swarth, Univ. California Publ. Zool.,
    7:127, January 12, type from Marten Arm, Boca de Quadra, Alaska.

When Swarth (_loc. cit._) named the red-backed mouse of the mainland of
southern Alaska as a new subspecies, he characterized it as "Size
rather large. Differs from _E._ [= _Clethrionomys_] _wrangeli_, nearest
it geographically, in cranial characters and in much longer tail; from
_E. caurinus_, the species to the southward in British Columbia, in
larger size and longer tail." He remarked (_loc. cit._): "I had
supposed that the red-backed mouse occurring on the mainland coast of
this region would prove to be _E. wrangeli_, but the latter appears to
be purely an insular species. I have had no specimens of that race for
comparison, but the _Evotomys_ secured differ so widely from it in all
the essential peculiarities of the species as given in the published
descriptions that there seems little doubt of their belonging to a
different species. _Wrangeli_ has a short tail, less than twice as long
as the hind foot--in adults of _phaeus_ the tail is invariably more
than twice the length of the foot, frequently more than a third of the
entire length of the animal."

The external and cranial measurements of two subadults in the United
States National Museum (No. 217413 from Quadra Lake and No. 217415 from
Marten Arm, Boca de Quadra, taken in mid-February) and three old adults
from Fort [= Port] Simpson, British Columbia (Nos. 90263-90264, 90272
USBS), are almost the same as those given by Swarth in the original
description of _Clethrionomys phaeus_.

In cranial measurements, as well as in the structure of the palate and
last upper molar, _C. phaeus_ agrees with the _gapperi_ group (to which
it has been assigned by Davis, The Recent Mammals of Idaho, The Caxton
Printers, p. 306, April 5, 1939, and by Orr, Jour. Mamm., 26:69,
February 12, 1945) and differs from _Clethrionomys occidentalis
caurinus_ (which was assigned above to the _occidentalis_ group,
formerly the _californicus_ group).

Since the measurements of specimens examined by us, as well as those
recorded by Swarth (_op. cit._), fall within the range of those of the
species _Clethrionomys gapperi_, and since the differences between
_phaeus_ and _C. g. saturatus_ are of the kind and degree that separate
subspecies in _C. gapperi_ we employ the name combination
_Clethrionomys gapperi phaeus_ (Swarth). _C. g. saturatus_, as
understood by us, occurs to the southeast of _C. g. phaeus_ in the
Rocky Mountains of British Columbia, and in northeastern Washington,
northern Idaho and northwestern Montana.

    _Specimens examined._--Total, 23, distributed as follows: Alaska:
    Chickamin River (Behm Canal), 15 (MVZ); Boca de Quadra, 3 (MVZ);
    Marten Arm, Boca de Quadra, 1 (USNM); Quadra Lake, 1 (USNM).
    British Columbia: Fort [= Port] Simpson, 3 (USBS).


    Clethrionomys gapperi wrangeli (Bailey)

    1897. _Evotomys wrangeli_ Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
    11:120, May 13, type from Wrangell, Wrangell Island, Alaska.

When Bailey (_loc. cit._) named the red-backed mouse from Wrangell
Island, Alaska, he characterized it as "A large, dull-colored species
entirely distinct from any known form," and remarked: "In no way does
_E._ [= _Clethrionomys_] _wrangeli_ show a close relationship to any
other American species. In size and relative proportions it comes
closest to _E. dawsoni_, from which it differs widely in coloration and
more widely in cranial characters. With the long-tailed species south
and east of its range there is no need of comparison."

Swarth (Univ. California Publ. Zool., 24:173, June 17, 1922) reported
that three specimens from Flood Glacier and 23 from Great Glacier,
British Columbia, and four from Sergief Island, at the mouth of the
Stikine River, Alaska, were: "All _E. wrangeli_, indistinguishable from
specimens at hand from Wrangell Island." Swarth further reported that,
although he found no intergradation between _Clethrionomys wrangeli_
from Flood Glacier and the nearly adjacent _Clethrionomys rutilus
dawsoni_, "the two species, however, resemble each other so closely in
form, and in some pelages in color also, that _wrangeli_ would seem to
be a coastal offshoot of _dawsoni_...."

Davis (The Recent Mammals of Idaho, The Caxton Printers, p. 306, April
5, 1939) and Orr (Jour. Mamm., 26:69, February 12, 1945) more recently
have shown that _Clethrionomys wrangeli_ is not a member of the
_rutilus_ group (to which _C. dawsoni_ belongs) but is a member of the
_gapperi_ group.

Our comparisons of a series of eight topotypes of _wrangeli_ (all in
the Biological Surveys Collection) with several subspecies of
_Clethrionomys gapperi_ (including _phaeus_, _saturatus_, _galei_,
_brevicaudus_, and others) reveal that the differences seen in
_wrangeli_ are of the kind and degree that serve to separate
subspecies. The red-backed mouse from Wrangell Island, then, should
stand as _Clethrionomys gapperi wrangeli_ (Bailey).

    _Specimens examined._--Total, 31, distributed as follows: Alaska:
    Wrangell, Wrangell Island, 27 (19 MVZ., 8 USBS); Sergief Island at
    mouth of Stikine River, 4 (MVZ).


    Clethrionomys gapperi solus, new subspecies

    _Type._--Male, adult, skin and skull, No. 74939, Biological Surveys
    Collection, United States National Museum; from Loring,
    Revillagigedo Island, Alaska; obtained on September 22, 1895, by C.
    P. Streator; original No. 4980.

    _Range._--Known only from two localities on Revillagigedo Island,
    Alaska.

    _Diagnosis._--A short-tailed, dark-colored member of the _gapperi_
    group. Dorsal stripe wide, between Chestnut and Bay (capitalized
    color terms after Ridgway: Color Standards and Color Nomenclature.
    Washington, D. C., 1912), with slight mixture of black-tipped
    hairs; sides and venter heavily washed with Ochraceous-Tawny. Skull
    flattened; rostrum proportionately short and wide; auditory bullae
    relatively uninflated.

    _Comparisons._--From topotypes of _Clethrionomys gapperi wrangeli_,
    _C. g. solus_ differs as follows: dorsal stripe wider and slightly
    brighter; sides brighter; venter more heavily washed with
    Ochraceous-Tawny (heavy wash in all 13 _C. g. solus_ examined; in
    _C. g. wrangeli_ no wash in 11, slight wash in 16, and heavy wash
    in only one); nasals, alveolar extent of upper cheek-teeth and
    incisive foramina shorter; skull shallower when measured with
    tympanic bullae included; rostrum averages slightly broader.

    From _C. g. phaeus_ of the adjacent mainland, _C. g. solus_ differs
    in: dorsal stripe slightly darker; ventral wash more prominent;
    tail shorter; skull smaller in all parts measured except that
    nasals are approximately the same length, auditory bullae notably
    smaller and teeth notably narrower.

    _Measurements._--External and cranial measurements of adults are
    shown in table 1.

    _Remarks._--Bailey (Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 11:120, May 13,
    1897) referred 17 specimens from Loring to his newly named species,
    _E. wrangeli_ [= _Clethrionomys gapperi wrangeli_] but based his
    description on specimens from Wrangell Island. He pointed out
    (_loc. cit._) that all of the specimens from Loring had the
    "bellies strongly washed with buffy-ochraceous, while more than
    half of those from Wrangell have whitish bellies."

    _Specimens examined._--Total, 13, all in the Biological Surveys
    Collection, U. S. National Museum, from the following localities:
    Alaska: Revillagigedo Island: Loring, 10; mouth of Fish Creek,
    Ketchikan, 3.


    Clethrionomys gapperi stikinensis, new subspecies

    _Type._--Male, adult, skin and skull, No. 30735, Museum of
    Vertebrate Zoology, University of California; from Stikine River at
    Great Glacier, British Columbia; obtained on August 13, 1919, by J.
    Dixon; original number 7691.

    _Range._--Known only from the lower Stikine River Valley of British
    Columbia and the Cleveland Peninsula of Alaska.

    _Diagnosis._--A medium-sized, dark-colored member of the _gapperi_
    group. Dorsal stripe wide, near Auburn with mixture of black-tipped
    hairs; sides and venter washed with Ochraceous-Tawny. Skull small;
    cheek-teeth narrow; auditory bullae relatively uninflated.

    _Comparisons._--From topotypes of _Clethrionomys gapperi wrangeli_,
    _C. g. stikinensis_ differs as follows: dorsal stripe slightly
    wider and brighter; sides slightly duller (lacking the olivaceous
    wash of _C. g. wrangeli_); all cranial measurements taken averaging
    smaller except height of skull, which is approximately the same;
    alveolar length of upper tooth-row and length of incisive foramina
    notably shorter; auditory bullae less inflated; cheek-teeth much
    narrower.

    From topotypes of _C. g. phaeus_, _C. g. stikinensis_ differs as
    follows: dorsal stripe and sides darker; auditory bullae less
    inflated; cheek-teeth narrower; skull smaller in most measurements
    taken (see table 1).

    From topotypes of _C. g. solus_, _C. g. stikinensis_ differs as
    follows: dorsal stripe lighter (more tawny underwash); ventral wash
    of buffy much paler (especially noticeable around mouth and on
    throat); zygomatic and lambdoidal breadths greater; skull deeper;
    auditory bullae more inflated; cheek-teeth slightly heavier.


    TABLE 1. _External and cranial measurements of Clethrionomys._

 N    |   |   |     |       |        |      |     |     |     |     |
 u    |   |   |     |       |        |      |     |     |     |     |
 m    |   |   |     |       |        |      |     |     |     |  L  |
 b    |   |   |     |       |        |      |     |     |     |  e  |
 e    |   |   |     |       |        |      |     |     |     |  n  |
 r  s |   |   |     |       |        |      |     |     |     |  g  |
    e |   |   |     |       |        |      |     |     |     |  t  |
 o  x |   |   |     |       |        |      |     |     |     |  h  |
 f    |   |   |     |   C   |        |      |     |     |     |     |
    o |   |   |     |   o   |        |      |     |     |     |  o  |
 i  r |   |   |     |   n   |        |      |     |     |     |  f  |
 n    |   |   |     |   d   |        |   L  |     | A   |  B  |     |
 d  s |   |   |     |   y   |    Z   |   a  |     | l   |  r  |  i  |
 i  p |   |   |     |   l   |    y   |   m  |  L  | v   |  e  |  n  |
 v  e |   |   |     |   o   |    g   |   b  |  e  | e  u|  a  |  c  |  H
 i  c |   |   |     |   b   |    o   |   d  |  n  | o  p|  d  |  i  |  e
 d  i |   |   |     |   a   |    m   |   o  |  g  | l  p|  t  |  s  |  i
 u  m | T |   |     |   s   |    a   |   i  |  t  | a  e|  h  |  i  |  g
 a  e | o |   |     |   i   |    t   |   d  |  h  | r  r|     |  v  |  h
 l  n | t |   |     |   l   |    i   |   a  |     |     |  o  |  e  |  t
 s    | a |   |  H  |   a   |    c   |   l  |  o  | l  t|  f  |     |
    m | l |   |  i  |   r   |        |      |  f  | e  o|     |  f  |  o
 o  e |   |   |  n  |       |    b   |   b  |     | n  o|  r  |  o  |  f
 f  a | l |   |  d  |   l   |    r   |   r  |  n  | g  t|  o  |  r  |
    s | e |   |     |   e   |    e   |   e  |  a  | t  h|  s  |  a  |  s
 e  u | n | T |  f  |   n   |    a   |   a  |  s  | h   |  t  |  m  |  k
 a  r | g | a |  o  |   g   |    d   |   d  |  a  |    r|  r  |  i  |  u
 c  e | t | i |  o  |   t   |    t   |   t  |  l  | o  o|  u  |  n  |  l
 h  d | h | l |  t  |   h   |    h   |   h  |  s  | f  w|  m  |  a  |  l

_Clethrionomys gapperi solus_, Loring

Male
type  |133|33 |20   | 22.3  | 12.5   |10.9  |6.8  |5.1  |3.4  |5.3  | 9.0
Male
5 av. |131|34 |20   | 22    | 12.7   |10.8  |6.8  |5.3  |3.5  |5.1  | 9.1
  min.|128|33 |19   | 21.8  | 12.5   |10.5  |6.7  |5.1  |3.3  |5.0  | 8.9
  max.|133|36 |20   | 22.3  | 13.0   |11.2  |7.1  |5.5  |3.6  |5.3  | 9.5
Female
5 av. |128|34 |19   | 21.3  | 12.5   |10.5  |6.5  |5.4  |3.5  |4.9  | 9.2
  min.|124|31 |19   | 20.9  | 12.3   |10.3  |6.0  |5.2  |3.3  |4.8  | 8.9
  max.|140|36 |20   | 21.7  | 12.7   |10.7  |7.0  |5.6  |3.6  |5.0  | 9.5

_Clethrionomys gapperi stikinensis_, Stikine River at Great Glacier

Male
type  |145|39 |20   | 23.2  | 13.9   |11.4  |7.3  |5.0  |3.1  |5.5  | 9.5
Male
4 av. |136|35 |20   | 22.2  | 13.0   |11.1  |6.8  |5.2  |3.4  |5.2  | 9.4
  min.|132|33 |19   | 21.5  | 12.3   |10.7  |6.5  |5.0  |3.1  |5.1  | 9.1
  max.|145|39 |20   | 23.2  | 13.9   |11.4  |7.3  |5.6  |3.5  |5.5  | 9.7
Female
7 av. |134|33 |19   | 21.8  | 12.7^6*|10.9  |7.0  |5.4  |3.4  |5.1  | 9.5
  min.|125|30 |19   | 21.5  | 12.5   |10.5  |6.7  |5.3  |3.2  |5.0  | 9.2
  max.|147|35 |20   | 22.2  | 12.9   |11.   |7.1  |5.6  |3.7  |5.3  | 9.8

_Clethrionomys gapperi wrangeli_, Wrangell

Male
9 av. |139|36 |19   | 23.4^8| 13.3  |11.4^8 |7.3  | .6  | .6  | .6  | 9.6^8
  min.|130|31 |18   | 22.9  | 13.0  |10.9   |7.1  |5.5  |3.3  |5.4  | 9.2
  max.|151|43 |20   | 23.9  | 13.7  |11.8   |7.6  |5.8  |4.0  |5.8  |10.1
Female
16 av.|134|34 |18^15| 23.2  | 13.3  |11.2^13|7.3  |5.8  |3.5  |5.5  | 9.4
  min.|123|28 |17   | 22.4  | 12.6  |10.7   |6.9  |5.5  |3.2  |5.2  | 9.0
  max.|156|45 |20   | 24.1  | 14.1  |11.8   |8.0  |6.1  |3.7  |5.9  | 9.7

_Clethrionomys gapperi phaeus_, Chickamin River

Male
5 av. |148|47 |20   | 23.0^4| 13.7^4|11.3^4 |7.5^4|5.3^4|3.5^4|5.3^4| 9.7^3
  min.|138|38 |20   | 22.3  | 13.0  |11.1   |7.1  |5.3  |3.4  |4.9  | 9.3
  max.|159|51 |21   | 23.8  | 14.6  |11.8   |7.7  |5.6  |3.8  |5.6  |10.0
Female
4 av. |153|49 |20   | 23.1^3| 13.4  |11.2^3 |7.6^3|5.2  |3.7  |5.3  | 9.6^3
  min.|140|44 |20   | 22.4  | 12.8  |10.8   |7.3  |5.0  |3.4  |5.1  | 9.2
  max.|164|56 |20   | 24.2  | 13.6  |11.4   |7.7  |5.3  |3.9  |5.5  | 9.8

      *Superior numbers denote the number of individuals averaged.


_Measurements_.--External and cranial measurements of adults are given
in table 1.

_Remarks_.--Morphologically _C. g. stikinensis_ shows greater
resemblance to _C. g. solus_ of Revillagigedo Island, than to the
geographically adjacent subspecies _C. g. wrangeli_ and _C. g. phaeus_.
Possibly the original stock of _C. g. solus_ was rafted to
Revillagigedo Island from the Cleveland Peninsula.

    _Specimens examined_.--Total, 29, all in the Museum of Vertebrate
    Zoology, University of California, distributed as follows: British
    Columbia: Stikine River at Great Glacier, 22; Stikine River at
    Flood Glacier, 3. Alaska: Bradfield Canal, 1; Helm Bay, 2.


    Pitymys pinetorum scalopsoides (Audubon and Bachman)

    1841. _Arvicola scalopsoides_ Audubon and Bachman, Proc. Acad. Nat.
    Sci. Philadelphia, 1:97, type from Long Island, New York.

    1912. _Pitymys pinetorum scalopsoides_ Miller, U. S. Nat. Mus.
    Bull., 79:229, December 31.

Hanson (Trans. Wisconsin Acad. Sci., Arts, and Letters, 36:124, 1944)
reported two pine mice from near Prairie du Sac, in Westpoint Township,
Columbia County, Wisconsin, as _Pitymys pinetorum scalopsoides_ but
cast doubt upon their subspecific identity. He also reported pine mice
from Blue Mounds, Dane County, Wisconsin. We have examined these
specimens (Westpoint, Columbia County, 2--No. 544, skin only, UWDEZ,
and No. 521, skin only, H. C. Hanson's private collection; Westpoint,
Dane County, 1, No. 11620, UWZM; Vermont, Dane County, 2, Nos. 11674
and 11694, UWZM) and have compared them with topotypes of _P. p.
schmidti_, and with specimens of _P. p. nemoralis_ and _P. p.
scalopsoides_. The specimens from Columbia and Dane counties differ
from _P. p. schmidti_ in the greater zygomatic breadth, and lesser
height of skull. They differ from _P. p. nemoralis_ of comparable age
in shorter tooth-row and generally smaller skull. The interorbital
region, however, is wider. In all of the features mentioned above, the
specimens in question agree with _Pitymys pinetorum scalopsoides_, to
which subspecies they are here referred.


    Microtus pennsylvanicus aztecus (Allen)

    1893. _Arvicola (Mynomes) aztecus_ Allen, Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat.
    Hist., 5:73, April 28, type from Aztec, 5900 ft., San Juan County,
    New Mexico.

Allen (_loc. cit._) described this species on the basis of two
specimens from Aztec, New Mexico, and three from La Plata, New Mexico.
He characterized it as "Size large; pelage very full and soft; tail
short; skull very narrow.

"Above grayish brown with a tinge of pale buff; fur blackish plumbeous
beneath the surface, tipped with pale yellowish brown, and varied with
longer, projecting, black-tipped hairs; below grayish white, the fur
plumbeous beneath the surface and tipped with white, giving a whitish
gray effect. Feet dusky; tail dusky brown above, dull white below."

Allen identified as this species "a large _Arvicola_ from Estes Park,
Colorado, which I have before been unable to allocate. I am unable to
find that it differs in any particular from the specimens from New
Mexico." He pointed out also (_op. cit._:73-74) that "The type and only
positively identified specimen of Baird's _Arvicola modesta_ [=
_Microtus pennsylvanicus modestus_ (Baird)] from Sawatche Pass,
Colorado, is a very young specimen in poor condition. An examination of
a series of adult and young examples from the type locality will be
necessary in order to determine its relationships to _A. alticolus_ [=
_Microtus longicaudus alticolus_ (Merriam)] and _A. aztecus_."

Bailey, in his revision of the American voles of the genus _Microtus_
(N. Amer. Fauna, 17:20), showed _Arvicola modesta_ Baird to be a
subspecies of _Microtus pennsylvanicus_ but retained _Microtus aztecus_
(Allen) as a distinct species. In describing _M. aztecus_ he wrote "the
size similar to _M. pennsylvanicus_, but with shorter tail and larger
hindfoot; skull long; braincase narrow; interparietal long ..." and
remarked that "_Microtus aztecus_ belongs to the _pennsylvanicus_
group. Externally it is not very different from _modestus_, but none of
the specimens show any signs of intergradation; and the skull
characters are so well marked that there seems no doubt of its full
specific rank."

Subsequent to the publication of Allen's (_op. cit._) account and
Bailey's account (_op. cit._), additional material was collected that
helps to clarify the relationships of _Microtus aztecus_. A comparison
of six adult topotypes of _Microtus aztecus_ with a series of nine
adults of _M. p. modestus_ from 1 mi. S, 2 mi. E Eagle Nest, 8100 ft.,
Colfax County, New Mexico, with three adults from 1-1/2 mi. E Manassa,
Conejos County, Colorado, and with four adults from Saguache County,
Colorado (all in KU), reveals that the supposed "well marked" external
and cranial differences between the two forms are not nearly so evident
as was indicated by Bailey.

The cranial differences that exist between these two forms (narrower
nasals, slightly longer interparietal, slightly longer and narrower
skull in _aztecus_) are evident only as averages. Although
geographically intermediate specimens are lacking, the morphological
differences between the two kinds of animals are of the degree and kind
that separate subspecies, rather than species. We therefore judge _M.
aztecus_ (Allen) to be only subspecifically distinct from _M.
pennsylvanicus modestus_ and employ the name _Microtus pennsylvanicus
aztecus_.


    Microtus pennsylvanicus funebris (Dale)

    1940. _Microtus pennsylvanicus funebris_ Dale, Jour. Mamm., 21:338,
    August 14, type from Coldstream, 1450 ft., 3-1/2 mi. SE Vernon,
    British Columbia.

Taylor and Shaw (Occas. Papers Charles R. Conner Mus., State College
Washington, 2:24, December, 1929) list under _Microtus nanus_ [=
_montanus_] _canescens_ material from Calispell Peak, Washington.
Probably the basis for this record is a specimen in the Biological
Surveys collection (adult male, 236474) taken on May 9, 1921, by G. G.
Cantwell, and labelled as Calispell Peak, 9 mi. W Locke, 3500 ft., Pend
Oreille County. An examination (by Hall and Kelson) of the specimen
discloses that it is of the species _Microtus pennsylvanicus_, and that
it falls within the geographic range ascribed to the subspecies
_Microtus pennsylvanicus funebris_ by Dalquest (Univ. Kansas Publ.,
Mus. Nat. Hist., 2:346, April 9, 1948).


    Microtus oeconomus amakensis (Murie)

    1930. _Microtus amakensis_ Murie, Jour. Mamm., 11:74, February 11,
    type from Amak Island, Bering Sea, Alaska.

When Murie (Jour. Mamm., 11:75, February 11, 1930) named the meadow
mouse from Amak Island, Alaska, as _amakensis_, he arranged it as a
separate species. One of us (Hall) and K. R. Kelson examined the type
and topotypes of _amakensis_ in the Biological Surveys collection in
the U. S. National Museum and compared them with series of _Microtus
oeconomus operarius_, _M. o. sitkensis_, _M. o. elymocetes_, _M. o.
yakutatensis_, and _M. o. kadiacensis_. Among the specimens examined of
the latter subspecies were 17 from Izambek Bay, Kodiak Peninsula, on
the mainland opposite Amak Island, the type locality of _amakensis_.
The characters given by Murie (_op. cit._) serve to separate
_amakensis_ from closely related neighboring kinds of meadow mice, but
are of the degree and kind that, in this group of meadow mice, separate
subspecies rather than species. Although actual intergrades are
lacking, the animals from Amak Island are considered to be only
subspecifically distinct and to belong to the _oeconomus_ complex. The
name _Microtus oeconomus amakensis_ is applied to them.


    Microtus longicaudus mordax (Merriam)

    1891. _Arvicola_ (_Mynomes_) _mordax_ Merriam, N. Amer. Fauna,
    5:61, July 30, type from Sawtooth (= Alturas) Lake, 7200 ft., east
    base of Sawtooth Mountains, Blaine County, Idaho.

    1938. _Microtus longicaudus mordax_, Goldman, Jour. Mamm., 19:491,
    November 14.

Dalquest (Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist., 2:353, April 9, 1948)
assigned all the meadow mice of the species _Microtus longicaudus_ from
approximately the eastern half of Washington State to _Microtus
longicaudus halli_ Hayman and Holt and, in doing so, excluded the
subspecies _Microtus longicaudus mordax_ from that state. This
assignment of specimens in Washington had the effect of separating the
geographic range of _M. l. mordax_ into two parts. One part was in
south-central British Columbia and the other part was mainly in the
Rocky Mountain region of the United States. Hall and Kelson examined
specimens in the Biological Surveys collection in the U. S. National
Museum in an attempt to determine more precisely the ranges of the
subspecies in southern Canada, Washington, and Idaho.

_Microtus longicaudus angustus_ [= _M. l. halli_] was described by one
of us (Hall, Univ. California Publ. Zool., 37:13, April 10, 1931) as
differing from _mordax_ in narrower braincase, higher skull near the
anterior end of the frontals, darker coloration, and seemingly smaller
size. After examining the material in the U. S. National Museum no
reason is seen at the present time to amend this characterization,
except to add that some specimens of _M. l. mordax_ are as dark as
seasonably comparable specimens of _M. l. halli_.

Examination of specimens of _Microtus longicaudus_ from Washington east
of the Cascade Range (those from the Blue Mountain area excepted)
discloses that the skulls do not differ essentially from those of
topotypes of _M. l. mordax_, but do differ, as outlined above, from
near-topotypes of _M. l. halli_. There is considerable variation in
color among the Washington-taken specimens of _Microtus longicaudus_.
Animals from the eastern flanks of the Cascades average darker than
those taken, north of the Snake River, still farther east in
Washington. Possibly Dalquest (_op. cit._) relied mainly upon this
darker color in assigning the specimens from eastern Washington to _M.
l. halli_. Relying principally upon cranial characters, we conclude
that most of the specimens are better referred to _M. l. mordax_ and
that _M. l. halli_ is restricted, in Washington, to the Blue Mountains.

    _Specimens examined of Microtus longicaudus mordax._--Total, 74,
    all in the Biological Surveys Collection, distributed as follows:
    Washington: _Okanogan_ _County_: mouth of Holmar Creek, W Fork
    Paysaten River, 4700 ft., 1; Conconully, 3; Twisp, 1; Omak Lake,
    1200 ft., 3. _Stevens County_: 5 mi. N Colville, 1. _Pend Oreille
    County_: 9 mi. N Metalina, 2600 ft., 1; Sullivan Lake, 3000 ft., 3.
    _Chelan County_: Sethekin, 1079 ft., 3; head of Lake Chelan, 900
    ft., 12; Hart Lake, Railroad Creek, 3900 ft., 1; Entiat, 20 mi from
    mouth of Entiat River, 1680 ft., 13; Wenatchee, 4. _Douglas
    County_: Waterville, 1. _Jefferson County_: Cleveland, 2. _Kittitas
    County_: 2 mi. S Blewett Pass, 3000 ft., 6: Ellensburg, 1500 ft.,
    4. _Whitman County_: Colfax, 2. _Yakima County_: McAllister
    Meadows, Tieton River, 3000 ft., 3; Gotchen Cr., 5500 ft., near
    Sava Spring, Mt. Adams, 2. _Klickitat County_: 8 mi. S Glenwood,
    base Mt. Adams, 2. _Asotin County_: Anatone, 3300 ft., 4; Bly, 1000
    ft., 2.


    Microtus miurus muriei (Nelson)

    1931. _Microtus muriei_ Nelson, Jour. Mamm., 12:311, August 24,
    type from Kutuk River (tributary of Alatna River), Endicott Mts.,
    Alaska.

Rausch (Jour. Washington Acad. Sci., 40:135, April 21, 1950) proposed
the name _Microtus miurus paneaki_, with type locality at Tolugak Lake
(lat. 68 deg. 24' N, long. 152 deg. 10' W), Brooks Range, Alaska, for a
meadow mouse of the subgenus _Stenocranius_. This place is only
approximately forty miles east and north of the type locality of the
earlier named _Microtus muriei_, also a member of the subgenus
_Stenocranius_. Large series of specimens of this subgenus, from the
Arctic Slope of Alaska, are in the Museum of Natural History of the
University of Kansas. Study of these indicates that the differences,
which Rausch (_op. cit._:136) described as distinguishing his _M. m.
paneaki_ from _M. muriei_, result from differences in age of the
specimens, and possibly in part from differences in seasonal condition
of pelage. For example, Rausch thought that _M. m. paneaki_ was larger
than _M. muriei_ but our specimens reveal that such is not the case. The
measurements given below of the type specimen of _M. muriei_ (after
Nelson, original description) and measurements (in parentheses) of an
immature female (43807 K. U.) of _Microtus miurus muriei_ from Chandler
Lake, 68 deg. 12', 152 deg. 45', 2900 ft., Alaska, show close
correspondence in size. Total length, 119 (122); tail vertebrae, 24 (24);
hind foot, 20 (20); condylobasal length, 24.3 (24.5); zygomatic breadth,
10.7 (11.0); greatest width of braincase, 9.0 (9.0); length of nasals,
6.5 (6.0); basal width of rostrum, 4.0 (4.3). In the light of all of the
evidence now available, it seems best to treat _Microtus miurus paneaki_
Rausch as a synonym of _Microtus muriei_ Nelson.

Quay (Jour. Mamm., 32:95, February 15, 1951) identified fifty-eight
specimens from the Seward Peninsula of Alaska as _Microtus miurus
oreas_ Osgood. Through the courtesy of Dr. Charles P. Lyman, fifteen of
Quay's specimens in the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard
College have been examined by one of us (Hall). These specimens are as
follows: Lava Lake (43378, 43379, 43381, 43382, 43386, 43467 and
43478); Mt. Boyan (43384, 43385, 43463 and 43477); Anvil Hill [= Peak],
Cooper Gulch (43377, 43464 and 43473); ----? Lake, 43383. Although we
are not prepared to say that these specimens are _M. m. muriei_, they
seem to resemble _M. m. muriei_ as closely as they do any other named
form and we here refer them to that subspecies.

The facts are that a critical taxonomic study of the American specimens
of the subgenus _Stenocranius_ is required in order to ascertain the
geographic variation. One of us (Hall) has examined the holotypes of
the kinds named from Alaska, and the material listed by R. Baker (Univ.
Kansas Publ. Mus. Nat. Hist., 5:109) of the two kinds named from
Canada. The degree and nature of the variation shown by these specimens
lead us to the conclusion that all are of a single species. If the
American mouse is specifically distinct from any of the previously
named Asiatic species--at this writing we lack material to decide this
question--the named kinds from the mainland of the New World may stand
as follows:

    MICROTUS MIURUS ANDERSONI Rand.

        1945. _Microtus andersoni_ Rand, Bull. Nat. Mus. Canada, 99:42,
        prior to June 20, type from near headwaters of Little Keel
        River, 5500 ft., 82 mi. W Mackenzie River on Canol Road,
        Mackenzie.

    MICROTUS MIURUS CANTATOR Anderson.

        1947. _Microtus cantator_ Anderson, Bull. Nat. Mus. Canada,
        102:161, January 24, type from mountain top near Tepee Lake,
        61 deg. 35' N, 140 deg. 22' W, N slope Elias Range, Yukon Terr.

    MICROTUS MIURUS MIURUS Osgood.

        1901. _Microtus miurus_ Osgood, N. Amer. Fauna, 21:64,
        September 26, type from head of Bear Creek, in mts. near Hope
        City, Turnagain Arm, Cook Inlet, Alaska.

    MICROTUS MIURUS MURIEI Nelson.

        1931. _Microtus muriei_ Nelson, Jour. Mamm., 12:311, August 24,
        type from Kutuk River (tributary of Alatna River), Endicott
        Mts., Alaska.

        1950. _Microtus miurus paneaki_ Rausch, Jour. Washington Acad.
        Sci., 40:135, April 21, type from Tolugak Lake (lat. 68 deg. 24'
        N, long. 152 deg. 10'), Brooks Range, Alaska.

    MICROTUS MIURUS OREAS Osgood.

        1907. _Microtus miurus oreas_ Osgood, Proc. Biol. Soc.
        Washington, 20:61, April 18, type from Toklat River, Alaskan
        Range, Alaska.


    _Transmitted July 8, 1952._






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Comments on the Taxonomy and
Geographic Distribution of North American Microtines, by E. Raymond Hall and E. Lendell Cockrum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTH AMERICAN MICROTINES ***

***** This file should be named 29201.txt or 29201.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/0/29201/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
