The Project Gutenberg EBook of Remarks Concerning Stones Said to Have
Fallen from the Clouds, Both in These Days, and in Antient Times, by Edward King

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Remarks Concerning Stones Said to Have Fallen from the Clouds, Both in These Days, and in Antient Times

Author: Edward King

Release Date: July 1, 2009 [EBook #29281]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REMARKS CONCERNING STONES ***




Produced by Meredith Bach and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








 REMARKS
 CONCERNING
 STONES
 SAID TO HAVE FALLEN FROM THE CLOUDS, BOTH
 IN THESE DAYS,
 AND IN ANTIENT TIMES.

 BY
 EDWARD KING, ESQ. F. R. S. AND F. A. S.


    Res ubi plurimum proficere, et valere possunt, collocari debent.
                                                      Cicero de Orat. 37.


 LONDON:
 PRINTED FOR G. NICOL, BOOKSELLER TO HIS MAJESTY,
 PALL-MALL.
 1796.




[Illustration: F.1.  F.3.  F.2.]




  _An Attempt to account for the Production of a Shower of Stones,
  that fell in Tuscany, on the 16th of June, 1794; and to shew that
  there are Traces of similar Events having taken place, in the
  highest Ages of Antiquity. In the course of which Detail is also
  inserted, an Account of an extraordinary Hail-stone, that fell, with
  many others, in Cornwall, on the 20th of October, 1791._


Having received this last winter, from Sir Charles Blagden, some very
curious _manuscript_ accounts, concerning a surprising shower of stones;
which is said, on the testimony of several persons, to have fallen in
Tuscany, on the 16th of June, 1794;--and having also perused, with much
attention, a very interesting pamphlet, written in Italian, by _Abbate
Ambrose Soldani_, Professor of mathematics, in the University of Siena,
containing an extraordinary and full detail of such facts as could be
collected relating to this shower; the whole has appeared to me to
afford such an ample field for philosophical contemplation, and also for
the illustration of antient historic facts; that (leaving the whole to
rest upon such testimony as the learned Professor has already collected
together; and to be supported by such further corroboration, as I am
informed is likely _soon_ to arrive in England,) I cannot but think it
doing some service to the cause of literature, and science, to give to
the world, in the earliest instance, a short abridgement of the
substance of the whole of the information; expressed in the most concise
and plainest language, in which it is possible for me to convey a full
and exact idea of the phaenomenon.

It may be of some use, and afford satisfaction to several curious
persons, to find the whole here compressed in so small a compass.

And, as I shall add my own conclusions without reserve; because the
whole of the phaenomenon tends greatly to confirm some ideas which I had
previously been led to form, many years ago, concerning the
consolidation of certain species of stone; it may open a door for
further curious investigation.

And it may at least amuse, if not instruct; whilst I add a short detail
of uncommon facts, recorded in antient history, and tending to shew
clearly, that we are not without precedents of _similar events_ having
happened, in the early ages of antiquity.

On the 16th of June, 1794, a tremendous cloud was seen in Tuscany, near
Siena, and Radacofani; coming from the north, about seven o'clock in the
evening;--sending forth sparks, like rockets;--throwing out smoke like a
furnace;--rendering violent explosions, and blasts, more like those of
cannon, and of numerous muskets, than like thunder;--and casting down to
the ground hot stones:--whilst the lightning that issued from the cloud
was remarkably red; and moved with _less_ velocity than usual.

The cloud appeared of different shapes; to persons in different
situations; and remained suspended a long time: but every where was
plainly seen to be burning, and smoking like a furnace.

And its original height, from a variety of circumstances put together,
seems to have been much above the common region of the clouds.

The testimony, concerning the falling of the stones from it, appears to
be almost unquestionable:--and is, evidently, from different persons,
who had no communication with each other.

For first; the fall of four stones is precisely ascertained: one of
which was of an irregular figure, with a point like that of a
diamond;--weighed five pounds and an half;--and had a vitriolic
smell.--And another weighed three pounds and an half;--was black on the
outside, as if from smoke;--and, internally, seemed composed of matter
of the colour of ashes;--in which were perceived small spots of metals,
of gold and silver.

And, besides these, Professor Soldani of Siena, was shewn about fifteen
others: the surfaces of which were glazed black, like a sort of
varnish;--resisted acids;--and were too hard to be scratched with the
point of a penknife.

Signior _Andrew Montauli_, who saw the cloud, as he was travelling,
described it as appearing much above the common region of the clouds;
and as being clearly discerned to be on fire;--and becoming white, by
degrees; not only where it had a communication, by a sort of stream of
smoke and lightning, with a neighbouring similar cloud: but also, at
last, in two-third parts of its whole mass, which was originally black.
And yet he took notice, that it was not affected by the rays of the sun,
though they shone full on its lower parts.--And he could discern as it
were the bason of a fiery furnace, in the cloud, having a whirling
motion.

This curious observer gives an account also, of a stone, which he was
assured fell from the cloud, at the feet of a farmer; and was dug out of
the ground, into which it had penetrated.--And he says, that it was
about five inches long, and four broad; nearly square; and polished:
black on the surface, as if smoked; but within, like a sort of
sand-stone, with various small particles of iron, and bright metallic
stars.

Other stones are described by him; which were said to have fallen at the
same time: were triangular; and terminated in a sort of (pyramidal) or
conical figure.--And others were so small as to weigh not more than an
ounce.

Professor Soldani saw another stone, said to have fallen from the cloud,
which had the figure of a parallelopiped, blunted at the angles; and was
as it were varnished, on the outside, with a black crust; and quite
unlike any stones whatever of the soil of the country where it had
fallen.

Two ladies being at _Cozone_, about 20 miles from _Siena_, saw a number
of stones fall, with a great noise, in a neighbouring meadow: one of
which, being soon after taken up by a young woman, burnt her hand:
another burnt a countryman's hat: and a third was said to strike off the
branch of a mulberry tree; and to cause the tree to wither.

Another stone, of about two ounces weight, fell near a girl watching
sheep; a young person, whose veracity it is said could not be
doubted.--This stone, the Professor tells us, is also a parallelopiped,
with the angles rounded; and its internal substance is like that of the
others; only with more metallic spots; especially when viewed with a
magnifying glass: and the black external crust appears to be minutely
crystallized.

Many others, of a similar kind, were in the possession of different
persons at Siena.

And besides the falling of these from the cloud, there is described to
have been a fall of sand; seen by keepers of cattle near _Cozone_,
together with the falling of what appeared like squibs; and which proved
afterwards to be stones, of the sort just described, weighing two or
three ounces:--and some only a quarter of an ounce.

Amongst other stones that fell; was one weighing two pounds, and two
ounces; which was also an oblong parallelopiped, with blunted angles,
(as they are called, but which I think meant plainly prismatical
terminations, and are said to have been about an inch in height;) and
this was most remarkable for having, a small circle, or sort of belt
round it, in one part; wherein the black crust appeared more smooth; and
shining like glass; as if that part had suffered a greater degree of
heat than the rest.

Another, also, was no less remarkable, for having many rounded cavities
on its surface: as if the stone had been struck with small balls, whilst
it was forming; and before it was hardened; which left their
impressions.--And some appearances, of the same kind, were found on one
of the four surfaces of another stone, in the possession of Soldani.

On minute examination, the Professor found the stones were composed of
blackish _crystals_, of different kinds; with metallic or pyritical
spots, all united together by a kind of consolidated ashes.--And, on
polishing them, they appeared to have a ground of a dark ash colour;
intermixed with cubical blackish crystals, and shining pyritical specks,
of a silver and gold colour.

The conclusion which Professor Soldani evidently forms, is; _that the
stones were generated in the air, by a combination of mineral
substances, which had risen somewhere or other_, AS EXHALATIONS, _from
the earth_: but, as he seems to think, _not from_ Vesuvius.

The names of many persons, besides those already referred to, are
mentioned; who were eye witnesses to the fall of the stones. And several
_depositions_ were made, _in a regular juridical manner_, to ascertain
the truth of the facts.

The space of ground, within which the stones fell, was from three to
four miles.

The falling of them, was _the very day after_ the great eruption of
Vesuvius.

And the distance of the place, from Vesuvius, could not be less than two
hundred miles, and seems to have been more.

Vesuvius is situated _to the south_ of the spot: and the cloud came
_from the north_; about thirteen, or at most eighteen hours, after the
eruption.

Now, putting all these circumstances together, I cannot but venture to
form a conclusion, somewhat different from Professor Soldani's; though
perfectly agreeing with his general principles.

From a course of observations, and inquiries, which I have been led to
pursue, for a great many years: tending to elucidate the history of
extraneous fossils, and of the deluge; I have long been convinced, that
stones in general, and strata of rocks, of all kinds, have been formed
by _two_ very different operations of those elements, which the wisdom,
and omnipotent hand of God, has ordained, and created.

The one, by means of fire:--and the other, by means of water.

And, of each sort, there are two subdivisions.

Of the stones, and rocks, formed by fire;--there are some, (besides
lavas,) whose component parts, having been previously fused, and in a
melted state, did merely cool, and harden _gradually_.

And there are others; whose component parts, having been fused, and in a
melted state, and having so become completely liquid; did instantly, by
the operation of the powers of _attraction_, become crystallized.

And, in like manner; of stones, and of strata of rocks, formed by means
of water;--there are some, which having had their component parts
brought together, in a fluid state; did then merely become gradually
settled; and by the power of attraction, and the mixture of crystalline
particles, were hardened by degrees.

And there are others: which, having had their component parts, in like
manner, brought together by water, did yet, on account of the peculiar
nature, and more powerful _attraction_ of those parts, _instantly_
crystallize.

And both of stones, and of strata of rocks, formed by fire; and of
stones, and of strata of rocks formed by means of water; there are some
such, as have been slowly consolidated by the first kind of operation;
namely by the gradual cooling or settling of the substances; which yet
do contain imbedded in them, crystals formed by the latter kind of
operation.

Instances of which, we seem to have, in some granites, on the one
hand;--and in some sorts of limestones on the other.

To this I must add also; that there appear further, to have been some
stones formed _by a sort of precipitation_: much in the same manner as
_Grew_ describes[A] the kernels, and stones of fruit to have been
hardened.

And I have met with many instances, wherein it appears unquestionably,
that all these kind of processes in nature are going on continually: and
that extraneous substances are actually inclosed, and _continually
inclosing_, which could not be _antediluvian_; but must have been
recent.

To these short premises, I must beg leave to add; that in two papers
formerly printed in the Philosophical Transactions,[B] I endeavoured, by
some very remarkable instances, to prove, that iron, wherever it comes
into combination with any substances that are tending to consolidation,
_hastens the process exceedingly_;--and also renders the hardness of the
body much greater.

And I have also endeavoured, elsewhere,[C] to shew, in consequence of
conclusions deduced from experiments of the most unquestionable
authority, that _air_, in its various shapes and modifications, is
indeed _itself_ the great consolidating fluid, out of which solid bodies
are composed; and by means of which the various attractions take place,
which form all the hard bodies, and visible substances upon earth.

From all these premises then, it was impossible for me not to be led to
conclude; that we have, in this august phaenomenon of the fall of stones
from the clouds, in Tuscany, an obvious proof, as it were before our
eyes, of the combined operation of those very powers, and processes, to
which I have been alluding.

It is well known; that pyrites, which are composed of iron, and
sulphur, and other adventitious matter, when laid in heaps, and
moistened, will take fire.

It is also well known, that a mixture of pyrites of almost any kind,
beaten small, and mixed with iron filings and water, when buried in the
ground will take fire; and produce a sort of artificial volcano. And,
surely then, wherever a vast quantity of such kind of matter should at
any time become mixed together, as flying dust, or ashes; and be by any
means condensed together, or compressed, the same effect might be
produced, even in the atmosphere and air.

Instead, therefore, of having recourse to the supposition, of the cloud
in Tuscany having been produced by any other kind of exhalations from
the earth; we may venture to believe, that an immense cloud of ashes,
mixed with pyritical dust, and with numerous particles of iron, having
been projected from Vesuvius to a most prodigious height, became
afterwards condensed in its descent;--took fire, both of itself, as well
as by means of the electric fluid it contained;--produced many
explosions;--melted the pyritical, and metallic, and argillaceous
particles, of which the ashes were composed;--and, by this means, had a
sudden crystallization, and consolidation of those particles taken
place, which formed the stones of various sizes, that fell to the
ground: _but did not harden the clayey ashes so rapidly as the metallic
particles crystallized_; and, therefore, gave an opportunity for
_impressions to be made_ on the surfaces of some of the stones, as they
fell, by means of the impinging of the others.

Nor does it appear to me, to be any solid objection to this conclusion,
either that Vesuvius was so far distant; or that the cloud came from the
north.

For, if we examine Sir William Hamilton's account of the very eruption
in question,[D] we shall find, that he had reason to conclude, that the
_pine-like_ cloud of ashes projected from Vesuvius, at one part of the
time during this eruption, was twenty-five or thirty miles in height;
and, if to this conclusion we add, not only that some ashes actually
were carried to a greater distance than _two hundred miles_;[E] but
that, when any substance is at a vast height in the atmosphere, a very
small variation of the direction of its course, causes a most prodigious
variation in the extent of the range of ground where it shall fall;
(just as the least variation in the angle, at the vertex of an
_isosceles_ triangle, causes a very great alteration in the extent of
its base;) we may easily perceive, not only the possibility, but the
probability, that the ashes in question, projected to so vast an height,
were first carried even beyond _Siena_ in Tuscany, northward; and then
brought back, by a contrary current of wind, in the direction in which
they fell.

Sir William Hamilton himself formed somewhat this sort of conclusion, on
receiving the first intimation of this shower of stones from the Earl of
Bristol.[F]

I cannot therefore but allow my own conclusion to carry conviction with
it to my own mind; and to send it forth into the world; as a ground, at
least, for speculation, and reflection, to the minds of others.

That ashes, and sand, and pyritical and sulphureous dust, mixed with
metallic particles from volcanoes; fit for the instantaneous
crystallization, and consolidation of such bodies as we have been
describing, are often actually floating in the atmosphere, at incredible
distances from volcanoes, and more frequently than the world are at all
aware of, is manifest from several well attested facts.

On the 26th of December, 1631, Captain _Badily_, being in the Gulph of
Volo, in the Archipelago, riding at anchor, about ten o'clock at night,
it began to rain _sand_ and _ashes_; and continued to do so till two
o'clock the next morning. The ashes lay about two inches thick on the
deck: so that they cast them overboard just as they had done snow the
day before. There was no wind stirring, when the ashes fell: and yet
this extraordinary shower was not confined merely to the place where
_Badily's_ ship was;[G] but, as it appeared afterwards, was extended so
widely to other parts, that ships coming from _St. John d'Acre_ to that
port, being at the distance of _one hundred leagues_ from thence, were
covered with the same sort of ashes. And no possible account could be
given of them, except that they might come from Vesuvius.

On the 23d of October, 1755, a ship belonging to a merchant of Leith,
bound for Charles Town, in Carolina, being betwixt Shetland and Iceland,
and about twenty-five leagues distant from the former, and therefore
about three hundred miles from the latter, a shower of dust fell in the
night upon the decks.[H]

In October, 1762, at _Detroit_, in America, was a most surprising
darkness, from day-break till four in the afternoon, during which time
some rain falling, brought down, with the drops, sulphur and dirt;
which rendered white paper black, and when burned fizzed like wet
gunpowder:[I] and whence such matter could originally be brought,
appeared to be past all conjecture, unless it came so far off as from
the volcano in Guadaloupe.

Condamine says, the ashes of the volcano of _Sangay_, in South America,
sometimes pass over the provinces of Maca, and Quito; and are even
carried as far as Guayaquil.[J]

And Hooke says,[K] that on occasion of a great explosion from a volcano,
in the island of Ternata, in the East Indies, there followed so great a
darkness, that the inhabitants could not see each other the next day:
and he justly leads us to infer what an immense quantity of ashes must,
by this means, have been showered down somewhere on the sea; because at
_Mindanao_, an hundred miles off, all the land was covered with ashes a
foot thick.

And now, I must add; that such kind of _falling of stones from the
clouds_, as has been described to have happened in Tuscany, seems to
have happened also in very remote ages, of which we are not without
sufficient testimony; and such as well deserves to be allowed and
considered, on the present occasion; although the knowledge of the facts
was, at first, in days of ignorance and gross darkness, soon perverted
to the very worst purposes.

In the Acts of the holy Apostles, we read, that the chief magistrate, at
_Ephesus_, begun his harangue to the people, by saying, "Ye men of
Ephesus, _what man is there that knoweth not how that the City of the
Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the_ IMAGE
_which fell down from Jupiter_?" (or rather, as the original Greek has
it) "_of_ THAT _which fell down from Jupiter_?" And the learned
_Greaves_ leads us to conclude this image of Diana to have been nothing
but _a conical, or pyramidal stone_, that fell from the clouds. For he
tells us,[L] on unquestionable authorities, that many others of the
images of heathen deities were merely such.

Herodian expressly declares,[M] that the Phoenicians had no statue of
the sun, polished by hand, to express an image; but only had a certain
_great stone, circular below, and ending with a sharpness above, in the
figure of a cone, of black colour. And they report it to have fallen
from heaven, and to be the image of the sun_.

So Tacitus says,[N] that at Cyprus, _the image of Venus was not of human
shape; but a figure rising continually round, from a larger bottom to a
small top, in conical fashion_. And it is to be remarked, that _Maximus
Tyrius_ (who perhaps was a more accurate mathematician,) says, the stone
was _pyramidal_.

And in Corinth, we are told by _Pausanias_,[O] that the images both of
_Jupiter Melichius_, and of _Diana_, were made (if made at all by hand)
with little or no art. The former being represented by a pyramid, the
latter by a column.

_Clemens Alexandrinus_ was so well acquainted with these facts, that he
even concludes[P] the worship of such stones to have been the first, and
earliest idolatry, in the world.

It is hard to conceive how mankind should ever have been led to so
accursed an abomination, as the worship of stocks, and stones, at all:
but, as far as any thing so horrid is to be accounted for, there is no
way so likely of rendering a possible account; as that of concluding,
that some of these pyramidal stones, at least, like the image of
_Diana_, actually did fall, in the earliest ages, from the clouds; in
the same manner as these pyramidal stones fell, in 1794, in Tuscany.

_Plutarch_, it is well known, mentions[Q] a stone which formerly fell
from the clouds, in _Thrace_, and which _Anaxagoras_ fancied[R] to have
fallen from the sun.

And it is very remarkable, that the old writer, from whom Plutarch had
his account, described the cloud, from which this stone was said to
fall, in a manner (if we only make some allowance for a little
exaggeration in barbarous ages,) very similar to _Soldani's_ account of
the cloud in Tuscany.--It hovered about for a long time; seemed to throw
out splinters, which flew about, like wandering stars, before they fell;
and at last it cast down to the earth a stone of extraordinary size.

Pliny,[S] who tells us that not only the remembrance of this event, but
that the stone itself was preserved to his days, says, it was of a dark
burnt colour. And though he does indeed speak of it as being of an
extravagant weight and size, in which circumstance perhaps he was
misled: yet he mentions _another_ of a moderate size, which fell in
_Abydos_, and was become an object of idolatrous worship in that place;
as was still _another_, of the same sort, at _Potidaea_.

_Livy_, who like _Herodotus_, has been oftentimes censured as too
credulous, and as a relater of falsehoods, for preserving traditions of
_an extraordinary kind_; which, after all, in ages of more enlarged
information, have proved to have been founded in truth; describes[T] a
fall of stones to have happened on mount _Alba_, during the reign of
_Tullus Hostilius_, (that is about 652 years before the Christian aera),
in words that exactly convey an idea of just such a phaenomenon, as this
which has so lately been observed in Tuscany.

He says, the senate were told, that _lapidibus pluisse_, it had rained
stones. And, when they doubted of the fact; and sent to inquire; they
were assured that stones had actually fallen; and had fallen just as
hail does, which is concreted in a storm.[U]

He mentions also shortly another shower of stones,[V] A. C. 202, and
still a third,[W] which must have happened about the year 194 before the
Christian aera.

Such are the records of antient history. And in Holy Writ also a
remembrance of similar events is preserved.

For when the royal Psalmist says,[X] "_The Lord also thundered out of
heaven, and the Highest gave his thunder: hail-stones_, AND COALS OF
FIRE,"--the latter expression, in consistency with common sense, and
conformably to the right meaning of language, cannot but allude to some
_such_ phaenomenon as we have been describing. And especially, as in the
cautious translation of the seventy, a Greek word is used, which
decidedly means _real hard substances made red hot_; and not mere
appearances of fire or flame.

Whilst therefore, with the same sacred writer,[Y] we should be led to
consider all these powerful operations, as the works of God; _Who
casteth forth his ice like morsels_;[Z] and should be led to consider
"_fire and hail, snow and vapours, wind and storm as fulfilling his
word_;"[AA] we should also be led to perceive, that the objections to
Holy Writ, founded on a supposed _impossibility_ of the truth of what is
written in the book of _Joshua_,[BB] concerning the stones that fell
from heaven, on the army of the Canaanites; are only founded in
ignorance, and error.

And much more should we be led to do so; when, to these observations,
and testimonies, concerning showers of hot burning stones, is added the
consideration; that within the short period of our own lives, incredibly
large _real hail-stones_, formed of consolidated ice;--_of ice
consolidated in the atmosphere_, have fallen both in France, and in
England.

In France, on the 13th of July in the year 1788;--of which it is well
known there has been a printed account: and concerning which it is said,
and has been confirmed, on good authority, that some of the stones
weighed three pounds: whilst others have been said to weigh even five
pounds.

And in England, on the 20th of October, 1791, in Cornwall.

Of one of the hail-stones of this latter, minor storm, I have had an
opportunity of obtaining, by the favour of a friend, an exact model in
glass; whereof I now add an engraving.

This stone fell, with thousands of others of the same kind, near
_Menabilly_, the seat of _Philip Rashleigh_, Esq.; well known for his
science, and attention to whatever is curious; who having great copper
works, and many ingenious miners, and workmen, on his estate, and
directly under his eye; caused it to be instantly picked up: and having
then, himself, first traced both its top, and bottom, upon paper; and
having measured its thickness in every part, with a pair of compasses;
caused a very exact mould to be formed: and afterwards, in that mould,
had this model cast in glass: wherein, also, the appearances of the
imbedded, common, small, roundish hail-stones, are seen transparently;
just as they appeared in the great hail-stone itself originally.

Fig. 1, is a representation of the flat bottom of the stone.

Fig. 2, is a representation of the top of the stone.

And fig. 3, shews the whole solid appearance sideways.

Whilst Mr. Rashleigh was taking the measures, it melted so fast, that he
could not, in the end, take the _exact weight_, as he fully intended to
have done. But as this model in glass weighs exactly 1 ounce, 16
pennyweights, 23 grains, we may fairly conclude, that the hail-stone
itself weighed much above half an ounce.

For it is well known, that the specific gravity of common glass, of
which sort this model is made, is to that of water, as 2.620 to 1.000.
And the specific gravity of common water, is to ice, as 8 to 7.[CC]--And
computing according to this standard, I make the exact weight of the
hail-stone to have been 295 grains.

From the singular manner in which the small, prior, common hail-stones
appear to have been imbedded in this larger one, whilst they were
falling to the earth; there is reason to be convinced, that it was
formed in the atmosphere, by a sudden extraordinary congelation _almost
instantaneously_, out of rain suddenly condensed, which was mingled with
the common hail.

And it was very remarkable, that its dissolution, and melting, also, was
much more rapid than that of the common small white hail-stones: as was
the case, in like manner, with the other numerous large ones.

Perhaps it ought to be here added:--that on the 18th of May, in the year
1680, some hail-stones are recorded to have fallen in London, near
_Gresham college_, which were seen and examined by the celebrated _Dr.
Hooke_; and were some of them not less than two inches over, and others
three inches.

This which fell in Cornwall was only about one inch and three quarters
long; an inch, or in some parts an inch and a quarter broad; and between
half an inch, and three quarters of an inch thick. And its weight was
near an ounce.--How much more tremendous then were those others, that
have been described as having fallen in France?--the accounts of some of
them may very probably have been exaggerated: but the reality was
nevertheless as wonderful, surely, as any thing related concerning the
ages of antiquity.

A proneness to credulity is ever blameable. And it is very possible,
that sometimes, in a very wonderful narration, a jest may be intended to
be palmed upon the world, instead of any elucidation of truth.--But
facts, _positively affirmed_, should be hearkened to with patience: and,
at least, so far recorded, as to give an opportunity of verifying
whether similar events do afterwards happen; and of comparing such
events one with another.

To what has been said, therefore, concerning the fall of stones in
Tuscany, and concerning these strange showers of hail, in France, and in
England, it might perhaps too justly be deemed an unwarrantable
omission, on this occasion, not to mention the very strange fact that
is affirmed to have happened the last year, near _the Wold Cottage_ in
Yorkshire.

I leave the fact to rest on the support of the testimonies referred to
in the printed paper, which is in so many persons' hands; and that is
given to those who have the curiosity to examine the stone itself, now
exhibiting in London;--and shall only relate the substance of the
account shortly, as it is given to us.

In the afternoon of the 13th of December, 1795, near the Wold Cottage,
noises were heard in the air, by various persons, like the report of a
pistol; or of guns at a distance at sea; though there was neither any
thunder or lightning at the time:--two distinct concussions of the earth
were said to be perceived:--and an hissing noise, was also affirmed to
be heard by other persons, as of something passing through the air;--and
a labouring man plainly saw (as we are told) that something was so
passing; and beheld a stone, as it seemed, at last, (about ten yards, or
thirty feet, distant from the ground) descending, and striking into the
ground, which flew up all about him: and in falling, sparks of fire,
seemed to fly from it.

Afterwards he went to the place, in company with others; who had
witnessed part of the phaenomena, and dug the stone up from the place,
where it was buried about twenty-one inches deep.

It smelt, (as it is said,) very strongly of sulphur, when it was dug up:
and was even warm, and smoked:--it was found to be thirty inches in
length, and twenty-eight and a half inches in breadth. And it weighed
fifty-six pounds.

Such is the account.--I affirm nothing.--Neither do I pretend either
absolutely to believe: or to disbelieve.--I have not an opportunity to
examine the whole of the evidence.--But it may be examined: and so I
leave it to be.

This, however, I will say: that _first_ I saw a fragment of this stone;
which had come into the hands of Sir Charles Blagden, from the Duke of
Leeds: and afterwards I saw the stone itself.--That it plainly had a
dark, black crust; with several concave impressions on the outside,
which must have been made before it was quite hardened; just like what
is related concerning the crusts of those stones that fell in
Italy.--That its substance was not _properly_ of a _granite kind_, as
described in the printed paper; but a sort of _grit stone_; composed
(somewhat like the stones said to have fallen in Italy) of sand and
ashes.--That it contained very many particles, obviously of the
appearance of gold, and silver, and iron; (or rather more truly of
_pyrites_).--That there were also several small rusty specks; probably
from decomposed pyrites;--and some striated marks;--that it does not
effervesce with acids;--and that, as far as I have ever seen, or known,
or have been able to obtain any information, no _such_ stone has ever
been found, before this time, in Yorkshire; or in any part of England.
Nor can I easily conceive that such a species of stone could be formed,
by art, to impose upon the public.

Whether, therefore, it might, or might not, possibly be the effect of
ashes flung out from _Heckla_, and wafted to England; like those flung
out from Vesuvius, and (as I am disposed to believe) wafted to Tuscany,
I have nothing to affirm.

I wish to be understood to preserve mere records, the full authority for
which, deserves to be investigated more and more.

Having, nevertheless, gone so far as to say thus much; I ought to add,
that the memorial of such sort of large stones having fallen from the
clouds is still preserved also in Germany.

For one is recorded to have fallen in _Alsace_, in the midst of a storm
of hail, November 29th, A. D. 1630;[DD] which is said to be preserved in
the great church of _Anxissem_: and to be like a large dark sort of
flint-stone; having its surface operated upon by fire: and to be of very
many pounds weight.

And another is said to be still preserved at Vienna.

This last is described by _Abbe Stutz_, Assistant in the Imperial
cabinet of curiosities at Vienna, in a book printed in German, at
_Leipsyc_, in 1790: entitled _Bergbaukimde_ (or _the Science of
Mining_.)

After describing two other stones, said to have fallen from the clouds:
one in the _Eichstedt_ country in Germany; and another in the _Bechin_
circle, in Bohemia, in July, 1753; concerning the _real_ falling of
which he had expressed some doubts; he proceeds to describe the falling
of two, (whereof this was one,) not far from _Agram_, the capital of
_Croatia_, in Hungary; which caused him to change his opinion; and to
believe, that the falling of such stones from heaven, was very possible.

His words, fairly translated,[EE] in the beginning of his narrative,
are, "These accounts put me in mind of a mass of iron, weighing
seventy-one pounds, which was sent to the imperial collection of natural
curiosities: about the origin of which _many mouths have been distorted
with scoffing laughter_. If, in the _Eichstedt_ specimen, the effects of
fire appear _tolerably_ evident; they are, in this, not to be
mistaken.--Its surface is full of spherical impressions, like the mass
of iron, which the celebrated _Pallas_ found on the Jenisei river;
except that here the impressions are larger, and less deep; and it
wants both the yellow glass, which fills up the hollows of the
_Siberian_ iron; and the _sand stone_, which is found in the _Eichstedt_
specimen; the whole mass being solid, compact, and black, like hammered
iron."

And his words in the end of the narrative are,

"There is a great step from the disbelief of tales, to the finding out
the true cause of a phaenomenon which appears wonderful to us. And
probably I should have committed the fault into which we so naturally
fall, respecting things we cannot explain; and have rather denied the
whole history, than have determined to believe any thing _so
incredible_; if various new writings, on electricity, and thunder, had
not fortunately, at that time come into my hands; concerning remarkable
experiments of reviving _metallic calces_ by the electric spark.
Lightning is an electrical stroke on a large scale.--If then the
reduction of iron can be obtained, by the discharge of an electrical
machine; why should not this be accomplished as well, and with much
greater effect by the very powerful discharge of the lightning of the
clouds?"

The substance of the account of the fall of stones, in Hungary, as given
by him, after the most accurate inquiries, is what I shall now add in
the following abridged detail; and it was verified by _Wolfgang
Kukulyewich, Spiritual vicar of Francis Baron Clobuschiczky, Bishop of
Agram_, who caused seven eye witnesses to be examined, concerning the
actual falling of these stones on the 26th of May, 1751;--which
witnesses were ready to testify all they affirmed, upon oath,--and one
of them was Mr. George Marsich, Curate, as we should call him, of the
parish.

According to their accounts; about six o'clock, in the afternoon of the
day just mentioned, there was seen towards the east, a kind of fiery
ball; which, after it had burst into two parts, with a great report,
exceeding that of a cannon, fell from the sky, in the form, and
appearance of _two chains_ entangled in one another:--and also with a
loud noise, as of a great number of carriages rolled along. And after
this a black smoke appeared; and a part of the ball seemed to fall in an
arable field of one _Michael Koturnass_; on the fall of which to the
ground a still greater noise was heard; and a shock perceived, something
like an earthquake.

This piece was afterwards soon dug out of the ground; which had been
particularly noted to be plain and level, and ploughed just before; but
where it was now found to have made a great fissure, or cleft, an ell
wide, whilst it singed the earth on the sides.

The other piece, which fell in a meadow, was also dug up; and weighed
sixteen pounds.

And it is fairly observed, that the unadorned manner in which the whole
account from _Agram_ is written; the agreement of the different
witnesses, who had no reason to accord in a lie; and the similarity of
this history to that of the _Eichstedt_ stone; makes it at least very
probable, that there was indeed something real, and worth notice, in the
account.

The _Eichstedt_ stone (somewhat like that said to have fallen so lately
in Yorkshire) is described as having been composed of ash-grey sand
stone, with fine grains intermixed all through it, partly of real native
iron, and partly of yellowish brown ochre of iron: and as being about as
hard as building stone.--It is said not to effervesce with acids, and
evidently to consist of small particles of siliceous stone and iron.--It
had also a solid malleable coat of native iron, as was supposed, quite
free from sulphur, and about two lines thick; which quite covered its
surface; resembling a blackish glazing. And the whole mass exhibited
evident marks of having been exposed to fire.

A plain testimony of the falling of this was affirmed to be, produced as
follows; that a labourer, at a brick-kiln, in winter, when the earth was
covered with snow, saw it fall down out of the air immediately after a
violent clap of thunder;--and that he instantly ran up to take it out of
the snow; but found he could not do so, on account of its heat; and was
obliged therefore to wait, to let it cool. That it was about half a foot
in diameter; and was entirely covered with a black coat like iron.[FF]

And I must now add that there is a record;[GG] that stones, to the
number of some hundreds, did once fall in the neighbourhood of a place
called _Abdua_; which were very large and heavy;--of the colour of rusty
iron;--smooth, and hard;--and of a sulphureous smell:--and which were
observed to fall from a vehement whirlwind; that appeared (like that in
Tuscany) as an atmosphere of fire.

Here I intended to have concluded all my observations. But a recent
publication, which I knew not of, when these sheets were written,
obliges me to add a few more pages.

In a very singular tract, published in 1794, at Riga, by Dr. _Chladni_,
concerning the supposed origin of the mass of iron found by Dr. Pallas
in Siberia; which the Tartars still affirm to be _an holy thing_, and,
_to have fallen from heaven_; and concerning what have been supposed, by
him, to be similar phaenomena; some circumstances are also mentioned,
which it would be an unjust omission not to take notice of shortly, on
the present occasion.

With the author's hypothesis I do not presume to interfere; but surely
his facts, which he affirms in support of his ideas, deserve much
attention; and ought to be inserted, before I conclude these
observations: and the rather, as they were adduced to maintain
conclusions very different from these now offered to the consideration
of the curious.

On the 21st of May, 1676, a fire ball was seen to come from
Dalmatia,[HH] proceeding over the Adriatic sea; it passed obliquely over
Italy; where an hissing noise was heard; it burst SSW from Leghorn, with
a terrible report; _and the pieces are said to have fallen into the
sea_, with the same sort of noise, as when red hot iron is quenched or
extinguished in water. Its height was computed to be not less than
thirty-eight Italian miles; and it is said to have moved with immense
velocity. Its form was oblong, at least as the luminous appearance
seemed in its passage.

_Avicenna_ mentions, (Averrhoes, lib. 2do Meteor. cap. 2.) that he had
seen at Cordova, in Spain, a sulphureous stone that had fallen from
heaven.

In _Spangenberg_'s Chron. Saxon, an account is found, that at Magdeburg,
in A. D. 998, two great stones, fell down in a storm of thunder: one in
the town itself; the other near the Elbe, in the open country.

The well known, and celebrated _Cardan_, in his book, _De Varietate
Rerum_, lib. 14. cap. 72. tells us, that he himself, in the year 1510,
had seen one hundred and twenty stones fall from heaven; among which
one weighed one hundred and twenty; and another sixty pounds. That they
were mostly of an _iron colour_, and very hard, and smelt of brimstone.
He remarks, moreover, that about three o'clock, a great fire was to be
seen in the heavens; and that about five o'clock the stones fell down
with a rushing noise.

And _Julius Scaliger_ (in his book _De Subtilitate Exerc._ p. 333.)
affirms, that he had in his possession a piece of iron (as he calls it,)
which had fallen from heaven in _Savoy_.

_Wolf_ (in _Lection. Memorab._ Tom. II. p. 911.) mentions a great
triangular stone, described by _Sebastian Brandt_, (which seems to have
been the identical stone I have already mentioned as having been
preserved in the church of Anxissem,) and which was said to have fallen
from heaven, in the year 1493, at Ensisheim or Ensheim.

_Muschenbroek_,[II] speaking of the same stone, says, that the stone was
blackish, weighed about 300lb. and that marks of fire were to be seen
upon it; but apprehended (in which he seems to have been mistaken) that
the date of the fall was 1630.

_Chladni_ also mentions another instance (from _Nic. Huknanfii_ Hist.
Hungar. lib. 20. fol. 394.) of five stones, said to have fallen from
heaven at _Miscoz_, in Transylvania, in a terrible thunder storm and
commotion of the air, which were as big as a man's head, very heavy, of
a pale yellow, and iron, or rusty colour; and of a strong sulphureous
smell; and that four of them were kept in the treasury room at Vienna.

He adds, (from _John Binbard_'s Thuring. Chron. p. 193.) that on the
26th of July, 1581, between one and two o'clock in the afternoon, a
stone fell down in _Thuringia_, with a clap of thunder, which made the
earth shake; at which time a small light cloud was to be seen, the sky
being otherwise clear. It weighed 39lb.; was of a blue and brownish
colour. It gave sparks, when struck with a flint, as steel does. It had
sunk five quarters of an ell deep in the ground; so that the soil, at
the time, was struck up to twice a man's height; and the stone itself
was so hot, that no one could bear to touch it. It is said to have been
afterwards carried to Dresden.

He adds, also, that in the 31st Essay of the Breslau Collections, p. 44,
is found an account by Dr. _Rost_; that on the 22d of June, 1723, about
two o'clock in the afternoon, in the country of Pleskowicz, some miles
from _Reichstadt_, in Bohemia, a small cloud was seen, the sky being
otherwise clear; whereupon, at one place twenty-five, at another eight,
great and small stones fell down, with a loud report, and without any
lightning being perceived. The stones appeared externally black,
internally like a metallic ore, and smelt strongly of brimstone.

And I shall conclude all _Chladni_'s remarkable facts, in addition to
those which I had myself collected, before ever I heard of his curious
book, with a short summary of what he calls one of the _newest_ accounts
of this kind, extracted from the _Histoire de l'Academie des Sciences_,
1769, p. 20.

It is an account of three masses, which fell down with thunder, in
provinces very distant from one another; and which were sent to the
Academy in 1769. They were sent from _Maine_, _Artois_, and _Cotentin_:
and it is affirmed, that when they fell an hissing was heard; and that
they were found hot. All three were like one another; all three were of
the same colour, and nearly of the same grain; and small metallic and
pyritical particles could be distinguished in them; and, externally,
all three were covered with an hard ferruginous coat: and, on chemical
investigation, they were found to contain iron, and sulphur.[JJ]

Considering, then, all these facts so positively affirmed, concerning
these various, most curious phaenomena:--the explosions;--the
sparks;--the lights;--the hissing noises;--the stones seen to fall;--the
stones dug up hot, and even smoking;--and some scorching, and even
burning other bodies in their passage;--we cannot but also bring to
remembrance, what Sir John Pringle affirmed to have been observed;
concerning a fiery meteor, seen on Sunday, the 26th of November, 1758,
in several parts of England and Scotland.[KK]

That the head, which appeared about half the diameter of the moon, was
of a bright white, like iron when almost in a melting heat;[LL] the
tail, which appeared about 8 deg. in length, was of a duskish red, burst
in the atmosphere, when the head was about 7 deg. above the horizon, and
disappeared; and in the room thereof were seen three bodies like stars,
within the compass of a little more than three degrees from the head,
which also kept descending with the head.

That before this, in another place, near Ancram in Scotland, (where the
same meteor was seen) one-third of the tail, towards the extremity,
appeared _to break off_, and to separate into sparks, resembling
stars.--That soon after this the body of the meteor had its light
extinguished, with an explosion; but, as it seemed to the observer
there, _the form of the entire figure of the body, quite black, was
seen to go still forwards in the air_.[MM] By some persons, also, an
hissing noise[NN] was apprehended to be heard.

Whether this might, or might not be an ignited body, of the kind we have
been describing, falling to the earth, deserves consideration. Sir John
Pringle seems to have been convinced that it was really _a solid
substance_; but fairly adds,[OO] that if such meteors had really ever
fallen to the earth, there must have been, long ago, so strong evidence
of the fact, as to leave no room to doubt.

Perhaps, in the preceding accounts, we have such evidence, _now_ fairly
collected together; at least in a certain degree.

I take all the facts, just as I find them affirmed. I have preserved a
faithful and an honest record.

For the sake of possible philosophical use;--let the philosophical, and
curious just preserve these facts in remembrance.

For the sake of philological advantage;--let the discerning weigh, and
judge. For (if such things be,) what has so often come to pass,
according to what is commonly called _the usual course of nature_; may
most undoubtedly, henceforth, without any hesitating doubts, be believed
to have been brought to pass, on an extraordinary occasion, in a still
more tremendous manner, by the immediate _fiat of the Almighty_.

Let no man scoff; lest he drives away the means of real
information.--And let all men _watch_, for the increase of science.--

The wisdom and power of God are far above not only the first
apprehensions, but even the highest ideas of man. And our truest wisdom,
and best improvement of knowledge, consist in searching out, and in
attending diligently, to what he has actually done: ever bearing in
mind those words of the holy Psalmist.[PP]

"_The works of The Lord are great: sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein._

"_The Lord hath so done his marvellous works, that they ought to be
had in remembrance._"




POSTSCRIPT.


Since these sheets were printed, I have received from Sir Charles
Blagden, a present of one of the very small stones mentioned, p. 7, that
are affirmed to have fallen in Tuscany; and which has very lately been
brought carefully from Italy.

Its figure plainly indicates, that in the instant of its formation,
there was a strong effort towards crystallization. For it is an
irregular quadrilateral pyramid;--whose base, an imperfect kind of
square, has two of its adjoining sides about six-tenths of an inch long,
each; and the other two, each about five-tenths: whilst two of the
triangular sides of the pyramid, are about six-tenths, on every side of
each triangle, all of which are a little curved: and the other two
triangular sides, are only five-tenths on the sides where these two last
join.

Its black crust, or coating, is such as has been described in the
preceding pages: and is also remarkable, for the appearance of a sort of
minute chequer work, formed by very fine white lines on the black
surface.




FOOTNOTES:


[A] In his Anatomy of Plants, p. 41-184.

[B] Vol. LXIII. p. 241--and Vol. LXIX. p. 35.

[C] In the Morsels of Criticism, p. 103.

[D] In the Philos. Trans. for 1795, p. 91, 92.

[E] This is mentioned by Sir William Hamilton himself, p. 105.

[F] See Philos. Trans. for 1795, p. 104, 105.

[G] See Lowthorp's Abridgement of the Philos. Trans. Vol. II. p. 143.

[H] Philos. Trans. Vol. XLIX. p. 510.

[I] Philos. Trans. Vol. LIII. p. 54.

[J] Condamine's Journal, p. 57.

[K] In his Experiments, p. 35.

[L] Pyramidographia, Vol. I. 89-91.

[M] Lib. 5.

[N] Lib. 2.

[O] In his Corinthiaca.

[P] Clem. Alex. lib. 1.--Stromatum.

[Q] In Vita Lysandri.

[R] Diogenes in Anaxag.

[S] Historia Nat. lib. 2. cap. 59.

[T] Lib. 1. Sec. 31.

[U] Haud aliter quam quum grandinem venti glomeratam in terras agunt,
crebri cecidere coelo lapides.

[V] Lib. 30. Sec. 28.

[W] Lib. 34. Sec. 45.

[X] Psalm 18. v. 13.

[Y] Psalm 148. v. 8.

[Z] Psalm 147. v. 17.

[AA] Psalm 148. v. 8.

[BB] Joshua, ch. 10. v. 11.

[CC] Hooke's Experiments, p. 134.

[DD] Vide Gesner.--and Ans de Boot Hist. Lapidum.

[EE] For which translation I am obliged to Sir Charles Blagden.

[FF] This account, from Abbe _Stutz_, and the following from Dr.
_Chladni_, I received, translated from the German, by the favour of Sir
Charles Blagden.

[GG] Vide Cardan _De Variet_, lib. 14. c. 72.

[HH] An account of this stone is given by Dr. Halley in the
Philosophical Trans. No. 341. And also there is an account of it by
Montenari.

[II] Essai de Physique, Tom. II. sect. 1557.

[JJ] All these facts are to be found mentioned in Chladni's book; first
at p. 8, and then from p. 34 to 37.

[KK] See the full account in the Philosophical Transactions, Vol. LI.
for 1759, p. 218, &c.

[LL] This is according to the account sent by the Rev. Mr. Michell,
Fellow of Queen's College, Cambridge, p. 223.

[MM] Ib. p. 237, 265, 269.

[NN] Ib. p. 265.

[OO] Ib. p. 272.

[PP] Psalm III. v. 2 and 4.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Remarks Concerning Stones Said to Have
Fallen from the Clouds, Both in These Days, and in Antient Times, by Edward King

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REMARKS CONCERNING STONES ***

***** This file should be named 29281.txt or 29281.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/8/29281/

Produced by Meredith Bach and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
