The Project Gutenberg EBook of Government Ownership of Railroads, and War
Taxation, by Otto H. Kahn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Government Ownership of Railroads, and War Taxation

Author: Otto H. Kahn

Release Date: July 22, 2009 [EBook #29493]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP ***




Produced by Stephanie Eason and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  Government Ownership
  of Railroads,
  and
  War Taxation

  OTTO H. KAHN

  AN ADDRESS BEFORE THE
  NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL CONFERENCE BOARD
  NEW YORK, OCTOBER 10, 1918




I

_GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP OF RAILROADS_


Paternalistic control, even when entirely benevolent in intent, is
generally harmful in effect. It is apt to be doubly so when, as
sometimes occurs, it is punitive in intent.

The history of our railroads in the last ten years is a case in point.

In their early youth our railroads were allowed to grow up like spoiled,
wilful, untamed children. They were given pretty nearly everything they
asked for, and what they were not given freely they were apt to get
somehow, anyhow. They fought amongst themselves and in doing so were
liable to do harm to persons and objects in the neighborhood. They were
overbearing and inconsiderate and did not show proper respect to their
parent, i. e., the people.

But the fond parent, seeing how strong and sturdy they were and on the
whole, how hustling and effective in their work, and how, with all their
faults of temper and demeanor, they made themselves so useful around the
house that he could not really get along without them, only smiled
complacently at their occasional mischief or looked the other way.
Moreover, he was really too busy with other matters to give proper
attention to their education and upbringing.

As the railroads grew towards man's estate and married and begot other
railroads, they gradually sloughed off the roughness and objectionable
ways of their early youth, and though they did not sprout wings, and
though once in a while they still did shock the community, they were
amazingly capable at their work and really rendered service of
inestimable value.

But meanwhile, for various reasons and owing to sundry influences, the
father had grown testy and rather sour on them. He cut their allowance,
he restrained them in various ways, some wise, some less so, he changed
his will in their disfavor, he showed marked preference to other
children of his. And one fine day, partly because he was annoyed at the
discovery of some wrongdoing in which, despite his repeated warnings, a
few of the railroads had indulged (though the overwhelming majority were
blameless) and partly at the prompting of plausible self-seekers or
well-meaning specialists in the improvement of everybody and
everything--one fine day he lost his temper and with it his sense of
proportion. He struck blindly at the railroads, he appointed guardians
(called commissions) to whom they would have to report daily, who would
prescribe certain rigid rules of conduct for them, who would henceforth
determine their allowance and supervise their method of spending it,
etc.

And these commissions, naturally wishing to act in the spirit of the
parent who had designated them, but actually being, as guardians are
liable to be, more harsh and severe and unrelenting than he would have
been or really meant to be, put the railroads on a starvation diet and
otherwise so exercised their functions, with good intent, doubtless, in
most cases, that after a while those railroads, formerly so vigorous and
capable, became quite emaciated and several of them succumbed under the
strain of the regime imposed upon them. And then, seeing their condition
and having need, owing to special emergencies, of railroad services
which required great physical strength and endurance, one fine morning
the parent determined upon the drastic step of taking things into his
own hands. And so forth....




II


To drop the style of story-telling: Individual enterprise has given us
what is admittedly the most efficient railroad system in the world. It
has done so whilst making our average capitalization per mile of road
less, the scale of wages higher, the average rates lower, the service
and conveniences offered to the shipper and the traveler greater than in
any other of the principal countries.

It must be admitted that in the pioneer period of railroad development,
and for some years thereafter, numerous things were done, and although
generally known to be done, were tolerated by the Government and the
public, which should never have been permitted. But during the second
administration and upon the courageous initiative of President
Roosevelt these evils and abuses were resolutely tackled and a definite
and effective stop put to most of them. Means were provided by salutary
legislation, fortified by decisions of the Supreme Court, for adequate
supervision and regulation of railroads.

The railroads promptly fell in line with the countrywide summons for a
more exacting standard of business ethics. The spirit and practices of
railroad administration became standardized, so to speak, at a moral
level certainly not inferior to that of any other calling. It is true,
certain regrettable abuses and incidents of misconduct still came to
light in subsequent years, but these were sporadic instances, by no
means characteristic of railroading methods and practices in general,
condemned by the great body of those responsible for the conduct of our
railroads, no less than by the public at large, and entirely capable of
being dealt with by the existing law, possibly amended in nonessential
features, and by the force of public opinion.

Unfortunately, the law enacted under President Roosevelt's
administration was not allowed to stand for a sufficient length of time
to test its effects. The enactment of new railroad legislation in 1909,
largely shaped by Congressmen and Senators of very radical tendencies
and hostile to the railroads, and acquiesced in by President Taft with
ill-advised and opportunist complacency, established, for the first time
in America, paternalistic control over the railroads. It was an
unscientific and ill-devised statute, gravely defective in important
respects and bearing evidence of having been shaped in heat, hurry and
anger. Mr. Taft himself, it seems, has since recognized its faultiness,
for he has repeatedly and publicly protested against the
over-regulation, the starvation and the oppression of the railroad which
were the inevitable and easy-to-be-foreseen consequences of its
enactment.

The States, to extent that they had not already anticipated it, were not
slow to follow the precedent set by the Federal Government. The
resulting structure of Federal and State laws under which the railroads
were compelled to carry on their business, was little short of a
legislative monstrosity.




III


You all know the result. The spirit of enterprise in railroading was
killed. Subjected to an obsolete and incongruous national policy,
hampered, confined, harassed by multifarious, minute, narrow, and
sometimes flatly contradictory regulations and restrictions, State and
Federal, starved as to rates in the face of steadily mounting costs of
labor and materials--that great industry began to fall away. Initiative
on the part of those in charge became chilled, the free flow of
investment capital was halted, creative ability was stopped, growth was
stifled, credit was crippled.

The theory of governmental regulation and supervision was entirely
right. No fair-minded man would quarrel with that. The railroads had
exercised great, and in certain respects undoubtedly excessive power for
a long time, and all power tends to breed abuses and requires
limitations and restraints. But the practical application of that theory
was wholly at fault and in defiance of both economic law and common
sense. It was bound to lead to a crisis.

It is not the railroads that have broken down, it is our railroad
legislation and commissions which have broken down.

And now the Government, in the emergency of war, probably wisely and, in
view of the prevailing circumstances, necessarily, has assumed the
operation of the railroads.

The Director General of Railroads, rightly and courageously, proceeded
to do immediately that which the railroads for years had again and again
asked in vain to be permitted to do--only more so.

Freight rates were raised twenty-five per cent., passenger rates in
varying degrees up to fifty per cent. Many wasteful and needless
practices heretofore compulsorily imposed were done away with.

Passenger train service, for the abolition of some of which the
railroads had petitioned unsuccessfully for years, was cut to the extent
of an aggregate train mileage of over 47,000,000.

The system of pooling for which since years many of the railroads had in
vain endeavored to obtain legal sanction was promptly adopted with the
natural result of greater simplicity and directness of service and of
considerable savings.

The whole theory under which intelligent, effective and systematic
co-operation between the different railways had been made impossible
formerly, was thrown into the scrap heap.

Incidentally, certain services and conveniences were abolished, of which
the railroad managements would never have sought to deprive the public,
and the very suggestion of the abrogation of which would have led to
indignant and quickly effective protest had it been attempted in the
days of private control.

Lest this remark might be misunderstood, let me say that I have no word
of criticism against Mr. McAdoo's administration of the railroads, as
far as I have been able to observe it.

I think, on the contrary, that he is entitled to great praise and that
he has handled the formidable and complex task confided to him with a
high degree of ability, fine courage, indefatigable energy, and with the
evident determination to keep the running of the railroads clear of
politics and to make them above all things effective instruments in our
war effort.




IV


For a concise statement of the results accomplished elsewhere under
government ownership I would recommend you to obtain from the Public
Printer, and to read, a short pamphlet entitled "Historical Sketch of
Government Ownership of Railroads in Foreign Countries," presented to
the Joint Committee of Congress on Interstate Commerce by the great
English authority, Mr. W. M. Acworth. It will well repay you the half
hour spent in its perusal. You will learn from it that, prior to the
war, about fifty per cent. of the railways in Europe were state
railways; that in practically every case of the substitution of
government for private operation (with the exception, subject to certain
reservations, of Germany) the service deteriorated, the discipline and
consequently the punctuality and safety of train service diminished,
politics came to be a factor in the administration and the cost of
operations increased vastly. (The net revenue, for example, of The
Western Railway of France in the worst year of private ownership was
$13,750,000, in the fourth year of government operation it fell to
$5,350,000.) He quotes the eminent French economist, Leroy-Beaulieu, as
follows:

     "One may readily see how dangerous to the liberty of citizens the
     extension of the industrial regime of the State would be, where the
     number of functionaries would be indefinitely multiplied.... From
     all points of view the experience of State railways in France is
     unfavorable as was foreseen by all those who had reflected upon the
     bad results given by the other industrial undertakings of the
     State.... The State, above all, under an elective government,
     cannot be a good commercial manager.... The experience which we
     have recently gained has provoked a very lively movement, not only
     against acquisition of the railways by the State, but against all
     extension of State industry. I hope ... that not only we, but our
     neighbors also may profit by the lesson of these facts."


Mr. Acworth mentions as a characteristic indication that after years of
sad experience with governmentally owned and operated railways, the
Italian Government, just before the war, started on the new departure
(or rather returned to the old system) of granting a concession to a
private enterprise which was to take over a portion of the existing
state railway, build an extension with the aid of state subsidies, _and
then work on its own account both sections as one undertaking under
private management_.

I may add, as a fact within my own knowledge, that shortly before the
outbreak of the war the Belgian Government was studying the question of
returning its state railways to private enterprise and management.

Mr. Acworth relates a resolution _unanimously_ passed by the French
Senate a few years after the State had taken over certain lines,
beginning: "The deplorable situation of the State system, the insecurity
and irregularity of its workings." He gives figures demonstrating the
invariably greater efficiency, economy and superiority of service of
private management as compared to State management in countries where
these two systems are in operation side by side. He treats of the effect
of the conflicting interests, sectional and otherwise, which necessarily
come into play under government control when the question arises where
new lines are to be built and what extensions to be made of existing
lines.

He asks: "Can it be expected that they (these questions) will be
decided rightly by a minister responsible to a democratic legislature,
each member of which, naturally and rightly, makes the best case he can
for his own constituents, while he is quite ignorant, even if not
careless, of the interests, not only of his neighbor's constituency, but
of the public at large?" And he replied: "The answer is written large in
railway history.... The facts show that Parliamentary interference has
meant running the railways, not for the benefit of the people at large,
but to satisfy local and sectional or even personal interests." He
maintains that in a country governed on the Prussian principles railroad
operation and planning may be conducted by the Government with a fair
degree of success, as an executive function, but in democratic
countries, he points out that in normal times "it is the legislative
branch of the government which not only decides policy but dictates
always in main outline, often down to the detail of a particular
appointment or a special rate, how the policy shall be carried out."

For corroboration of this latter statement we need only turn to the
array of statutes in our own States, which not only fix certain railroad
rates by legislative enactment, but deal with such details as the repair
of equipment, the minimum movement of freight cars, the kind of
headlights to be used on locomotives, the safety appliances to be
installed, etc.--and all this in the face of the fact that these States
have Public Service Commissions whose function it is to supervise and
regulate the railroads.

The reason why the system of state railways in Germany was largely free
from most, though by no means all, of the unfavorable features and
results produced by government ownership and operation elsewhere, is
inherent in the habits and conditions created in that country by
generations of autocratic and bureaucratic government. But Mr. Acworth
points out very acutely that while German manufacturers, merchants,
financiers, physicians, scientists, etc., "have taught the world a good
deal in the twenty years preceding the war, German railway men have
taught the world nothing." And he asks: "Why is this?" His answer is:
"Because they were state officials, and, as such, bureaucrats and
routiniers, and without incentive to invent and progress themselves or
to encourage or welcome or even accept inventions and progress.

It is the private railways of England and France, and particularly of
America, which have led the world in improvements and new ideas, whilst
it would be difficult to mention a single reform or invention for which
the world is indebted to the state railways of Germany."

The question of the disposition to be made of the railroads after the
war is one of the most important and far-reaching of the post-bellum
questions which will confront us. It will be one of the great test
questions, the answer to which will determine whither we are bound.




V


And, it seems to me, one of the duties of business men is to inform
themselves accurately and carefully on this subject, so as to be ready
to take their due and legitimate part in shaping public opinion, and
indeed to start on that task now, before public opinion, one-sidedly
informed and fed of set purpose with adroitly colored statements of half
truths, crystallizes into definite judgment.

My concern is not for the stock and bond holders. They will, I have no
doubt, be properly and fairly taken care of in case the Government were
definitely to acquire the railroads. Indeed, it may well be, that from
the standpoint of their selfish interests, a reasonable guarantee or
other fixed compensation by the Government would be preferable to the
financial risks and uncertainties under private railroad operation in
the new and untried era which we shall enter after the war. I know,
indeed, that not a few large holders of railroad securities take this
view and therefore have this preference.

Nor do I speak as one who believes that the railroad situation can be
restored just as it was before the war. The function, responsibility and
obligation of the railroads as a whole are primarily to serve the
interests and economic requirements of the nation. The disjointed
operation of the railroads, each one considering merely its own system
(and being under the law practically prevented from doing otherwise)
will, I am sure, not be permitted again.

The relinquishment of certain features of our existing legislation, the
addition of others, a more clearly defined and purposeful relationship
of the nation to the railroads, involving amongst other things possibly
some financial interest of the Government in the results of railroad
operations, are certain to come from our experiences under Government
operation and from a fresh study of the subject, in case the railroads,
as I hope, are returned to private management.

Personally I believe that in its underlying principle, the system
gradually evolved in America but never as yet given a fair chance for
adequate translation into practical execution, is an almost ideal one.
If preserves for the country, in the conduct of its railroads, the
inestimable advantage of private initiative, efficiency, resourcefulness
and financial responsibility, while at the same time through
governmental regulation and supervision it emphasizes the semi-public
character and duties of railroads, protects the community's rights and
just claims and guards against those evils and excesses of unrestrained
individualism which experience has indicated.

It is, I am profoundly convinced, a far better system than government
ownership of railroads, which, wherever tested, has proved its
inferiority except, to an extent, in the Germany on which the Prussian
Junker planted his heel and of which he made a scourge and a horrible
example to the world; and the very reasons which have made state
railways measurably successful in _that_ Germany are the reasons which
would make government ownership and operation in America a menace to our
free institutions, a detriment to our racial characteristics and a grave
economic disservice.




I

_PUNITIVE PATERNALISM IN TAXATION_


I have spoken of the treatment of our railroads in the past ten years as
"punitive paternalism." In some respects this same term may be applied
to our existing and proposed war taxation.

Of course, the burden of meeting the cost of the war must be laid
according to capacity to bear it. It would be crass selfishness to wish
it laid otherwise and fatuous folly to endeavor to have it laid
otherwise.

We all agree that the principal single sources of war revenue must
necessarily be business and accumulated capital, but these sources
should not be used excessively and to the exclusion of others. The
structure of taxation should be harmonious and symmetrical. No part of
it should be so planned as to produce an unscientific and dangerous
strain.

The science of taxation consists in raising the largest obtainable
amount of needed revenue in the most equitable manner, with the least
economic disturbance and, as far as possible, with the effect of
promoting thrift.

The House Bill proposes to raise from income, excess or war profit and
inheritance taxes $5,686,000,000 out of an estimated total of
$8,182,000,000. In other words, almost seventy per cent. of our
stupendous total taxation is to come from these few sources. It seems to
me that the effect and meaning of this is to penalize capital, to fine
business success, as well as thrift and self-denial practised in the
past, thereby tending to discourage saving.

The House Bill fails, on the other hand, to impose certain taxes the
effect of which is to promote saving. Intentionally or not, yet
effectively, it penalizes certain callings and sections of the country
and favors others.

Let me say at the outset that my criticism does not refer to the
principle of an eighty per cent. war profits tax. Indeed, I have from
the very beginning advocated a high tax on war profits. To permit
individuals and corporations to enrich themselves out of the dreadful
calamity of war is repugnant to one's sense of justice and gravely
detrimental to the war morale of the people.

Strictly from the economic point of view, the eighty per cent. war
profits tax is not entirely free from objection. Whether England did
wisely on the whole in fixing the tax at quite so high a rate is a
debatable point, and is being questioned by some economists of high
standing in that country, not from the point of view of tenderness for
the beneficiaries from war profits, but from that of national advantage.

Moreover, conditions in America and England are not quite identical and
I believe it to be a justifiable statement that British industry is
better able to stand so high a tax than American industry, for reasons
inherent in the respective business situations and methods.

However, everything considered, circumstances being what they are, I
believe the enactment of the proposed eighty per cent. war profits tax
to be expedient, provided that, like in England, the standard of
comparison with pre-war profits is fairly fixed and due and fair
allowance made, in determining taxable profits, for such bona fide items
of depreciation and other write-offs as a reasonably conservative
business man would ordinarily take into account before arriving at net
profits.

Amongst the principles of correct and effective taxation, which are
axiomatic, are these:

     1. No tax should be so burdensome as to extinguish or seriously
     jeopardize the source from which it derives its productivity. In
     other words, do not be so eager to secure every possible golden
     egg, that you kill the goose which lays them.

     2. In war time, when the practice of thrift is of more vital
     importance than ever to the nation, one of the most valuable
     by-products which taxation should aim to secure is to compel
     reduction in individual expenditures.

     3. Taxation should be as widely diffused as possible, at however
     small a rate the minimum contribution may be fixed, if only to give
     the greatest possible number of citizens an interest to watch
     governmental expenditure, and an incentive to curb governmental
     extravagance.


It may safely be asserted that our war taxation runs counter to every
one of these tested principles.




II


The characteristic difference between the House Bill and the revenue
measures of Great Britain (I am not referring to those of France and
Germany, because they are incomparably less drastic than ours or Great
Britain's) is, first, that we do not resort to consumption taxes and
only to a limited degree to general stamp taxes, and, secondly, that our
income tax on small and moderate incomes is far smaller, on large
incomes somewhat smaller and on the largest incomes a great deal
heavier.

The House rate of taxation on incomes up to, say, $5,000, averages only
one-fifth of what it is in England; the House rate of taxation on
maximum incomes is approximately fifty per cent. higher than it is in
England. Moreover, married men with incomes of less than $2,000 are
entirely exempted from taxation in this country. In England all incomes
from $650 on are subject to taxation.

I believe, on the whole, our system of gradation is juster than the
English system, but I think we are going to an extreme at both ends. And
it must be borne in mind that our actual taxation of high incomes is not
even measured by the rates fixed in the House Bill, because to them must
be added State and municipal taxes. There must further be added what to
all intents and purposes is, though a voluntary act, yet in effect for
all right-minded citizens tantamount to taxation, namely, a man's
habitual expenditures for charity and his contributions to the Red Cross
and other war relief works.

The sentimental and thereby the actual effect of extreme income
taxation is not confined to the relatively small number of people in
possession of very large incomes directly affected by it. The
apprehension caused by the contemplation of an excessively high ratio of
taxation is contagious and apt to react unfavorably on constructive
activity.

It is highly important that taxation should not reach a point at which
business would be crippled, cash resources unduly curtailed and the
incentive to maximum effort and enterprise destroyed. And it should not
be forgotten that both theoretically and actually the spending of money
by the Government cannot and does not have the same effect on the
prosperity of the country as productive use of his funds by the
individual.

If all the European nations have stopped during the war at a certain
maximum limit of individual income and inheritance taxation, even after
four years of war, the reason is surely not that they love rich men more
than we do or that they are all less democratic than we are. The reason
is that these nations, including the financially wisest and most
experienced, recognize the unwisdom and economic ill effect under
existing conditions of going beyond that limit.




III


The same observations hold good in the case of our proposed inheritance
taxation (maximum proposed here forty per cent., as against twenty per
cent. maximum in England and much less in all other countries). And
again there are to be added to Federal taxation the rates of state
legacy and inheritance taxation.

Inheritance taxation, moreover, has that inevitable element of
unfairness that it leaves entirely untouched the wastrel who never laid
by a cent in his life, and penalizes him who practiced industry,
self-denial and thrift. And it cannot be too often said that the
encouragement of thrift and enterprise is of the utmost desirability
under the circumstances in which the world finds itself, because it is
only by the intensified creation of wealth through savings and
production that the world can be re-established on an even keel after
the ravages and the waste of the war.

Furthermore, business men, of necessity, have only a limited amount of
their capital in liquid or quickly realizable form, and through the
absorption by the inheritance tax of a large proportion of such assets,
many a business may find itself with insufficient current capital to
continue operations after the death of a partner. This effect is not
only unfair in itself, but is made doubly so, as being a discrimination
in favor of corporations as against private business men and business
houses, inasmuch as corporations are, of course, not amenable to
inheritance taxation.

Whilst in the case of the rich we discourage saving by the very hugeness
of our taxation, or make it impossible, we fail to use the instrument
of taxation to promote saving in the case of those with moderate
incomes. And the enormous preponderance of saving which could and should
be effected does not lie within the possibilities of the relatively
small number of people with large means, but of the huge number of
people with moderate incomes.

Moreover, while the rich, in consequence of taxation, limitation of
profits, etc., have become less able to spend freely since our entrance
into the war, workingmen and farmers, through increased wages, steadier
employment and higher prices of crops, respectively, have become able to
spend more freely.

Workingmen are in receipt of wages never approached in pre-war times,
many of them making incomes a good deal higher than the average
professional man, while the profits of business, generally speaking, are
rather on a declining scale and certain branches of business have been
brought virtually or even completely to a standstill.

Of our total national income, conservatively estimated at, say,
$40,000,000,000 for the last year before our entrance into the war, i. e.,
the year 1916, it is safe to say that not more than $2,000,000,000
went to those with incomes of, say, $15,000 and above, whilst
$38,000,000,000 went to those with lower incomes.

A carefully compiled statement issued by the Bankers Trust Company of
New York estimates the total individual incomes of the nation for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1919, at about $53,000,000,000, and
calculates that families with incomes of $15,000 or less receive
$48,250,000 of that total; or, applying the calculation to families with
incomes of $5,000 or less, it is found that they receive $46,000,000,000
of that total.




IV


Whilst the House Bill imposes luxury and semi-luxury taxes, it fails--as
I have mentioned before--to resort to consumption taxes of a general
kind--a deliberate but, in my opinion, unwarrantable omission.

My advocacy of consumption and similar taxes, such as stamp taxes of
many kinds, is not actuated by any desire to relieve those with large
incomes from the maximum of contribution which may wisely and fairly be
imposed on them. I advocate consumption and general stamp taxes--such as
every other belligerent country without exception has found it well to
impose--because of the well attested fact that while productive of very
large revenues in the aggregate, they are easily borne, causing no
strain or dislocation, and automatically collected; and because of the
further fact that they tend to induce economy than which nothing is more
important at this time and which, as far as I can observe, is not being
practised by the rank and file of our people to a degree comparable to
what it is in England and France.

The tendency of the House Bill is to rely mostly on heavy taxation--in
some respects unprecedentedly heavy--of a relatively limited selection
of items. I am--as I have already said--in favor of the highest possible
war profits tax and of at least as high a rate of income and inheritance
taxation during the war as exist in any other country. But apart from
these and a few other items which can naturally support very heavy
taxation, such, for instance, as cigars and tobacco, I believe that the
maximum of revenue and the minimum of economic disadvantage and
dislocation can be secured not by the very heavy taxation of a
relatively limited selection, but by comparatively light taxation
distributed over a vast number of items. I believe such taxes would be
productive enough to make good the impending revenue losses from
Prohibition.

I think, for instance, the imposition of a tax of one per cent. on every
single purchase exceeding, say, two dollars (the tax to be borne by the
purchaser, not by the seller) would be productive of a large amount of
revenue and be harmful to none. A similar tax was imposed in the course
of the Civil War and appears to have functioned so well and met with
such ready acceptance that it was not repealed until several years after
the close of that war.

There is apparently small limit to the zeal of many politicians and
others when it is a question of taxing business and business men,
especially those guilty of success. We are, I believe, justified in
inquiring to what extent there is a relation between this tendency and
political considerations which ought to be remote from the treatment of
economic subjects such as taxation.

Let us take, as an instance, the case of the farmer. I do not pretend to
judge whether in these war times the farmers of the country are bearing
an equitable share of taxation in proportion to other callings or not. I
certainly recognize that they are entitled to be dealt with liberally,
even generously, for I know the rigors of the farmers' life, the ups and
downs of their industry's productivity, and fully appreciate that their
work lies at the very basis of national existence. Everything that can
fairly make for the contentment, well being and prosperity of the
farmer is to be wholeheartedly welcomed and promoted.

Yet, we cannot avoid noticing that the average value of farm lands in
this country is estimated to have increased between 1900 and 1918 more
than 200 per cent., that the value of farm products has been vastly
enhanced, but that according to the latest published details of income
tax returns, the farmer contributes but a very small percentage to the
total income tax collected. Of twenty-two selected occupations the
farmers' class contributes the least in the aggregate, although it is
numerically the largest class in the country.

Let it be clearly understood that I have not the remotest thought of
suggesting "tax dodging" on the part of the farmers. I know well how
fully they are doing their part towards winning the war, and am
entirely certain that they are just as ready to carry patriotically
their due share of the financial cost of achieving victory as the
splendid young fellows taken from the farms, many of whom I met in
Europe, have been ready to bear their full share of the cost in life and
limb of achieving victory.

The point of my question is not the action and attitude of the farmer.
But here is a great industry exempt from the excess profit and war
profit tax and apparently not effectively reached by the income tax,
which is entirely natural, because in this case the income tax can
neither be retained at the source nor are the large body of the farmers,
many of whom do not keep and cannot be expected to keep books, in a
position to determine their taxable income.

Is it conceivable that the politicians who are so rigorous in their
watchfulness that no business profit shall escape the tax-gatherer,
would not devise means to lay an effective tax if the same situation
existed in a business industry?

The point of my question is, taking the case of the farmers as an
instance, whether in framing our system and method of taxation, the
steady aim has been to ascertain impartially what is equitable and
wisely productive of revenue and to act accordingly, or whether
considerations of the anticipated effect of taxation measures upon the
fortunes of individual legislators or of their party, have been
permitted unduly to sway their deliberations and conclusions.




V


Turning aside from this interrogation mark, I will only add, in
returning to our general scheme of taxation, that there are numerous
taxes of a tried and tested and socially just kind--some of them applied
in this country during the Civil War and the Spanish War--which would
raise a very large amount of revenue and yet would be little felt by the
individual. Some of them have been suggested to our legislators, but
have not found favor in their eyes. Their non-imposition, taken together
with the entire character of our taxation program, the burden of which
falls to an enormously preponderant extent upon the mainly industrial
States and the business classes, not only proportionately, which, of
course, is just, but discriminatingly, which is not just, seems hardly
explainable except on the theory that the intention of those who were
primarily in charge of framing that program was punitive and corrective
and that they were influenced--though I am willing to believe
unconsciously--by sectional and vocational partiality.

The fact that the revenue bill was passed in the House by a unanimous
vote does not mean, of course, that it met with unanimous approval on
the part of Congressmen. The debate shows this. The bill, as reported
after months of labor, either had to be approved practically as it stood
or rejected and returned to the Committee. It is not possible for a body
of 400 men to deal in a detailed manner with a subject so complex as a
taxation measure of the magnitude of the present one.

The bill could not be made over or materially amended in the House. In
view of the urgency of the emergency and the vital need to raise the sum
asked for by the Treasury, no patriotic course was open to the House but
to accept the bill and pass it up to the Senate.

I know it is not popular to say things in criticism of war burdens of a
financial nature. One's motives are liable to be misunderstood or
misinterpreted and he is very apt to have it scornfully pointed out to
him how small relatively is the sacrifice asked of him, compared with
the sacrifice of position, prospects, and life itself, so willingly and
proudly offered by the young manhood of the land.

It is a natural and effective rejoinder, but it is not a sound or
logical one. Heaven knows, my heart goes out to our splendid boys, and
my admiration for their conduct and achievements and my reverence for
the spirit which animates them knows no bounds. But I am acquainted
with hundreds of business men who bemoan their gray hair and their
responsibilities, which prevent them from having the privilege of
fighting our foe arms in hand.

And I know no American business man worthy of the name, who would not
willingly give his life and all his possessions if the country's safety
and honor required that sacrifice.



Transcriber's Notes:
  Passages in italics indicated by underscore _italics_.

  Additional spacing after the block quotes is intentional to indicate
  both the end of a quotation and the beginning of a new paragraph as
  presented in the original text.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Government Ownership of Railroads, and
War Taxation, by Otto H. Kahn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP ***

***** This file should be named 29493.txt or 29493.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/4/9/29493/

Produced by Stephanie Eason and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
