The Project Gutenberg EBook of Identity, by Zoe Blade

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: Identity

Author: Zoe Blade

Release Date: August 12, 2009 [EBook #29676]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IDENTITY ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Illustration: Cover art]


Identity


A short story by Zoe Blade


  (C) 2008 Zoe Blade.  Distributed under a Creative Commons
  Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 License.


"Flat-chested Faye, flat-chested Faye," chanted the girls on the table
next to Faye and Rebecca's.  The large hall smelled of cabbages,
potatoes and baked beans, and everyone else was talking and eating and
moving chairs so loudly that Faye could hardly hear herself think.

"Just ignore them," suggested Rebecca.

Faye didn't say anything.  She opened her lunchbox and fished around in
her deep blazer pockets for her medication.  She teased a pill out of
the bottle and washed it down with some orange squash from her Helen
Fryer thermos flask.

"It's not healthy to have secrets, you know."  Rebecca peered across at
her, trying to make out the label on the bottle.

"They're called antiandrogens."  Faye slipped the bottle back into her
pocket.  "I told you, I have a hormonal imbalance, that's all."  It
wasn't even a white lie, she told herself.  It was just being vague.

"Is that why you haven't... you know... developed yet?"  Rebecca took a
bite out of her sandwich.

"It's not healthy to be so pushy, either."  Faye forced herself to
start eating her lunch; she wasn't feeling hungry.

"Sorry," said Rebecca.  She took a sip of her drink.  "It's just that
it's not the same without you during swimming lessons.  Who else am I
going to tease?"

"I'm sure there must be someone," said Faye.

Rebecca looked up as she thought to herself.  "How come you're not
allowed to go swimming with us, anyway?  Just because you haven't
started puberty yet?  I mean, Jenny's way behind everyone else too and
she still goes swimming."

"I'd rather not talk about it."  Faye didn't dare to look up from her
food.  She could already feel herself getting the kind of headache that
meant she'd start crying soon if she wasn't careful.  She tried to
change the subject.  "Have you done the new Fryer episode?"

"What, this?"  Rebecca pulled a silver disc out of her blazer pocket,
holding it up for Faye to see.  "You want to try it?"

"I think I could be persuaded."  Faye looked up long enough for her
eyes to meet Rebecca's.  Big mistake.  She tried not to think about how
they seemed to radiate a sense of playful mischief, or about the curly
trusses of auburn hair partially hiding them.

Rebecca handed the disc to Faye, and for an instant, their hands
touched as she took it from her.

"Thanks."  Faye slid the disc into her pocket and tried to concentrate
on finishing her meal.


Faye stared up at a bright blue sky that wasn't there and listened to a
dozen conversations about nothing in particular.  She breathed in
deeply, savouring the scent of the freshly cut grass she wasn't really
lying on.  Although she was actually lying on her bed, her senses were
all being hijacked by the Digitac player lying next to her as it
replayed the sensory input of Helen Fryer, one of the country's most
popular actresses.  She saw and heard everything that Helen did, but
she was helpless to try and direct her where she wanted to go.  She was
just an observer, albeit a very intimate one.

Faye felt someone squeeze her hand, and turned to face him.  Naturally,
it was James.  He had the kind of rugged good looks that were currently
considered attractive by most of the girls in her class.  His bleached
blonde hair was just long enough to get in the way of his hazel eyes,
and whenever she kissed him, his stubble felt like sandpaper.  She
wasn't quite sure if she had a type yet, but if she did, James
definitely wasn't it.

"I love you, James," she felt herself say.

"I love you too, Helen," said James.  His smile widened, and Faye felt
hers do the same.  He leaned towards her.  She reciprocated, closing
her eyes.  As their lips met, she started to open her mouth, letting
him separate her lips with his tongue.

_Eww_, thought Faye as she opened her eyes and groped around for her
Digitac player's stop button, overwhelmed by the two sets of images
competing in her head.  She pressed it just in time.  Suddenly, the
bright blue sky was replaced with the various posters of female rock
stars that lined her bedroom's walls.  The chattering of passers-by
came to an abrupt end, and in its place she could hear the dull murmur
of her parents' old fashioned flatscreen television downstairs.

Looking down at herself, Faye sighed wistfully.  At least she'd slipped
out of the unfashionable blazer, blouse, polyester skirt and opaque
black tights of her school uniform.  Instead, she was wearing a light
pink spaghetti top over a padded bra--as if _that_ was fooling
anybody--and a blue denim miniskirt, clothes she wouldn't mind actually
being seen in, but that didn't change the fact that the other girls were
right.  She _was_ flat-chested.

She reached into her bedside drawer, lifted up a stack of glossy
magazines and pulled out the Digitac disc she'd been too embarrassed to
tell anyone about.

She read the disc's title: _The Kelly Travis Workout Experience_.  It
had come free with a packet of cereal, the kind that wasn't covered in
sugar.  It was meant to show you that working out at a Kelly Travis gym
wasn't as difficult as you thought it was.  Faye ejected the Helen
Fryer disc and tossed it onto the bed next to the player, then slid the
Kelly Travis disc in and pressed play.

Within moments, she was running on a treadmill in front of a full
length mirror.  She could smell her own sweat, sharp and strong, but it
didn't matter.  Closing her eyes again, she stared at her own face, or
at least the face of a nameless actress, blue eyes staring back at her
from behind a blonde fringe, smiling with determination and the
knowledge that she could push herself further this time.  Digitac
actresses almost always smiled.  She pushed a few buttons on the
treadmill's keypad, and it beeped in reply as the motor sped up.

Her muscles soon started to ache, but it was worth it.  She could feel
every inch of her fully developed and well defined body.  Every
footstep filled her with the kind of satisfaction she couldn't get in
real life. She was supple and slender, but not dangerously thin
anymore.  She was fully grown, with curves she would do anything to
have in real life.

Without warning, Faye felt a tap on her shoulder.  She pressed the stop
button on the player again and opened her eyes.

"Your father and I would like to have a word with you when you're
ready."  Her mother was standing by the bed, looking down at her.

"What did I do?" protested Faye.

"It's nothing like that."

Faye squinted up at her mother, shielding her eyes from the bedroom
light with her hand.  "What do you want then?"

Her mother sighed in frustration.  "Please, just come down."


By the time Faye walked into the lounge, the television was off.  Her
parents were sitting in silence, staring at the fireplace.  It was
still covered in cards wishing Faye a happy birthday.

"Please, sit down, dear," suggested her mother.

Faye sat down on the couch, facing both her parents.  They looked
solemn, like the time her uncle had died.

Her mother cleared her throat.  "You know how you're... different from
the other girls?"

"I don't like Helen Fryer as much," suggested Faye.

"Not that."  Her mother sounded frustrated again now.

"Your body," said her father, almost apologetically.  "You know, the
reason you work on your algebra while your friends have their swimming
lessons."

"Oh."  Faye suddenly realised what they were getting at.  "_That_."
She looked down at the shag carpet.

Years ago, her parents had sat her down for a similar talk.  They had
told her about how all babies have thorough medical checks these days,
ever since the government worked out that prevention was cheaper than
cure.  When she'd had hers, the high definition MRI scan had apparently
revealed that she was a perfectly healthy baby girl--despite her body
giving her the appearance of a perfectly healthy baby boy.

It was an age old condition, her parents had told her.  In a funny sort
of way, they'd said, she was lucky to have been born when she was.  As
recently as a few decades earlier, people with her medical issue had to
work it out for themselves after decades and sometimes even lifetimes
of mental anguish.  Nowadays it was something your doctor told your
parents at birth.

"I know you don't exactly like your body," said her father.

"I look like a freak," muttered Faye.

"That's not true," said her mother sharply.  "You look just as lovely
as any of your friends."

Faye didn't say anything.  It simply wasn't true.  Karen and Sarah and
Louise all had to start wearing training bras this year, and here she
was with a flat chest and an unsightly bulge in her knickers.  It was
hideous.  Her skin crawled just thinking about it.

"Those pills you're taking are just a temporary measure," her mother
continued.  "They're delaying your puberty, but you can't take them
forever."  Her mother's voice became unusually soft and quiet.  "You're
going to have to make a choice."

"What kind of choice?" asked Faye, her eyes still fixed on the floor.
She could feel them welling up already.

Her father piped up.  "We can give you some other pills that will give
your body the oestrogen it ought to be producing.  They'll make you
look more like your friends, you know, put some weight on your hips
and..." he glanced at her chest, unable to be so blunt to his own
daughter. "...other places."  He quickly changed the subject, adding,
"But you'll have to meet us half way, you understand, and start eating
properly."

Faye looked up at him, hope in her eyes.  He looked blurry behind her
tears.

"Plus, you know... we've been saving away since your birth.  I know
Christmas and your birthday have always been lean, but you'd be able to
have an operation to fix..." he glanced down at her groin.  "...you
know."

"Really?  You mean it?"  Faye sniffed.

"There is another option," her mother pointed out.  "I don't want to
pressure you into anything, but it would mean your body wouldn't be so
scarred.  You could use the money to go to college, and you could even
have children one day.  It _would_ be nice to have grandchildren."

Her father gave her mother a look that silenced her.

"What do you mean?" asked Faye, her eyes darting from her mother to her
father.

"There's a new operation you can have."  Her father shifted in his
seat. "They came out with it a few years ago."

"It's perfectly safe," assured her mother.  "Lots of girls with your
condition have had it."

"What kind of operation?"  Faye didn't like the sound of this at all.

"It would mean you wouldn't mind your body so much."  Her mother looked
hopeful.  "In fact, you'd welcome its growth."

Faye tried to work out what her parents were getting at.  "What kind of
operation?" she repeated.

"It has something to do with the way the brain's wired up," said her
father.

"Brain surgery?" spluttered Faye, shocked that her parents could
suggest such a thing.

"You'd still be you," assured her mother.

"For the most part, anyway," corrected her father.

"Oh, stop scaring her!" scathed her mother.  Facing Faye again, she
added, "You'd still be the same person.  You'd just be... well... a
boy."

Before Faye knew what had happened, she'd dashed out of the room.  She
ran up the stairs, their outline a blurry mess behind her tears, and
slammed her bedroom door shut before flopping onto her bed, her eyes
buried in her arm.

When she finally let herself sob uncontrollably, it was a relief in a
way.  She just let go, letting the pain wash over her.  The pile of
soft toys by her side offered no comfort, their presence suddenly
seeming childish.  As much as her parents kept on saying how much they
loved her, she got the feeling all her mother really cared about was
having grandchildren.


"So what did you think of him?" asked Rebecca as she sat on her bed,
her back against the wall.

"Who?" asked Faye.  She made an effort to stop gawking at her best
friend's perfectly curled tresses as she snapped out of her daydream.

"_James_," said Rebecca, slightly jerking her head forward to show her
frustration.

"Oh."  Faye took the silver disc out of her pocket and handed it to
her. "Thanks."

"You're not getting out of the question _that_ easily!"  Rebecca took
the disc and put it on a stack on the shelf next to the bed.

"I dunno."  Faye shrugged.  "He's OK, I guess."

"Just _OK_?" asked Rebecca in disbelief.

"It's not like I wanna have his babies or anything," said Faye.

"Geez, you don't like Toby, you don't like James, who _do_ you like?"
Rebecca scrunched her face up for a split second.

"I like you," pointed out Faye.

"Yeah, but not _like_ like.  Not like you like boys."

Faye made an effort to look away from Rebecca's soft cheeks and her
perfect lips.  "What's meant to be so good about boys, anyway?"

"They have their moments," said Rebecca.  "Some of them do, anyway.
Maybe not the ones in _our_ class, but once they're a bit older, maybe."

"Sounds like a long wait."  Faye kept her gaze on the floor.

"They just take a few more years to grow up, is all.  Give them a
while, you'll see.  Besides, if you didn't like boys, who _would_ you
like?"

"Faye!" called Rebecca's mother from downstairs.  "Your mother's here!"

"I'd better go."  Faye stood up.  "Thanks for the Fryer episode."

"That's OK."  Rebecca looked at her the same way she looked at
caterpillars and butterflies, her eyes focused with well meaning
curiosity.  For a second, Faye forgot to worry about the choice she had
to make and about deciding how much she could tell Rebecca and just let
herself get lost in her smile.


Faye stared up at her familiar posters of female rock stars as she lay
down on her bed in deep thought.

On the one hand, she didn't want to die.  She figured the person who'd
recover from the brain surgery, however nice he might be and however
happy he might become, simply wouldn't be her.  Sure, he'd resemble her
like a brother might and he'd keep her memories as a strange sort of
memento, but he'd have different drives, different ambitions, a
different outlook on life.  Wouldn't he?

Besides, she couldn't bear the thought of giving a complete stranger,
someone who didn't even exist yet, all of her emotional baggage.  The
memories of trying to cope with her birth defect, of trying to make
sense of it, and of being constantly bullied at school because of her
differences... she didn't even want this knowledge herself, and the
thought of crippling someone else with it made her cringe.

On the other hand, someone else would have a much better chance of
actually being happy.  He'd still inherit her psychological scars, but
not the dozens of physical ones that the necessary surgery would give
her.  Maybe her childhood would seem as distant and unreal to him as a
Digitac episode did to her.

So it boiled down to a choice between growing up to be a woman with low
self esteem and a malformed body, and donating the rest of her life to
some boy who--strange memories aside--might actually qualify as
normal.  His life would certainly be easier than hers, especially if he
also wanted to date girls.

She grabbed her pillow, hugged it and curled up into a ball.  Why did
this have to happen to her?  She was just a girl trying to lead an
ordinary life.

In the end, she finally made a decision.  She was pretty sure it was
the _wrong_ decision, but she didn't know what else to do.  At least
this way, she'd stop being such a burden and an embarrassment to
everyone.


"This is your last chance to change your mind," said the doctor in a
soft, sympathetic voice.  He put his hand on hers.  "Are you sure you
want to do this?"

Faye looked down at their hands.  Her wrist was encased in a light blue
bracelet with her name and date of birth printed on it.  They'd soon
have to change it, she realised.

Of course I'm not sure, she thought.  Was anyone?  She held back a
tear. "Yes, I'm sure," she said, nodding.  She just wanted to get it
over with.

                            * * *

David opened his eyes.  A blurry white light filled the room.  Slowly,
everything came into focus.  He was lying on a hospital bed, soaked
with sweat.  A fan was perched on the table next to the bed, blowing a
gentle breeze of fresh air into his face.  He looked around.  There was
a bag with a liquid in it suspended above him, with a tube running down
to his arm.  He found a mirror on the table, next to the fan, and
picked it up. Holding it in front of his face, he gazed at his
reflection.

It was the same as it had always been, of course, except that where
long, frizzy hair used to be, there was now a tightly wrapped bandage,
stained with blood.  It was clearly the face of a young boy staring
back at him.  For the first time, he wasn't repulsed by it.  It wasn't
like looking at a stranger he grudgingly had to put up with.  It was
more like... he thought about this.  It didn't really feel like
anything at all.  His reflection didn't provoke any kind of emotion in
him.  It wasn't good, it wasn't bad, it was just who he was.  That had
always been the problem with Faye, though: not that her body was _bad_,
just that it simply wasn't who she was.

He could remember everything.  Not just Faye's actions, but her
innermost thoughts.  He remembered the way that some evenings, as she
went to bed, she would look down at her flat chest and lack of curves
and feel the headache that meant she was about to cry.  He even
remembered how she'd secretly started to feel about her best friend,
Rebecca.  Those memories were his now, but the feelings weren't.

Looking down at the outline of the slightly malnourished but otherwise
healthy young body hidden beneath the bed sheets and medical gown, he
felt no repulsion any longer.  Despite the nausea and the overwhelming
feeling that he needed to get some rest, in a weird sort of way, he
felt fine for the first time in his life.  It was finally over.


As he walked up to Rebecca's house, David scratched the scar on the
back of his head.  He still wasn't used to the feeling of the short
bristles of hair against his fingers.  He pressed the doorbell and
waited.

Rebecca's mother answered the door, but she didn't greet him with
enthusiasm like she usually did.  Instead, she looked at him like she
was expecting him to introduce himself.

"Hi.  It's me, David," he said.  Seeing no hint of recognition in her
eyes, he added, "Henley."

"Oh."  She seemed taken aback.  "Of course.  Please, come in."  She
opened the door wider and turned around to face the stairs.  "Rebecca!
Your friend's here!"  Turning back to face David, she assured him, "I'm
sure she won't be long," before disappearing into the kitchen.

David waited in the hallway until Rebecca finally crept down the
stairs, coming to a stop half way down the staircase.  She looked
almost afraid. It made David's stomach hurt, to know that he was the
cause of the pained look on her face.

"Hi," he said.

"Hi."  She squeezed her arm as if she was nervous.

"You haven't been to see me or anything," he said.  "You still like me,
right?"

"_Like_ you?  I don't even _know_ you."  Rebecca waited what seemed
like forever before she next spoke.  When she did, her voice was soft,
as if she was recounting a painful tale.  "Three years ago, my best
friend moved to the other side of the country, and I never got to see
her again.  We still e-mail each other, of course, but it's not the
same. For the longest time, I didn't have anyone to help me make it
through the day.  Until I met you.  Until I met Faye, I mean.  Now it's
happening all over again, only worse than that, because it's like a
part of Faye's still here, and you're running around, oblivious to the
fact that you've stolen it from her."

"Oh."  David didn't know what else to say.

"Is that all you've got to say?  '_Oh_'?"

"I guess I didn't see it that way.  I was hoping we could still be
friends."  David looked at Rebecca, but her eyes seemed sharp and cold.
"You know, like you and her were.  You and me, I mean.  I still
remember everything, you know.  How you'd laugh together, or swap
secrets about boys."

"Yeah, well not anymore, OK?"

David stood in silence, trying to think of something to say to make it
all better.  Deep down, he knew there was nothing he could say or do
that could change how Rebecca felt.

"So is this it?" David eventually asked.  "Is this how we're going to
say goodbye?  You meant everything to her."

Rebecca paused, as if she wanted to say something but wasn't sure if
she should.  Finally, she said, "She loved me, didn't she?"

David nodded.

Rebecca looked straight ahead as if she was talking to the front door.
"I loved her too, I think.  Despite everything."  She turned to face
David.  "That's why it hurts to look at you."

"I'm sorry," said David.  He cursed himself for not being able to think
of anything better to say.

Rebecca didn't reply to him, but as he walked out the door, he could
have sworn he'd heard her whispering, "So am I."








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Identity, by Zoe Blade

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IDENTITY ***

***** This file should be named 29676.txt or 29676.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/6/7/29676/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
