The Project Gutenberg EBook of Less than Human, by Zoe Blade

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: Less than Human

Author: Zoe Blade

Release Date: August 12, 2009 [EBook #29675]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LESS THAN HUMAN ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Illustration: Cover art]



Less Than Human


A short story by Zoe Blade


  (C) 2008 Zoe Blade.  Distributed under a Creative Commons
  Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 License.


From the roof of the legal bookstore, I have a clear shot at my target,
Jon Russell.  He's sitting down at a table outside a cafe where
Chancery Lane meets Fleet Street, sipping a cardboard cup of coffee.  I
briefly ponder how ironic it seems that he's actually bought a drink;
it must be for show, although there's no way that he can tell that
right now he has a very specific audience.

Even in the sunshine, the guiding beam of my tripod mounted rifle is
brightly illuminating a thick circle of skin on his neck, just below
his white beard, but even if any of the passersby can see infrared as
well as I can, they won't have time to do anything even if they notice
it. My eyes are already over two years old now, but they were expensive
enough at the time to still be considered detailed even by today's
standards.  With their magnification, I can see the circle of light on
his neck clearly, growing steadier with every passing second as a
familiar cocktail of drugs calms my metabolism.

I try not to let the laser's fan distract me.  The guidance beam's one
thing, but the main laser, the one that generates the lethal pulse,
gives off heat like you wouldn't believe.  With the midday sun shining
straight down on me, the laser needs all the cooling it can get, and
the fan sounds like someone's standing next to me, drying her hair.

Once I can hold the laser still enough, I brace myself.  For just a few
precious seconds, I let myself ponder the consequences of what I'm
about to do.  I'm about to execute this guy, but although he's broken
the law, I'm no sheriff.  I think about the effect that what I'm about
to do will have on people who look up to Jon Russell, and that makes me
nervous.  I have nothing against them; if anything, I actually
sympathise with their cause.

I put the thought out of my mind.  It's unprofessional, a pause at best
and a hindrance at worst.  It's far too late to start developing
emotions at this stage of my career, after months of training and
almost three years of missions.

I pull the trigger, just for half a second, my eyes momentarily
shielding themselves from the visible end of the beam on his neck.
There's no recoil on my weapon, giving it the eerie feel of a
simulation.  The only sign that it's firing is a loud popping noise
like someone squashing a bag of crisps.  It's over in an instant.  I
can almost convince myself that I haven't done anything wrong, but not
quite.

The bright circle is instantly replaced with a gushing stream of blood,
pumping out in rhythmical bursts.  His cardboard cup drops to the
floor, and I unscrew the rifle from the tripod, duck below the top of
the brick wall of the bookstore, fold up the tripod and put everything
in my holdall, hidden beneath a pair of jogging bottoms.

In a fleece, t-shirt and designer jeans, I hopefully pass for someone
on her way to one of the gyms scattered around the legal district,
where people who help corporations sue their customers for a living
would feel far too inconvenienced by taking a detour on their way home
just to stay in shape.  I put on a pair of designer sunglasses to cover
up my designer eyes, as if anyone could spot their telltale trademark
without being close enough to kiss me, then I pull the scrunchy out of
my hair and tie it in again, keeping my dark brown ponytail as taut and
professional as it is glossy.

By the time anyone can work out what happened to Russell and where the
brief burst of energy came from, I'm already half way down the fire
escape.  By the time anyone's dialed the emergency services, I'm
already briskly walking down Fleet Street and out of the scene.


"Remind me why I had to kill Russell."  I drop my bag onto the desk of
my boss, Mike Vegas, and it lands with a satisfying thud.  Frankly, I'm
glad to be rid of the evidence, if only until tomorrow.

"Because it's your job."  Mike slides the bag under his desk without
even glancing at its contents, then finally looks up to meet my gaze.
His facial expression looks as blank as usual to me, but a piece of
software I installed on my eyes starts flashing up a translucent yellow
warning sign, pointing out that he's making tiny involuntary
movements--a momentary flicker of the cheek here, a curl of the lip
there.  Nothing a human could consciously spot, but my eyes have a
sufficient refresh rate and resolution to pick up that sort of thing.
The bottom line is that he's uncharacteristically uncomfortable, for
whatever reason.

"You know what I mean," I continue.  "He was hardly violent.  Don't you
think that actually having him taken out was kind of overkill on
Godin's part?"

"It's not our job to question our clients' motives, only their ability
to pay.  Besides, he was a liability.  Copyright violation is one of
the most serious crimes there is these days, given the structure of our
fragile economy."  He gets up and makes his way to a shelf filled with
various photos and figurines, where he pours himself a shot of whiskey
from an expensive looking decanter.

As he glances back at me, I decline his offer of the same with a subtle
shake of my head.  Call me paranoid, but in my line of work, I never
could feel comfortable if I was anything less than a hundred percent
sober.

"They couldn't just have him running around pirating their intellectual
property," Mike continues.

"But it's _food_," I protest.  "It's not like it's a rich kid's luxury
like music or films.  There are homeless people I've seen eating decent
meals thanks to him."

"There are plenty of public domain staple foods.  The homeless can eat
the same handouts as the starving children in Africa: rice, grains,
vegetables, pulses.  No one's trying to stop people from eating.  They
have more than enough to live on."  He takes a sip of his drink.  "All
Godin want to do is ensure the uniqueness of the very specific dishes
served in their chain of five-star restaurants, so don't give me any of
that melodramatic bollocks about starving homeless people just because
they have to eat boiled rice and steamed vegetables instead of _foie
gras en brioche_."

"It still doesn't feel right."

"Which brings me to my next point.  Have you given any more thought to
my offer?  Most people would kill for another free synaptic implant."

"That all depends on the implant.  The uplink to the Mesh and the map
are all well and good, but I'm still not sure about suppressing my
emotions.  It just seems so... inhuman."

"As opposed to all the drugs you take to calm you down as you make the
hit?"

"At least they wear off after a few minutes."  I walk past the shelf
and look out the window at the scenic view of the city, taking a moment
to watch the clouds drift along in the summer breeze.  The trees are
such a vibrant green this time of year, they look somehow unreal, set
against the pale grey concrete blocks that people waste their lives in.
I quickly inspect all the nearby rooftops, making sure nobody's on any
of them.  Old habits.  "You know, I've been thinking a lot lately, and
between the implants and the drugs, I'm beginning to feel less and less
like a real woman and more and more like some kind of machine, just
efficiently fulfilling her job role and nothing else."

"Efficiently?"  I hear Mike practically choking on his drink.

I turn back around to face him.  "Is there something wrong with my
performance?"

"I've been running over the encrypted video feed of the hit that your
eyes sent me."

It wasn't exactly a secret he kept from me that when I was on the job,
my eyes sent an encrypted live broadcast straight to the office, hidden
in the Mesh's entropy.  Talk about your body betraying you.  I had to
take Vegas's word for it that he couldn't spy on me when I was off
duty. It was something I tried hard not to think about every time I had
a shower.  Just the thought gave me the shivers.

"You stalled.  Your heartrate had slowed down just fine, you were as
calm as a cow, and yet you didn't fire until almost five seconds later.
Why the pause?"

"He was drinking a cup of coffee at a table.  I could tell he was going
to be there for at least another two minutes.  It made no difference."

"I didn't ask you if you thought it would make a difference.  I asked
you why you paused.  I hire you because you're the sort of woman who
knows better than to take unnecessary risks.  Why did you wait so long?"

I let myself sigh.  "OK, so I felt a _little_ empathy towards the
target.  He'd never hurt anybody.  I mean, I read his profile.  He was
essentially a good man."

"Which is exactly what I'm talking about.  We can't afford to let your
personal opinions and morals slow you down when you're at work.  Those
profiles are there to help you to better understand the targets, to
better predict them, not to make you feel an emotional attachment
towards them.  You can do whatever you want at home, donate your wage
to charity, I don't care, but when you're out in the field, I need you
to be there for me, performing at a hundred percent."

"Yes, sir," I say reluctantly.

He talks into his glass as he swishes around the remaining dribble of
whiskey, as if he has trouble meeting my eyes for once.  "Someone will
meet with you on your way out."

This takes me by surprise.  I don't need the red warning label that's
suddenly superimposed over my vision to tell me that something's wrong.
"Who?"

"A doctor.  I'd like to run a few checks on you, just to be on the safe
side."  If he's not outright lying, then my software's convinced that
he's at least hiding something from me.

"Checks?"

"Yeah.  Checks."  He takes another sip of his drink.

My paranoia starts to kick in as I realise how easy it would be for him
to kill me, just as long as he took me unaware.  For all my jacked up
reflexes and painstakingly learned skills, in light of the new wholly
artificial employees our rivals have been raving about, I'm starting to
look a lot like an old Decca television set in a room full of Sony
projectors.  In all likelihood, Mike would have had me killed months
ago already if I wasn't still so damned good.

"And Suzi?"

"Yes?"  Our eyes meet again, at last.

"Do yourself a favour.  Don't get emotionally involved.  It's just
business."

"I know."  I walk out the door, not looking back.


"Well, all your tests show you're operating within specs," says the man
that Mike claims to be some sort of medical doctor.

"That's a relief," I say sarcastically.

"Nevertheless, I'm still concerned about these certain imperfections in
your performance.  I just can't seem to find a neurological or
physiological source for them."

"Did it ever occur to you that I'm only human?"

A grunt serves him as laughter.  "Isn't that your main selling point?
From what I hear, you're Mike's poster girl.  Maybe even the whole
industry's."  He looks me up and down, and I fight the urge to pull out
the knife I'm carrying and gouge his inferior eyes out.  "Shame no one
knows what you look like."  Perhaps sensing my obvious discomfort, he
changes the subject.  "You know how few of you there are left in your
line of work?"  By 'you,' I assume he means humans.  "Less than a
dozen, by our estimates.  Worldwide.  You're a rarity."

I let myself flash a brief smile.  Professional pride.

"A dying breed, you might say," he adds with a chuckle.  I feel my
whole body tense up.

"There's one more test I'd like to carry out on you.  It will take
several hours, but thankfully I don't actually need you to be present
for it so you can go and do whatever you like.  I just need to take a
relatively quick backup of your brain's neural pathways first, then you
can go home and get some rest."

"A neural backup?"

"It won't hurt, I promise."  Another warning sign pops up next to his
face, and I finally decide it's time to kick into defence mode.
There's no discernible change from an outsider's perspective, but
inside my brain and its hardware, a dozen little defence applications
are springing to life, waiting for my signal that they should start
wreaking havoc.  I usually slip into this mode several times a week,
but in my line of work it's safer to err on the side of paranoia.
"What's this really for?  Insurance in case I mess up?"

"I can't slip anything past you."  The doctor grins, revealing two rows
of surprisingly well worn teeth.  "Let's just say your employer doesn't
like to take chances, and you're the best person in the business."

"From what you're saying, I'm pretty much the _only_ person in the
business."

"Exactly.  Now, please, lie down here while I perform a quick scan of
your neural pathways.  It'll only take a few minutes."

For some reason, I black out.


I feel rain on my face, a light drizzle.  My nostrils fill with the
scent of wet plants and damp soil.  I open my eyes to discover that I'm
lying on a park bench less than a mile from my flat.  That's never
happened to me before: I've always stayed awake just fine for brain
scans in the past, both objectively and subjectively.  I summon my
clock application, its translucent display fading into my vision and
out again for just long enough for me to tell that I was out for almost
two hours, which is about right for the journey home.

I stand up, a little giddy at first, and tentatively start to make my
way through the park.  By the time I'm striding through the streets,
stepping around all the puddles on the pavement, I've had a few minutes
to reflect on the day's events.  I decide not to let Mike or his crony
doctor get to me.  Let him be pissed off at me.  I'm the last human
assassin.  Replacing me with an android would be a terrible PR move,
and he knows it.

Still, I can't overlook the fact that _something_ is terribly wrong,
although it's probably just healthy paranoia on my part to assume that
it concerns me at all.  Maybe he's just shielding me from some dull
business problems he's having.  Whatever it is, I'm glad I don't have
to think about it anymore tonight.

As I walk into my driveway, I think about how I can spend the rest of
the evening.  Maybe a hot shower followed by a stir fry and a nature
documentary.  Both the matter and the subject matter were popular
torrents on my favourite Swedish tracker the previous week.  It really
puts my job into perspective when I'm reminded how the human race is
the only species that isn't still wrapped up in daily life-or-death
struggles for food, or at least, not for copyright free food.

As I approach my block of flats, for some reason I feel uneasy.  I
realise something's wrong, although I can't quite work out what it is
yet.  I switch to defence mode yet again as I press the palm of my hand
against the security pad, look into the retina scanner and open the
door as quietly as I can.  To my surprise, my eyes' apps seem to have
been upgraded.  I have them set not to update automatically, which
means they must have been switched while I was out from the brain scan.
No wonder I lost consciousness: they'd been altering me, not just
passively examining me.  I switch modes again, figuring that it's
better to take my chances on my own, rather than risk firing off
unknown software that could do anything from crash to sabotage me.  I
creep along the corridor, then open the door to my flat just as quietly.

I switch my eyes to +IR mode so that they overlay the infrared
frequencies of the electromagnetic radiation around me over the top of
the human-visible ones.  The eerie glow of the walls and pipes is
familiar enough, but the human sized and shaped blob glowing in the
living room isn't.  I switch the vision to only twenty percent infrared
overlay so that I don't have as much information to distract me, and I
brace myself.

I keep two katanas hung up decoratively on the wall in my living room,
and with the element of surprise I might manage to grab one before the
intruder knows I'm there.  I have no idea if he or she is even armed,
so I don't want to take any chances.

The blur moves like she or he is about to stand up, so I run into the
room as quickly as I can and grab a katana.  Despite bracing myself,
I'm not prepared for what I see next.

                            * * *

The figure dashes for the other katana, then leaps back to the other
side of the room so we can properly study each other.  I can see her
clearly now, from her thermal imprint to the deep brown colour of the
artificial eyes hidden behind her epicanthic folds.  In every
discernible way, she looks identical to me.  She's even wearing the
fleece, t-shirt and jeans I picked out this morning.  Even more
incredibly, she looks just as confused as I feel.

"Oh, that's just perfect," she says.  "Did Mike send you?"

"_What_?"  I don't take my eyes off her.  Her face is serious; her
poise calculated.  She's ready to attack me without warning, just
waiting to know for sure that I'm a threat.  I nod, gesturing towards
her.  "Who _are_ you?"

"Suzi Yamada," she says.

"That's impossible!"

"Evidently it isn't."  She speaks without moving her head a single
degree, watching me carefully.  "Listen, I've had a _really_ bad day
today.  Some phony doctor tried to kill me earlier, and it doesn't look
like you're shaping up to be any friendlier."

"You killed him?" I ask.

"It's a habit."  She lunges towards me, her sword pointed directly at
my chest, aiming straight for my heart.

I manage to nudge her blade out of the way of my body with my own
sword, redirecting the force of her sprint away from me.  "I didn't
come here to kill you.  Can't we just talk like civilised adults?"  I
then sweep my blade around, aiming to slice off her bicep, but she
similarly counters my move.  In a weird sort of way, it's exhilarating
to finally have a worthy opponent to fight--someone who could actually
beat me.

"Let me guess."  She swings her blade around to my hip and I counter
it. "The last thing you remember is Mike sending you to some creepy
bastard who gave you a brain scan, then you just woke up somewhere
strange."

"How do you know that?"  I try to stab her in the stomach, but she
sweeps my blade away.

"Surely it must have occurred to you by now that one of us is an
android."

"Actually, I'd kinda been preoccupied."

"So why'd they build you?"

"How do you know they didn't build _you_?"

"Because androids are damned near infallible," she says as I take one
last sweep at her neck.  "And you're better than me."

As I'm taking in what she's said, my sword's edge slices through the
air towards her neck.  I lunge backwards, managing to just barely nick
her skin instead of slicing her head clean off.  She starts to bleed a
tiny dribble of bright red blood, but I know she'll live.

"You've got a point."  I stare at the blood.  _Real_ blood.  "And
_we've_ got a problem."

"We can't trust each other?"

"Trust is simply a matter of being able to predict someone's moves.
Since I'm a pretty good facsimile of you, I figure we can both predict
each other just fine by working out what we would do in each other's
situation."  It just doesn't feel right calling myself a copy.  Have I
really become a commodity?  I keep my sword raised, on guard just in
case the other Suzi tries anything.

"So what's the problem?"

"Our boss tried to kill you."

"You mean you've had a change of heart?"

"I'd like to propose an alternative, but we're going to have to trust
each other."  I throw my katana onto the floor as a sign of good faith.
While I'm not exactly ready to commit _harakiri_ just yet, suddenly my
imitation of a life doesn't seem to be worth fighting for so hard.  I
figure that if either one of us lives on, I haven't really lost much.
The gamble's worth it, because if she'll go along with my plan--and I'm
pretty sure she will, because I'm pretty sure I would--then we can both
get what we deserve.


Mike doesn't get into his office until seven the next morning.  When he
sees me, he freezes, and for just a second he reveals fear in his eyes.

"You're early," he says.

I briefly wonder how much effort he's putting into keeping his voice
steady, trying his best not to give away how scared he is, but that
brief glance has already betrayed his fear.  He knows the doctor's
dead. I figure I should have taken him up on his offer a few months
back to join in his poker games.  I'd have made a fortune off him.

"I didn't get much sleep."  I figure I can trust him not to try to kill
me yet because I haven't revealed my intentions.  He's far too trusting
like that.  The right move would have been to kill me as soon as he saw
me in the room.  But he can't do that.  He needs me.  So I turn my back
to him, walking up to the window.

"Bad night?" asks Mike, feigning ignorance.

"You could say that.  When I got home, I found an intruder waiting for
me."

"My god!" says Mike.  "What happened?"

"I dispatched her, naturally."  The first rule in my line of work is
never trust anybody, not even somebody pretending to be your friend.

"_Her_?" asks Mike, pretending to be shocked by her gender, knowing
full well how rare human assassins are, let alone women.

I nod silently.

"Did she say anything?" asks Mike.

"No, nothing.  She didn't have a chance to."

"Wow," says Mike.  "I guess that's too bad, in a way."

I shrug.  "We all get what's coming to us, eventually.  She just wasn't
smart enough to quit while she was ahead."

Mike sighs.  "I'm not an idiot, you know.  You have to understand, it's
business, nothing personal."  He's sweating now.  I watch a little bead
of perspiration make its way down his forehead.  "How much do you know?"

I make my way to the shelf and pour a shot of whiskey.

"It's a bit early for that, isn't it?"

"Special occasion," I insist.  It always helps to inebriate your
opponent, to give yourself any edge over him that you can when it comes
to reflexes.  "I know how attached people can get to certain ways of
doing things.  The comfort of the familiar."  I look at my glass
thoughtfully.  "I think it's time to make a clean break."  I get
another glass, pour another shot, and hand it to him.  Raising my
glass, I declare a toast.  "To the future."

Mike has a dubious look in his eye like he knows I'm up to _something_,
just not what.  For a manager, he sure lacks vision.  He looks out the
window at the ant-like people all those floors below, oblivious to the
woman pointing a high powered laser rifle straight at him from the next
block along, and raises his glass.  "To--"

Despite giving my new business partner the order to fire, the laser
burst still somehow makes me jump.  I've never seen it up close before.
On the receiving end, it's deadly silent, the only sound being the
sloshed gurgles of the target.  The smell, on the other hand, is
overwhelming--searing flesh with a hint of burnt cotton from his shirt.

The great thing about biometrics is that they still work when the
person's dead.  With the help of Mike's eyes and fingers, it takes me
less than five minutes to drain his bank accounts--both his company's
and his own.  _Nothing personal_.


Sitting on a bench in the local park, I take a second to close my eyes
and just listen to the birds.  I open them again just in time to see a
young woman waving at me as she walks towards me.  To an outside
observer, she looks like she could be my identical twin.  I wave back,
smiling as I watch her familiar mannerisms from an unfamiliar point of
view.

She sits down beside me.  "How long do you reckon we've got 'til
someone realises what happened to Mike?"

I shrug.  "A few hours, maybe.  Long enough to get a few things from
our flat, move the money to a safe account, and walk away."

"Ah, yes, the money."  She smiles sweetly, a smile I've never seen
outside of a mirror before.  "What do you figure we should do with it?"

"I say we take what's owed to us, enough to start a new life, and give
the rest to Jon Russell's charity.  He did bring about this turn of
events, in a weird sort of way."

She nods.  "I guess so."  After a few seconds' silent reflection, she
turns to look at me.  "And us?"

"I've been thinking about that," I say.  "I think we could continue to
do what we're doing, only freelance.  If you're up for it, I mean.
We'd have to really start trusting each other, but at least we'd get to
choose our clients, and we'd get to stay human.  Well, you would,
anyway."

That smile again, turning into a broad grin.  "Twin assassins?  No one
would see it coming.  It's a hell of an edge."

"Exactly."  I smile back at my new business partner.  Maybe things
didn't turn out so bad after all.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Less than Human, by Zoe Blade

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LESS THAN HUMAN ***

***** This file should be named 29675.txt or 29675.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/6/7/29675/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
