The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of the White Mouse, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Story of the White Mouse

Author: Unknown

Release Date: October 3, 2009 [EBook #30169]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE WHITE MOUSE ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Edwards and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






[Illustration descriptions in {braces} were added by the transcriber
to supplement the bare page references.]




  [Illustration: Page 5.
  {Husband and wife in bed looking at white mouse}]




            _NEW JUVENILE LIBRARY._


                      The

                     STORY

                     of the

                  WHITE MOUSE.


                Embellished With
          _Four Elegant Copperplates._
          A New and Correct Edition.


                    LONDON:
          Printed for the Booksellers.
                     1816.




  The
  STORY
  of the
  WHITE MOUSE.


In the kingdom of Bonbobbin, which, by the Chinese annals, appears
to have flourished twenty thousand years ago, there reigned a prince,
endowed with every accomplishment which generally distinguishes the sons
of kings. His beauty was brighter than the sun. The sun, to which he was
nearly related, would sometimes stop his course, in order to look down
and admire him.

His mind was not less perfect than his body; he knew all things without
having ever read; philosophers, poets, and historians, submitted their
works to his decision; and so penetrating was he, that he could tell the
merit of a book by looking on the cover. He made epic poems, tragedies,
and pastorals, with surprising facility; song, epigram, or rebus,
was all one to him; though, it is observed, he could never finish an
acrostick. In short, the fairy who presided at his birth had endowed him
with almost every perfection; or, what was just the same, his subjects
were ready to acknowledge he possessed them all; and, for his own
part, he knew nothing to the contrary. A prince so accomplished,
received a name suitable to his merit; and he was called
_Bonbenin-bonbobbin-bonbobbinet_, which signifies Enlightener
of the Sun.

As he was very powerful, and yet unmarried, all the neighbouring kings
earnestly sought his alliance. Each sent his daughter, dressed out in
the most magnificent manner, and with the most sumptuous retinue
imaginable, in order to allure the prince; so that, at one time, there
were seen at his court, not less than seven hundred foreign princesses,
of exquisite sentiment and beauty, each alone sufficient to make seven
hundred ordinary men happy.

Distracted in such a variety, the generous Bonbenin, had he not been
obliged by the laws of the empire to make choice of one, would very
willingly have married them all, for none understood gallantry better.
He spent numberless hours of solicitude, in endeavouring to determine
whom he should choose. One lady was possessed of every perfection, but
he disliked her eye-brows; another was brighter than the morning-star,
but he disapproved her fong-whang; a third did not lay enough of white
on her cheek; and a fourth did not sufficiently blacken her nails. At
last, after numberless disappointments on the one side and the other, he
made choice of the incomparable Nanhoa, queen of the Scarlet Dragons.

The preparations for the royal nuptials, or the envy of the disappointed
ladies, needs no description; both the one and the other were as great
as they could be. The beautiful princess was conducted, amidst admiring
multitudes, to the royal couch, where, after being divested of every
encumbering ornament, he came more chearful than the morning; and
printing on her lips a burning kiss, the attendants took this as a
proper signal to withdraw.

Perhaps I ought to have mentioned in the beginning, that, among several
other qualifications, the prince was fond of collecting and breeding
mice, which being an harmless pastime, none of his counsellors thought
proper to dissuade him from; he therefore kept a great variety of
these pretty little animals in the most beautiful cages, enriched with
diamonds, rubies, emeralds, pearls, and other precious stones. Thus he
innocently spent four hours each day in contemplating their innocent
little pastimes.

But, to proceed, the prince and princess now retired to repose; and
though night and secrecy had drawn the curtain, yet delicacy retarded
those enjoyments which passion presented to their view. The prince
happening to look towards the outside of the bed, perceived one of the
most beautiful animals in the world, a white mouse with green eyes,
playing about the floor, and performing an hundred pretty tricks. He was
already master of blue mice, red mice, and even white mice with yellow
eyes; but a white mouse with green eyes, was what he long endeavoured
to possess: whereupon, leaping from bed, with the utmost impatience and
agility, the youthful prince attempted to seize the little charmer; but
it was fled in a moment; for, alas! the mouse was sent by a discontented
princess, and was itself a fairy.

It is impossible to describe the agony of the prince upon this occasion.
He sought round and round every part of the room, even the bed where the
princess lay was not exempt from the inquiry; he turned the princess on
one side and the other, stripped her quite naked, but no mouse was to be
found; the princess herself was kind enough to assist, but still to no
purpose.

"Alas!" cried the young prince in an agony, "how unhappy am I to be thus
disappointed! never sure was so beautiful an animal seen; I would give
half my kingdom and my princess to him that would find it." The
princess, though not much pleased with the latter part of his offer,
endeavoured to comfort him as well as she could; she let him know he
had an hundred mice already, which ought to be at least sufficient to
satisfy any philosopher like him. Though none of them had green eyes,
yet he should learn to thank Heaven that they had eyes. She told him
(for she was a profound moralist,) that incurable evils must be borne,
and that useless lamentations were vain, and that man was born to
misfortunes; she even intreated him to return to bed, and she would
endeavour to lull him on her bosom to repose; but still the prince
continued inconsolable; and, regarding her with a stern air, for which
his family was remarkable, he vowed never to sleep in a royal palace,
or indulge himself in the innocent pleasures of matrimony, till he had
found the white mouse with green eyes.

When morning came, he published an edict, offering half his kingdom, and
his princess, to that person who should catch and bring him the white
mouse with green eyes.

The edict was scarce published, when all the traps in the kingdom were
baited with cheese; numberless mice were taken and destroyed, but still
the much-wished-for mouse was not among the number. The privy council
were assembled more than once to give their advice; but all their
deliberations came to nothing, even though there were two complete
vermin-killers, and three professed rat-catchers, of the number.
Frequent addresses, as is usual on extraordinary occasions, were sent
from all parts of the empire; but, though these promised well, though in
them he received an assurance that his faithful subjects would assist in
his search with their lives and fortunes, yet, with all their loyalty,
they failed, when the time came that the mouse was to be caught.

The prince, therefore, was resolved to go himself in search, determined
never to lie two nights in one place, till he had found what he sought
for. Thus, quitting his palace without attendants, he set out upon his
journey, and travelled through many a desert, and crossed many a river,
high over hills, and down along vales, still restless, still inquiring
wherever he came, but no white mouse was to be found.

  [Illustration: Page 10.
  {Man kneeling before young witch}]

As one day, fatigued with his journey, he was shading himself from the
heat of the mid-day sun, under the arching branches of a Banana tree,
meditating on the object of his pursuit, he perceived an old woman
hideously deformed approaching him; by her stoop, and the wrinkles
of her visage, she seemed at least five hundred years old; and the
spotted toad was not more freckled than was her skin. "Ah! Prince
Bonbenin-bonbobbin-bonbobbinet," cried the creature, "what has led you
so many thousand miles from your own kingdom? What is it you look for,
and what induces you to travel into the kingdom of the Emmets?" The
prince, who was excessively complaisant, told her the whole story three
times over, for she was hard of hearing. "Well," says the old fairy,
for such she was, "I promise to put you in possession of the white mouse
with green eyes, and that immediately too, upon one condition." "One
condition," replied the prince in a rapture, "name a thousand; I shall
undergo them all with pleasure." "Nay," interrupted the old fairy,
"I ask but one, and that not very mortifying neither; it is only that
you instantly consent to marry me."

It is impossible to express the prince's confusion at this demand; he
loved the mouse, but he detested the bride; he hesitated; he desired
time to think upon the proposal. He would have been glad to consult his
friends on such an occasion. "Nay, nay," cried the odious fairy, "if you
demur, I retract my promise; I do not desire to force my favours on any
man. Here, you my attendants, (cried she, stamping with her foot,) let
my machine be driven up; Barbacela, queen of Emmets, is not used to
contemptuous treatment." She had no sooner spoken than her fiery chariot
appeared in the air, drawn by two snails; and she was just going to step
in, when the prince reflected that now or never was the time to be in
possession of the white mouse; and, quite forgetting his lawful princess
Nanhoa, falling on his knees, he implored forgiveness for having rashly
rejected so much beauty. This well-timed compliment instantly appeased
the angry fairy. She affected an hideous leer of approbation, and taking
the young prince by the hand, conducted him to a neighbouring church,
where they were married together in a moment. As soon as the ceremony
was performed, the prince, who was to the last degree desirous of seeing
his favourite mouse, reminded the bride of her promise. "To confess a
truth, my prince," cried she, "I myself am that very white mouse you saw
on your wedding night in the royal apartment. I now therefore give you
your choice, whether you would have me a mouse by day, and a woman by
night, or a mouse by night, and a woman by day." Though the prince was
an excellent casuist, he was quite at a loss how to determine; but at
last thought it most prudent to have recourse to a blue cat, that had
followed him from his own dominions, and frequently amused him with its
conversation, and assisted him with its advice; in fact this cat was no
other than the faithful Princess Nanhoa herself, who had shared with him
all his hardships in this disguise.

By her instructions he was determined in his choice; and returning to
the old fairy, prudently observed, that, as she must have been sensible
he had married her only for the sake of what she had, and not for her
personal qualifications, he thought it would, for several reasons, be
most convenient if she continued a woman by day, and appeared a mouse by
night.

The old fairy was a good deal mortified at her husband's want of
gallantry, though she was reluctantly obliged to comply; the day was
therefore spent in the most polite amusement, the gentlemen talked, the
ladies laughed, and were angry. At last the happy night drew near; the
blue cat still stuck by the side of its master, and even followed him
to the bridal apartment. Barbacela entered the chamber, wearing a train
fifteen yards long, supported by porcupines, and all over beset with
jewels, which served to render her more detestable. She was just
stepping into bed to the prince, forgetting her promise, when he
insisted on seeing her in the shape of a mouse. She had promised, and
no fairy can break her word; wherefore, assuming the figure of the most
beautiful mouse in the world, she skipped and played about with an
infinity of amusement. The prince, in an agony of rapture, was desirous
of seeing his pretty play-fellow move a slow dance about the floor to
his own singing; he began to sing, and the mouse immediately to perform
with the most perfect knowledge of time, and the finest grace, and
greatest gravity imaginable; it only began, for Nanhoa, who had long
waited for the opportunity, in the shape of a cat, flew upon it
instantly without remorse, and eating it up in the hundredth part of
a moment, broke the charm, and then resumed her natural figure.

  [Illustration: Page 12.
  {Husband in bed, wife with two porcupines holding her train}]

  [Illustration: Page 13.
  {Man and woman on arcaded terrace}]

The prince now found that he had all along been under the power of
enchantment; that his passion for the white mouse was entirely
fictitious, and not the genuine complexion of his soul; he now saw, that
his earnestness after mice was an illiberal amusement, and much more
becoming a rat-catcher than a prince. All his meannesses now stared
him in the face; he begged the princess's pardon an hundred times. The
princess very readily forgave him; and both returning to their palace at
Bonbobbin, lived very happily together, and reigned many years, with all
that wisdom, which, by the story, they appear to have been possessed of;
perfectly convinced by their former adventures, that they who place
their affections on trifles at first for amusement, will find these
trifles at last become their most serious concern.




  The
  STORY
  of the
  ENVIOUS MAN,
  and
  HIM THAT HE ENVIED.


In a considerable town, two persons dwelt next door to one another; one
of them conceived such a violent hatred against the other, that he who
was hated resolved to remove his dwelling farther off, being persuaded
that their being neighbours was the only cause from whence his animosity
did arise; for though he had done him several pieces of service, he
found, nevertheless, that his hatred was nothing diminished; therefore
he sold his house, with what goods he had left, and retired to the
capital city of that kingdom, which was not far distant. He bought a
little spot of ground which lay about half a league from the city; he
had a house convenient enough, with a fine garden, and a pretty spacious
court, wherein was a deep well, which was not in use.

The honest man, having made this purchase, put on a dervise's or monk's
habit, to lead a retired life, and caused several cells to be made in
the house, where, in a short time, he established a numerous society of
dervises; he came soon to be publicly known by his virtue, through
which he acquired the esteem of a great many people, as well of the
commonalty, as of the chief of the city. In short, he was extremely
honoured and cherished by every one. People came from afar to recommend
themselves to his prayers; and all those who came to live with him
published what blessings they received through his means.

The great reputation of this honest man having spread to the town from
whence he came, it touched the envious man so much to the quick, that he
left his house and affairs, with a resolution to go and ruin him. With
this intent he went to the new convent of dervises, of which his former
neighbour was the head, who received him with all imaginable tokens of
friendship. The envious man told him that he was come on purpose to
communicate a business of importance to him, which he could not do but
in private; and in order that nobody may hear us, let us, says he, take
a walk in your court, and seeing night begins to draw on, command your
dervises to retire to their cells. The head of the dervises did as he
required.

When the envious man saw that he was alone with this good man, he began
to tell him his errand, walking side by side in the court, until he saw
his opportunity; and getting the good man near the brink of the well,
he gave him a thrust, and pushed him into it, without any body being
witness to so wicked an action. Having done this, he marched off
immediately, got out at the gate of the convent, without being known
to any one, and came home to his own house, well satisfied with his
journey; being fully persuaded that the object of his hatred was no
more in this world; but he found himself highly mistaken.

This old well was inhabited by fairies and genies, which happened very
luckily for the relief of the head of the convent; for they received and
supported him, and carried him to the bottom, so that he got no hurt.
He perceived well enough that there was something extraordinary in his
fall, which must otherwise have cost him his life; whereas he neither
saw nor felt any thing. But he soon heard a voice, which said, "Do you
know what honest man this is to whom we have done this piece of
service?" Another voice answered, "No." To which the first replied,
"Then I will tell you. This man, out of charity, the greatest that ever
was known, left the town he lived in, and has established himself in
this place, in hopes to cure one of his neighbours of the envy he had
conceived against him; he has acquired such general esteem, that the
envious man, not able to endure it, came hither on purpose to ruin him,
which he had performed, had it not been for the assistance which we have
given this honest man, whose reputation is so great, that the sultan,
who keeps his residence in the neighbouring city, was to pay him a visit
tomorrow, and to recommend the princess, his daughter, to his prayers."

Another voice asked, "What need had the princess of the dervise's
prayers?" To which the first answered, "You do not know, it seems, that
she is possessed by Genie Maimoun, the son of Dimdim, who is fallen in
love with her. But I know well how this good head of the dervises may
cure her; the thing is very easy, and I will tell it you. He has a black
cat in his convent, with a white spot at the end of her tail, about the
bigness of a small piece of English money; let him only pull seven hairs
out of this white spot, burn them, and smoke the princess's head with
the fume, she will not only be presently cured, but be so safely
delivered from Maimoun, the son of Dimdim, that he will never dare
to come near her a second time."

The head of the dervises remembered every word of the discourse between
the fairies and the genies, who were very silent all the night after.
The next morning, by break of day, when he could discern one thing from
another, the well being broken down in several places, he saw a hole,
by which he crept out with ease.

The other dervises, who had been seeking for him, were rejoiced to see
him. He gave them a brief account of the wickedness of that man to whom
he had given so kind a reception the day before, and retired to his
cell. It was not long till the black cat, of which the fairies and the
genies had made mention in their discourses the night before, came to
fawn upon her master, as she was accustomed to do: he took her up, and
pulled seven hairs out of the white spot that was upon her tail, and
laid them aside for his use, when occasion should serve.

The sun was not high, when the sultan, who would leave no means untried
that he thought could restore the princess to her perfect health,
arrived at the gate of the convent. He commanded his guards to halt,
whilst he, with his principal officers, went in. The dervises received
him with profound respect.

The sultan called their head aside, and said, "Good Scheich, it may be,
you know already the cause of my coming hither." "Yes, sir," replies he,
very gravely, "if I do not mistake it, it is the disease of the princess
which procures this honour that I have not deserved." "That is the very
thing," replied the sultan. "You will give me new life, if your prayers,
as I hope they will, can procure my daughter's health." "Sir," said the
good man, "if your majesty will be pleased to let her come hither, I am
in hopes, through God's assistance and favour, she shall return in
perfect health."

The prince, transported with joy, sent immediately to fetch his
daughter, who very soon appeared with a numerous train of ladies and
eunuchs, but masked, so that her face was not seen. The chief of the
dervises caused a pall to be held over her head, and he had no sooner
thrown the seven tufts of hair upon the burning coals, but the genie
Maimoun, the son of Dimdim, gave a great cry, without any thing being
seen, and left the princess at liberty; upon which she took the veil
from off her face, and rose up to see where she was, saying, "Where am
I, and who brought me hither?" At these words the sultan, overcome with
excess of joy, embraced his daughter, and kissed her eyes; he also
kissed the chief of the dervises' hands, and said to his officers,
"Tell me your opinion, what reward does he deserve who has thus cured my
daughter?" They all cried, "He deserves her in marriage." "That is what
I had in my thoughts," said the sultan, "and I make him my son-in-law
from this moment." Some time after, the prime visier died, and the
sultan conferred the place on the dervise. The sultan himself died
without heirs-male; upon which the religious orders and the militia
gathered together, and the honest man was declared and acknowledged
sultan by general consent.

The honest dervise being mounted on the throne of his father-in-law, as
he was one day in the midst of his courtiers upon a march, he espied the
envious man among the crowd of people that stood as he passed along, and
calling one of his visiers that attended him, whispered him in the ear
thus: "Go, bring me that man you see there, but take care you do not
frighten him." The visier obeyed; and when the envious man was brought
into his presence, the sultan said, "Friend, I am extremely glad to see
you." Upon which he called an officer, "Go immediately," says he, "and
cause to be paid this man out of my treasury one hundred pieces of
gold; let him have also twenty load of the richest merchandise in my
store-houses, and a sufficient guard to conduct him to his house."
After he had given this charge to the officer, he bid the envious man
farewell, and proceeded on his march.




  The
  STORY
  of the
  GOLDEN HEAD.


It is generally known, that Tom Two-Shoes went to sea when he was a very
little boy, and very poor; and that he returned a very great man, and
very rich; but no one knows how he acquired so much wealth but himself
and a few friends.

After Tom had been at sea some years, he was unfortunately cast away
on that part of Africa inhabited by the Hottentots. Here he met with a
strange book, which the Hottentots did not understand, and which gave
him some account of Prester John's country; and being a lad of great
curiosity and resolution, he determined to see it; accordingly he set
out on the pursuit, attended by a young lion, which he had tamed, and
made so fond of him, that he followed him like a dog, and obeyed all his
commands; and indeed it was happy for him that he had such a companion;
for, as his road lay through large woods and forests, that were full of
wild beasts, and without inhabitants, he must have been soon starved or
torn in pieces, had he not been both fed and protected by this noble
animal.

Tom had provided himself with two guns, a sword, and as much powder and
ball as he could carry: with these arms, and such a companion, it was
mighty easy for him to get food; for the animals in these wild and
extensive forests, having never seen the effects of a gun, readily ran
from the lion, who hunted on one side, to Tom, who hunted on the other,
so that they were either caught by the lion, or shot by his master; and
it was pleasant enough, after a hunting-match, and the meat was dressed,
to see how cheek by jowl they sat down to dinner.

When they came to the land of Utopia, he discovered the statue of a man
erected on an open plain, which had this inscription on the pedestal:
"On May-day in the morning, when the sun rises, I shall have a _Head of
Gold_." As it was now the latter end of April, he staid to see this
wonderful change; and, in the mean time, inquiring of a poor shepherd
what was the reason of the statue being erected there, and with that
inscription, he was informed, that it was set up many years ago by an
Arabian philosopher, who travelled all the world over in search of a
real friend, that he lived with, and was extremely fond of, a great
man who inhabited the next mountain; but that on some occasion they
quarrelled, and the philosopher, leaving the mountain, retired into the
plain, where he erected this statue with his own hands, and soon after
died. To this he added, that all the people for many leagues round came
there every May morning, expecting to see the stone head turned to gold.

Tom got up very early on the first of May to behold this amazing change,
and when he came near the statue, he saw a number of people, who all ran
away from him in the utmost consternation, having never before seen a
lion follow a man like a lap-dog. Being thus left alone, he fixed his
eyes on the sun, then rising with resplendent majesty, and afterwards
turned to the statue, but could see no change in the stone.--"Surely,"
says he to himself, "there is some mystical meaning in this! This
inscription must be an aenigma, the hidden meaning of which I will
endeavour to find; for a philosopher never would expect a stone to be
turned to gold." Accordingly he measured the length of the shadow, which
the statue gave on the ground by the sun shining on it, and marked that
particular part where the head fell; then getting a chopness, a thing
like a spade, and digging, he discovered a copper chest, full of gold,
with this inscription engraved on the lid of it, "Thy _wit_, oh man!
whoever thou art, hath disclosed the aenigma, and discovered the _Golden
Head_. Take it and use it: but use it with wisdom; for know, that
_Gold_, properly employed, may dispense blessings, and promote the
happiness of mortals; but when hoarded up, or misapplied, is but trash,
that makes mankind miserable. Remember the unprofitable servant, who hid
his _talent_ in a napkin; and the profligate son who squandered away his
substance, and fed with the swine. As thou hast got the _Golden Head_,
observe the _Golden Mean_; be _good_, and be happy."

This lesson, coming as it were from the dead, struck him with such an
awe and reverence for piety and virtue, that before he removed the
treasure, he kneeled down, and earnestly and fervently prayed that he
might make a prudent, just and proper use of it. He then conveyed the
chest away; but how he got it to England is not known. It may not be
improper, however, in this place, to give the reader some account of the
philosopher who hid this treasure, and took so much pains to find a true
and real friend to enjoy it. As Tom had reason to venerate his memory,
he was very particular in his inquiry, and had this character of him:
That he was a man well acquainted with nature and with trade; that he
was pious, friendly, and of a sweet and affable disposition; that he had
acquired a fortune by commerce, and having no relation to leave it to,
he travelled through Arabia, Persia, India, Lybia, and Utopia, in search
of a real friend. In this pursuit he found several, with whom he had
exchanged good offices, and who were polite and obliging; but they often
flew off for trifles, or as soon as he pretended to be in distress,
and requested their assistance, had left him to struggle with his own
difficulties. So true is that copy in our books, which says, "Adversity
is the touchstone of friendship."

At last, however, he met in with the Utopian Philosopher, or the Wise
Man of the Mountain, as he is called, and thought in him he had found
the friend he wanted; for though he had often pretended to be in
distress, and abandoned to the frowns of fortune, this man always
relieved him, and with such chearfulness and sincerity, that concluding
he had found out the only man to whom he ought to open both his purse
and his heart, he let him so far into his secrets, as to desire his
assistance in hiding a large sum of money, which he wanted to conceal,
lest the prince of the country, who was absolute, should, by the
advice of his wicked minister, put him to death for his gold. The two
philosophers met and hid the money, which the stranger, after some days,
went to see, but found it gone. How was he struck to the heart, when he
found that his friend, whom he had often tried, and who had relieved him
in his distress, could not withstand this temptation, but broke through
the sacred bonds of friendship, and turned even a thief for gold which
he did not want, as he was already very rich! "Oh!" said he, "what is
the heart of man made of? Why am I condemned to live among people who
have no sincerity, and barter the most sacred ties of friendship and
humanity for the dirt that we tread on? Had I lost my gold, and found a
real friend, I should have been happy with the exchange, but now I am
most miserable." After some time he wiped off his tears, and being
determined not to be so imposed on, he had recourse to cunning and
the arts of life. He went to his pretended friend with a chearful
countenance, told him he had more gold to hide, and desired him to
appoint a time when they might go together and open the earth, to put it
into the same pot; the other, in hopes of getting more wealth, appointed
the next evening. They went together upon the ground, and found the
money they had first placed there, for the artful wretch he so much
confided in, had conveyed it again into the pot, in order to obtain
more. Our philosopher immediately took the gold, and putting it into his
pocket, told the other he had now altered his mind, and should bury it
no more, till he found a man more worthy of his confidence. See what
people lose by being dishonest!


Remember this story, and take care whom you trust; but do not be
covetous, sordid, and miserable; for the gold we have, is but lent us to
do good with. We receive all from the hand of God, and every person in
distress hath a just title to a portion of it.


FINIS.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


  Errors and Anomalies (noted by transcriber):

  These spellings are standard for the book:
    acrostick, chearful
    dervise [for dervish], Lybia, Scheich [for sheikh?], Visier

  he came more chearful than the morning  [_text unchanged_]
  but no white mouse was to be found.  [_. missing or invisible_]
  the arching branches of a Banana tree
    [_text unchanged, but author may have intended "Banyan"_]
  come near her a second time."  [_closing " missing_]
  the discourse between the fairies and the genies  [faries]
    [_the words "fairy" and "fairies" occur many times_]
  twenty load of the richest merchandise
    [_text unchanged: usage may be normal for 1816_]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of the White Mouse, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE WHITE MOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 30169.txt or 30169.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/1/6/30169/

Produced by Louise Hope, David Edwards and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
