The Project Gutenberg EBook of Joseph the Dreamer, by Amy Steedman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Joseph the Dreamer

Author: Amy Steedman

Release Date: October 9, 2009 [EBook #30218]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOSEPH THE DREAMER ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Juliet Sutherland, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








   [Illustration: Joseph as Ruler of Egypt speaks to his brothers.]


                                JOSEPH

                             THE DREAMER



                           By AMY STEEDMAN


                            [Illustration]




                         THOMAS NELSON & SONS

                               NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *




The Story of Joseph

[Illustration: The coat of many colours.]


This is the story of Joseph, the boy who had the strangest and most
exciting adventures of any boy who ever lived.

Joseph was but a little lad when his mother died. His father, Jacob,
had loved that mother more than any one else in the world, so that
when she died leaving Joseph and a baby brother, Benjamin, all the
love in the father's heart turned to his two little sons.

The elder brothers were strong, grown-up men, quite able to look
after themselves, and no longer needing their father's care; so
perhaps it was no wonder that Jacob made a special favourite of the
little lad Joseph, and loved him best.

At first the older brothers took no notice of their father's way with
the younger boy; but as Joseph grew older they began to feel uneasy
and envious. Why should this child be marked out for special favour?
Their father took no pains to hide the fact that the boy was the apple
of his eye. Even his clothes showed this.

While the brothers wore the ordinary shepherd clothing, Joseph had a
beautiful coat of many colours. His father had made it for him of
different pieces of coloured cloth joined together, and it was so gay
and beautiful that every one who saw him wearing it said, "This must
be the son of a great chief!"

But if the gay coat made them angry, they were more angry still when
Joseph began to dream strange dreams, which he always told to them.

As they sat around in the fields watching the sheep, the boy would
come running to them, full of excitement, as he begged them to listen
to a wonderful dream he had had.

"Hear, I pray thee, this dream that I have dreamed!" he cried, sitting
down amongst them. "We were binding sheaves in a field, and lo! my
sheaf arose and also stood upright, and, behold, your sheaves stood
round about and bowed to my sheaf!"

Another time his dream was about the stars; the sun and moon and
eleven stars, he said, had all bowed down before him. This was really
more than his brothers could bear. Did he really think he was going to
rule over them? Were they to bow down before this boasting boy in his
fine coat?

Even his father did not quite approve of these dreams. But Joseph had
not really meant to boast. It was the wonder of the dreams that made
him repeat them. If he was proud of his coat of many colours, it was
only because it was a gift from his father. He was a straightforward
good-natured boy, clever and brave, and ready to take his turn in
watching the flocks or helping his brothers with their work in the
fields.

But it grew day by day more difficult to keep the peace at home, and
the only quiet times were when the elder brothers went farther afield
to find new pasture for their flocks.

It was at one of these times, when the brothers had been gone for some
time, that Jacob called Joseph to him, and bade him go and find his
brothers, and bring back news if they were safe and well.

Joseph was now a lad of about seventeen, and this would be the first
journey he had taken by himself, so he was eager to show that he was
to be trusted, and he set out most cheerfully.

After some days he arrived at Shechem, where his father had told him
he would find his brothers. But he could find no signs of them there.
Unwilling to go home without news, Joseph wandered about until he met
a man who directed him to a place farther on where his brothers might
be, and at last he caught sight of their tents in a field far ahead.
How lucky he was to find them, he thought to himself, as he hurried
forward eager to meet them.

It was a clear day, and the shepherds' keen eyes could see far along
the winding road that stretched out across the low hills towards
Shechem. Long before Joseph came within hail, his brothers saw his
figure in the distance hastening towards them. Perhaps it was the gay
colour of his coat that first told them who it was, and perhaps it was
the coat that reminded them of their hate and envy, and brought back
to their memory again those dreams so full of pride.

"Behold, this dreamer cometh!" they said one to another. "Come now,
therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we
will say, 'Some evil beast hath devoured him!' and we shall see what
will become of his dreams."

With dark looks of hate they watched the gay figure coming so joyfully
towards them, and only one heart felt any pity for the boy. Reuben,
the eldest brother, made up his mind quickly that he would save him if
possible. Only he must set to work cunningly, for those other nine
brothers were very determined men.

So he began by suggesting that it seemed quite unnecessary to kill
the boy themselves when the easiest plan would be just to put him down
the pit, which was close at hand, and there leave him to die. (For he
thought if he could persuade them to do this he would come back and
save Joseph when the others had gone.) Never dreaming of evil, Joseph
came on, and now he ran eagerly up to them and began to give them
their father's message.

[Illustration: "Behold, this dreamer cometh!"]

But the rough hands held out to him were not held out in welcome. The
brothers seized the boy and savagely tore off his beautiful coat, as
if the very sight of it hurt their eyes, and then they hurried him
towards the pit which Reuben had pointed out.

Then Joseph knew that they meant to kill him. He knew that if they
threw him into one of those deep narrow pits there was no chance of
climbing up its steep sides, even if he were not immediately drowned
in the water which often gathered at the bottom.

Was he never to see his father and little brother again? never to
spend any more happy days in the fields under the blue sky? It was
useless to cry out and beg for pity. Reuben, the eldest brother, who
might have helped him, was not there, and the others he knew were
merciless.

The pit was reached, and in spite of his cries strong hands pushed him
forward and over the edge. Down, down he fell into the blackness,
until with a terrible thud he reached the bottom. There was no water
to break his fall, for the pit was dry.

Well--that was done! The cruel brothers went off to a little distance
and began to eat their midday meal. But scarcely had they begun when
they caught sight of a company of travellers passing along the road
close by. There was a long train of camels laden with spices,
evidently on their way down to Egypt.

[Illustration: "They sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites."

Gen. xxxvii. 28.]

Here was a splendid opportunity of making some money out of their evil
plan. Instead of leaving Joseph to starve in the pit, they would fetch
him out and sell him to these merchants. Most likely they would get
a good price for such a strong young slave.

[Illustration: They hurried him towards the pit.]

Perhaps when Joseph heard their voices at the pit's mouth, and when
they drew him up and lifted him out into the sunshine again, he
thought for a moment that they meant to be kind to him after all. But
that thought soon vanished.

The Midianite merchants were waiting, the bargain was struck, and very
soon a rope was bound round his hands, and he was tied to the saddle
of the man who had bought him. He knew now they had only taken him
out of the pit to sell him as a slave.

Meanwhile Reuben had been keeping out of sight, waiting to return and
rescue his young brother as soon as it was safe to do so. Very
cautiously at last he stole back. But, alas! when he reached the pit
he found that it was empty. In his distress he forgot his caution, and
cared no longer if his brothers guessed what he had meant to do.

"The child is not, and I, whither shall I go?" he cried to them in
bitter sorrow when he met them.

With angry, sullen looks they told him that Joseph was now far away on
his road to Egypt. Reuben must keep their secret. There was but one
thing to be done. Joseph's coat lay there, just as they had torn it
off his back. They would dip the coat in goat's blood and carry it to
their father.

The poor, gay-coloured little coat, all blood-stained and torn, was
brought and held up before Jacob's eyes.

"This have we found," said the brothers; "know now whether it be thy
son's coat or no?"

Did he not, indeed, know that coat of many colours? Had he not matched
and joined together each of the pieces? Had not his heart been filled
with pride and love as he watched the boy wearing it with such a
gallant air?

"It is my son's coat!" he cried with a bitter cry of grief; "an evil
beast hath devoured him! Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces!"

[Illustration: He was tied to the saddle of the man who had bought
him.]

It might perhaps have seemed better just then for Joseph if he had
been dead instead of being carried away into slavery. It was a
terrible fate, and he might well have become sullen and hopeless in
the strange land of Egypt to which the merchantmen took him.

But instead of being sorry for himself, and thinking only of the
unkindness and wickedness of his cruel brothers, he made the best of
everything, and set himself to do his new hard work as well as
possible. If he was a slave he would, at any rate, be a thoroughly
good slave.

And very soon his master, Potiphar, found that this fair-haired,
good-looking Hebrew boy was one to be trusted, and, as time went on,
he not only gave him his freedom, but made him the chief servant of
the house-hold. Then, just when happy days began to dawn for Joseph,
misfortune once more overtook him.

His master's wife accused him of doing wrong, and declared he was
thoroughly bad. And so all his well-deserved favours were taken from
him, and he was put into prison.

Even in prison Joseph's quiet goodness and his wise ways made him a
favourite. He was the friend of all the other prisoners, and before
long he became the governor's right hand.

Still it was weary work to be shut up in prison, and he longed with
all his heart for freedom, and a chance to win a place for himself in
the great world. He knew that Pharaoh, the King of Egypt, was not
unfriendly to strangers. If only he could reach his ear all might be
well.

At last the chance came. There were two of Pharaoh's servants in the
prison--one, the king's cup-bearer, and the other his chief baker, and
both these were sorely troubled one night because of the dreams they
had dreamt. They were sure these dreams had a meaning, but who was to
explain them?

[Illustration: "Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces!"]

Now Joseph had learned to know a great deal about dreams, and so he
listened to these men and told them what he thought their dreams must
mean.

The chief baker's dream was a sad one. He had dreamt of three baskets
which he carried on his head--baskets filled with the king's food--but
the birds had come and eaten up all the food. "Alas!" said Joseph,
"the three baskets must mean three days, and in three days the baker
must be hanged, and the birds would come and eat his flesh."

But the cup-bearer's dream was a happy one, for he had seen a vine
which bore three clusters of grapes, which he had pressed out into the
king's cup and presented to Pharaoh. The three clusters of grapes were
again three days, said Joseph, and in three days' time the cup-bearer
would be once more free and hand the king his golden cup.

"But think of me when it shall be well with thee," added Joseph to the
cup-bearer, "and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention
of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house. For, indeed, I was
stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews, and here also have I done
nothing that they should put me into the dungeon."

In three days all that Joseph had said came true. The chief baker was
hanged, and the chief butler was set free, and stood once more before
the king; only he quite forgot the man who had been so kind to him in
prison, and for two years never once thought of Joseph.

But at last something happened that reminded him. Once again it was a
dream, but this time the dreamer was Pharaoh, the great king. He had
sent for all the cleverest men in the land to explain his dreams to
him, but no one could find a meaning for them.

Then the cup-bearer suddenly remembered Joseph, and came and told the
king all that had happened to him when he was in prison. Surely it
would be worth while to try this man. So Pharaoh sent and brought
Joseph out of prison, and asked him if it was true that he could tell
the meaning of dreams.

[Illustration: He told them what he thought their dreams must mean.]

There was no pride nor boastfulness in Joseph's answer. Of himself, he
said, he could do nothing; but with God's help he would tell the king
all that he could.

So Pharaoh told his dreams, and as Joseph listened he knew at once
that they had been sent as a warning from God. Seven years of good
harvests and plenty of food were coming, and after that seven years
of famine, when, if all the food of the good years was eaten up, the
people would starve. The warning dreams had been sent so that the corn
might be saved up and stored. And it would be a good plan, said
Joseph, to find the very wisest and best man in all the land who would
undertake to do this.

Pharaoh listened thoughtfully, and soon made up his mind. He felt at
once that Joseph was a man to be trusted.

"Forasmuch as God hath showed thee all this," he said, "there is none
so discreet and wise as thou art. Thou shalt be over my house, and
according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled. Only in the
throne will I be greater than thou."

What a wonderful adventure this was for Joseph! One day only a poor
unknown prisoner, and the next the lord and ruler over all the land of
Egypt--next only to the king in power.

But although Joseph's outside life was changed, he himself remained
just the same. He was as keen as ever on doing his best, as brave and
fearless in serving God and the king, as wise in ruling as he had been
in serving.

So when the years of famine came there were great stores of corn laid
up to feed the Egyptians, and not only the people of Egypt, but
strangers from other lands came to Joseph, the Ruler, to buy food.

[Illustration: He felt at once that Joseph was a man to be trusted.]

Then it was that one day ten tired, travel-stained men arrived at the
city, saying they had come from the far-distant land of Canaan to buy
corn for their wives and families, who were starving.

Joseph knew them at once. They were his ten brothers--those brothers
whom he had last seen when, as a helpless boy, he had knelt and begged
them for mercy. Now they came kneeling to the great ruler, little
dreaming that this powerful prince was the young brother they had
betrayed and sold into slavery.

And Joseph did not mean to tell them just yet. He pretended to take
them for spies, and he spoke roughly to them.

"Thy servants are no spies," the brothers answered humbly. "We are the
sons of one man, in the land of Canaan, and, behold, the youngest is
this day with our father, and one is not."

Even then Joseph pretended that he did not believe them. No, they must
first prove their words by bringing their youngest brother to him.
They might leave one of their number behind as a hostage, and take
corn for their families, and return to fetch their brother. This he
said because he longed to see Benjamin again.

The men listened sadly to what the great man said. They must have the
corn or their families would starve. And yet how could they leave one
of their brothers behind when they knew their father would never allow
Benjamin to return with them.

"This is just what we deserve," they said to one another. "We would
not listen to Joseph when he begged for mercy, and now this is our
punishment."

"Did I not beg you not to hurt the child?" said Reuben.

They did not know, of course, that the great ruler could understand
what they were saying in their own language; but as Joseph listened
he was obliged to turn away to hide the tears that were in his eyes.

[Illustration: Lord and ruler over all the land of Egypt.]

There was nothing for it but to agree to the conditions, so it was
decided that Simeon should be left behind, and the order was given
that all the sacks should be filled with corn, and that every man's
ass should be laden with as much corn as could be carried; only,
instead of taking money for the corn, Joseph ordered that it should be
secretly hidden in the sacks, each man's money in his sack of corn.

So the men started off on their journey home, and travelling all day
came at night to an inn to rest. There one of the men opened his sack
to give his ass some food. What, then, was his surprise to find his
bundle of money tied up in the mouth of his sack!

The other brothers gathered round and looked on in amazement. Yes, it
was quite true. There was the money which was the price of the
corn--not a penny of it taken! What could it mean?

But they were still more amazed when at last they came to their
journey's end and found, when they opened their sacks, that all their
money had been returned. There was a bundle of money in each sack!

It was so strange that they grew uneasy and frightened. Then, too,
they were obliged to tell their father that Simeon had been left
behind as a hostage, and that the great lord of the country had taken
them for spies, and had demanded that Benjamin should return with them
before he would believe their story.

But Jacob would not hear of parting with his youngest son. Had he not
lost two sons already, first his beloved Joseph, and now Simeon?

"Will you also take Benjamin from me?" he asked. "All these things are
against me!"

In vain Reuben promised that he would bring Benjamin safely back.
Jacob only shook his head.

"My son shall not go down with you," he said. "His brother is dead,
and he is left alone. If mischief befall him by the way in the which
ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave!"

[Illustration: There was the money which was the price of the corn.]

Now that was all very well while the corn lasted; but when the famine
still went on, and all the corn was eaten up, there was nothing to be
done but to go back to Egypt and try to buy some more.

And it was no use going without Benjamin, for had not the great lord
of the country declared, "Ye shall not see my face except your brother
be with you."

So at last Jacob was obliged to let his precious son go with his
brothers, although it almost broke his heart to part with him.

Now Joseph had been quite sure that his brothers would return, and
when at last they appeared he was overjoyed to see that Benjamin was
with them. He ordered a great feast to be made, and invited them all
to dine with him; but still he kept his secret, and they did not guess
who he was, although they could not help noticing that Benjamin was
singled out for special favor.

So their sacks were filled again with corn, and the brothers prepared
to set out joyfully on their return journey. Only this time Joseph had
ordered his servants to put his silver cup into Benjamin's sack.

The men had not gone far before they were overtaken by the great
ruler's servants, who accused them of stealing their lord's silver
cup. Of course they indignantly denied this; but when the baggage was
searched the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.

Now indeed was their joy turned into blackest sorrow. They must go
back at once to try and explain matters to the lord of the land. But
would he listen to them?

At first Joseph pretended to be very angry, but as he listened to
their tale and heard how they dared not face their father without the
beloved youngest son, he saw that they had earned his forgiveness, and
he kept up the pretence no longer. Sending all the servants away he
held out his hands to his brothers, his eyes blinded with tears.

"I am Joseph, your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt," he said. "Now,
therefore, be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me
hither, for God did send me before you to preserve life."

At first the brothers could scarcely believe their ears. Could this
great lord really be their little brother Joseph? And could he really
forgive them their cruelty?

Then Joseph put his arm round Benjamin's neck and kissed him, and
afterwards kissed each of his other brothers, so that they began to
feel that the wonderful story was real and not a mere dream.

There was no fear of famine for them now. Nothing in all the land was
too good for the brothers of the great ruler, and ere long there were
wagons and camels on their way to Canaan to fetch Jacob, the old
father, and all the wives and children belonging to the ten brothers.
They would all now share in Joseph's good fortune.

So Jacob's sorrow was turned into joy when the news was brought to him
that Joseph was alive and was governor over all the land of Egypt.

It sounded almost like a magic tale, and at first Jacob could not
believe it; but at last, when he saw the wagons and heard Joseph's own
message to him, his heart was filled with joy and thankfulness.

"It is enough," he cried. "Joseph, my son, is yet alive; I will go
and see him before I die."

It was a long journey for such an old man; but joy gave him strength
to endure it, and at the end Joseph stood waiting to welcome
him--Joseph the great ruler, clad in rich robes, living in princely
state, whose word was law, and who held the highest honors in the
land.

       *       *       *       *       *




BOOKS IN THIS SERIES


JOSEPH THE DREAMER

THE BABE IN THE BULRUSHES

DAVID THE SHEPHERD BOY

THE CHILD JESUS

THE GOOD PHYSICIAN

THE GOOD SHEPHERD

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Joseph the Dreamer, by Amy Steedman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOSEPH THE DREAMER ***

***** This file should be named 30218.txt or 30218.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/2/1/30218/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Juliet Sutherland, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
