Project Gutenberg's The Vote That Made the President, by David Dudley Field

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Vote That Made the President

Author: David Dudley Field

Release Date: October 11, 2009 [EBook #30231]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VOTE THAT MADE THE PRESIDENT ***




Produced by Meredith Bach, Carla Foust, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









   THE VOTE
   THAT
   MADE THE PRESIDENT.

   BY
   DAVID DUDLEY FIELD.

   NEW YORK:
   D. APPLETON & COMPANY,
   549 & 551 BROADWAY.
   1877.




COPYRIGHT BY DAVID DUDLEY FIELD. 1877.




THE VOTE THAT MADE THE PRESIDENT.


At ten minutes past four o'clock on the second morning of the present
month (March, 1877), the President of the Senate of the United States,
in the presence of the two Houses of Congress, made this announcement:
"The whole number of the electors appointed to vote for President and
Vice-President of the United States is 369, of which a majority is 185.
The state of the vote for President of the United States, as delivered
by the tellers, and as determined under the act of Congress, approved
January 29, 1877, on this subject, is: for Rutherford B. Hayes, of Ohio,
185 votes; for Samuel J. Tilden, of New York, 184 votes;" and then,
after mentioning the votes for Vice-President, he proceeded: "Wherefore
I do declare, that Rutherford B. Hayes, of Ohio, having received a
majority of the whole number of electoral votes, is duly elected
President of the United States for four years, commencing on the fourth
day of March, 1877."

Mr. Hayes was thus declared elected by a majority of one. If any vote
counted for him had been counted on the other side, Mr. Tilden, instead
of Mr. Hayes, would have had the 185 votes; if it had been rejected
altogether, each would have had 184 votes, and the House of
Representatives would immediately have elected Mr. Tilden. One vote,
therefore, put Mr. Hayes into the presidential office.

To make up the 185 votes counted for him, 8 came from Louisiana and 4
from Florida. Whether they should have been thus counted is a question
that affects the honor, the conscience, and the interests of the
American people. There is not a person living in this country who has
not a direct concern in a just answer. Not one will ever live in it
whose respect for this generation will not depend in some degree upon
that answer.

The 12 votes were not all alike. Some had one distinction, some another.
But, not to distract attention by the discussion of several transactions
instead of one, and because one in the present instance actually
determined the result, I will confine my observations to a single vote.
For this purpose let us take one of the votes from Louisiana, that, for
instance, of Orlando H. Brewster.

Brewster was not appointed an elector, inasmuch as he did not receive a
majority of the votes cast by the people of Louisiana, and inasmuch also
as he could not have been appointed if he had received them all.


HE DID NOT RECEIVE A MAJORITY OF THE VOTES.

It would be a waste of time and patience to go through the testimony
taken by the two Houses of Congress for their own information, before
they consented to call in the advice of the Electoral Commission. The
evidence of wrongs on both sides, and the irreconcilable contradictions
of witnesses, made President Seelye and Mr. Pierce, of Massachusetts,
declare it to be impossible for them to reach a satisfactory conclusion
upon the facts, and compelled them to break away from their party, and
refuse to abide by the advice of the Commission. There are certain
things, however, which we know beyond dispute, or about which there is
and can be no controversy, and these only will I mention. We know that
the number of votes cast in Louisiana for the Tilden electors, taking
the first name on the list as representing all, was 83,723, but that the
certificate of the Returning Board put them at 70,508, turning Mr.
Tilden's majority of more than 6,000 into a majority for Mr. Hayes; and
we know that the reduction was made by throwing out more than 13,000
votes of legal voters voting legally for Mr. Tilden, and that more than
10,000 of these were thrown out upon the assumed authority of a statute
of Louisiana, which in terms gave the board power to throw out votes,
upon examination and deliberation, "whenever, from any poll or
voting-place, there shall be received the _statement of any supervisor_
of registration _or commissioner_ of election, in form as required by
section 26 of this act, _on affidavit of three or more citizens_, of any
riot, tumult, acts of violence, intimidation, armed disturbance,
bribery, or corrupt influences, which prevented, or tended to prevent, a
fair, free, and peaceable vote of all qualified electors entitled to
vote at such poll or voting-place."

Whether the statute itself has its warrant in the Constitution is a
question not necessary now to be considered. For my part, I cannot see
the authority for taking out of the ballot-boxes the ballots of lawful
voters and throwing them away because other voters did not vote,
whatever may have been the cause of their not voting, whether they were
frightened, foolish, or perverse. I cannot for the life of me perceive
that the State can be held to have elected persons whom it did not in
fact elect, because it is conjectured, or even made probable, that if
voters who kept away from the polls had in fact attended and voted, they
would have made a majority for these persons.

Without going into that question, however, and assuming for the sake of
the argument that the statute had all the authority of the most clearly
valid statute that was ever passed, it is certain that the only ground
upon which a vote could have been thrown out, for intimidation or other
corrupt influence, was the statement of a supervisor of registration or
commissioner of election, founded upon the affidavits of three citizens.
When, however, the vote of Louisiana was before the Electoral
Commission, the following offer was made by counsel:

     "We offer to prove that _the statements and affidavits_ purporting
     to have been made and forwarded to said Returning Board in
     pursuance of the provisions of section 26, of the election law of
     1872, alleging riot, tumult, intimidation, and violence, at or near
     certain polls, and in certain parishes, _were_ falsely fabricated
     and _forged_ by certain disreputable persons _under the direction_,
     and with the knowledge, _of said Returning Board_, and that said
     Returning Board, knowing said statements and affidavits to be false
     and forged, and that none of the said statements or affidavits were
     made in the manner or form or within the time required by law, did
     knowingly, willfully, and fraudulently, fail and refuse to canvass
     or compile more than 10,000 votes lawfully cast, as is shown by the
     statements of votes of the Commissioners of Election."

This offer the Commission rejected by a vote of 8 to 7.

In the Commission Mr. Abbott moved the following:

     "_Resolved_, That testimony tending to show that the so-called
     Returning Board of Louisiana had no jurisdiction to canvass the
     votes for electors of President and Vice-President is admissible."

This was rejected by the same vote.

In explaining the reason of their decision in the case, the Commission
used the following language:

     "And the Commission has, by a majority of votes, decided, and does
     hereby decide, that it is not competent, under the Constitution and
     the law as it existed at the date of the passage of said act, to go
     into evidence _aliunde_, the papers opened by the President of the
     Senate, in the presence of the two Houses, to prove that other
     persons than those regularly certified to by the Governor of the
     State of Louisiana, on and according to the determination and
     declaration of their appointment by the returning officers for
     elections in the said State prior to the time required for the
     performance of their duties, had been appointed electors, or by
     counter-proof to show that they had not; or that the determination
     of the said returning officers was not in accordance with the truth
     and the fact, the Commission, by a majority of votes, being of
     opinion that it is not within the jurisdiction of the two Houses of
     Congress, assembled to count the votes for President and
     Vice-President, to enter upon a trial of such questions."

Whether, therefore, the decisions of the Commission or the reasons given
for them be sound or unsound, it may be assumed, that _Brewster did not
receive a majority of the votes cast by the people of Louisiana, and
that the action of the Returning Board_ in cutting down the majority of
his competitor, so as to reduce it below his, _was taken without
jurisdiction, and upon the pretense of statements and affidavits which
they themselves had caused to be forged_.


BREWSTER COULD NOT HAVE BEEN APPOINTED ELECTOR IF HE HAD RECEIVED THE
VOTES OF ALL THE PEOPLE OF LOUISIANA.

He had been made Surveyor-General of the United States, for the District
of Louisiana, on the 2d of February, 1874; was recommissioned by
President Grant on the 11th of February, 1875, and is at present
exercising the office. Whether he has ever been out of the office
depends upon the facts now to be mentioned. Eight or nine days after the
election of November 7, 1876, at which he was a candidate on the
Republican electoral ticket, there was received at the Department of the
Interior, from the hands of the President, this letter:

                                           MONROE, _November 4, 1876_.

     DEAR SIR: I hereby tender my resignation of the office of
     Surveyor-General of the State of Louisiana, with the request that
     it be accepted immediately. With many thanks for your kindness,

                                       I remain, yours respectfully,
                                                       O. H. BREWSTER.

     U. S. GRANT, _President United States_.

When the letter was written does not appear. It is certain that Brewster
was acting as Surveyor-General on the 10th of November.

On the 16th of November a letter was addressed to the Commissioner of
the General Land-Office, as follows:

                                       DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,}
                                  WASHINGTON, _November 16, 1876_.}

     SIR: I have received the resignation of Mr. Orlando H. Brewster,
     Surveyor-General of Louisiana, which he has requested may take
     effect immediately. Please inform Mr. Brewster that his resignation
     has been accepted by the President, to take effect November 4th
     instant, that being the date of his letter of resignation to this
     Department.

                                       Very respectfully,
                                          Z. CHANDLER, _Secretary_.

At what time, if ever, the Commissioner informed Brewster of the
acceptance of his resignation we do not know, but it could not have been
earlier than the 20th of November.

On the morning of the 6th of December, the four men who assumed to act
as the Returning Board of Louisiana filed in the office of the
Secretary of that State a certificate that Brewster, with seven other
persons, had been appointed presidential electors. There was then on the
statute-book of Louisiana this enactment:

     "If any one or more of the electors chosen by the people shall fail
     from any cause whatever to attend at the appointed place at the
     hour of 4 P.M. of the day prescribed for their meeting, it shall be
     the duty of the other electors immediately to proceed by ballot to
     fill such vacancy or vacancies."

What Brewster did is thus told by Kellogg, one of the Hayes electors, on
his examination at Washington in January:

     "_Q._ Did Levissee and Brewster vote at the meeting of electors?

      _A._ I believe they did.

      _Q._ Was not an appointment made for somebody to fill Brewster's
     place?

      _A._ I believe that that is the case.


      _Q._ Who was appointed to fill Brewster's place?

      _A._ Brewster himself.

      _Q._ The same man?

      _A._ The same man.


      _Q._ Were you also instructed by these committees (National and
      Congressional Republican Committees) how to dispose of Brewster
      and Levissee?

      _A._ My recollection is that some one of the electors had
      received a letter suggesting that in case of a vacancy or in case
      of the absence of Levissee and Brewster, they should be chosen in
      their own places. That is my recollection.


      _Q._ And yet they absented themselves from the electoral college,
      and you filled their vacancies with themselves?

      _A._ They were absent from the college when the college met, and we
      filled their vacancies by themselves."

Being thus installed, they voted for Mr. Hayes within an hour after they
were chosen to fill their own vacancies; and three days afterward
Brewster addressed the following letter to the President:

                            NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA, _December 9, 1876._

     SIR: I respectfully apply to be appointed Surveyor-General for the
     District of Louisiana. Commendations from prominent gentlemen will
     be submitted to your Excellency to justify the appointment.

                       I have the honor to remain
                                  Your very obedient servant,
                                            ORLANDO H. BREWSTER.

     U. S. GRANT, _President United States, Washington, D. C._

The reappointment was made on the 5th of January, 1877. The Chief of the
Appointment Division in the Interior Department was asked and testified
about it as follows:

     "_Q._ Who recommended his appointment in January?

      _A._ I think the probability is (although there is no evidence of
      it) that there was no recommendation, further than his own
      application to the President.

      _Q._ You do not know of any recommendation?

      _A._ I do not know of any.

      _Q._ There is none on file?

      _A._ There is none on file to the best of my knowledge. There is
      none on file in the Interior Department."

Who does not perceive the shallow trick by which Brewster pretended to
have divested himself of his Federal office that he might vote; only to
be reinvested as soon as he had voted?

The letter of resignation, with its false date, and its pretended
acceptance, to take effect as of a time past, were evident shams to make
it appear that he was not holder of a Federal office when he was
elected; his affecting to be absent on the 6th of December, and coming
in immediately to fill the vacancy occasioned by his own absence, in
order to make it appear that his appointment was made on that 6th of
December, instead of the 7th of November, and his barefaced application
on the third day thereafter to be reappointed to the Federal office,
from which he could not possibly have perfected his resignation before
the 20th of November--all these were but so many contrivances to evade
the highest enactment known to our civil polity. In the eye of reason
and of law, he acted during the whole period under that influence of
office which it was the design of the Constitution to prevent, and he
must have entered more thoroughly into the work of his Federal master
than if he had not gone through the form of resigning, inasmuch as that
placed him, more than before, in his master's power.

Let us now place side by side the commandment of the Constitution and
the resolution of the Electoral Commission:

   COMMANDMENT.                       | RESOLUTION.
                                      |
   "_No_ Senator or Representative,   | "The Commission, by a majority
   or _person holding an office of    | of votes, is also of the opinion
   trust or profit under the United   | that _it is not competent to prove
   States, shall be appointed an      | that any of said persons, so
   elector._"                         | appointed electors_ as aforesaid,
                                      | _held an office of trust or
                                      | profit under the United States
                                      | at the time when they were
                                      | appointed_, or that they were
                                      | ineligible under the laws of the
                                      | State, or any other matter
                                      | offered to be proved _aliunde_
                                      | the said certificates and
                                      | papers."

It would be unjust to cast upon the Electoral Commission the blame of
all the wrong that has been practised in this presidential count. The
Commission was but a council of advice, which Congress might have taken
or not, as it pleased, the only condition being that, in order to reject
it, both Houses must have agreed. The responsibility of the final
decision lay, after all, upon Congress, or rather, upon the Senate,
which voted throughout to follow the Commission.

       *       *       *       *       *

The facts thus briefly recited present certain questions--moral,
political, and legal--which cannot be considered too soon for our good
repute and our self-respect.


THE MORAL QUESTION.

Whatever differences of opinion there may be about the political and
legal questions involved, there can be none about the moral. The
presidential office is the gift of the people of the several States, of
their own free-will, expressed according to the laws. A falsification of
that will is an offense against the State where it is committed, and
against all the States. If the falsification is beyond the reach of the
law, it is not beyond the reach of the conscience. A robbery is none the
less a robbery because it is beyond the range of vision or the arm of
justice. If the possessor of an estate has entered through the forgery
of a record or the spoliation of a will, which although believed by
every neighbor is beyond judicial proof, all the world pronounces his
possession fraudulent, even though he scatters his wealth in charities
and gathers many companions around his luxurious table. The example is
corrupting, but it is against the eternal law of justice that the act
should be respected or the actors continue forever to prosper.

It is no answer to these observations to say that frauds have been
practised on the other side. Unhappily there is too much reason to
believe that neither party is free from practices which are at once a
scourge and a dishonor. Neither has the disgraceful monopoly of such
practices, whichever may have the bad preeminence. But this is certain:
one wrong neither justifies nor palliates another.

There is no set-off known to the moral law. Because A has defrauded B,
that is no reason why B should defraud A. If it were so, society would
go on forever in a compound ratio of crime. The first breach of the law
would furnish excuse for the second, and their progeny would follow in
sad progression to the end of time. This is not, however, the moral
condition of the world. The _lex talionis_ has been abolished by the law
of civilization and the higher law of the gospel.

In this case of Louisiana there can be neither excuse nor palliation for
the misconduct of the Returning Board.

On the 10th of November, President Grant telegraphed to the General of
the Army instructions about troops in Louisiana and Florida, and added
that "_no man worthy of the office of President should be willing to
hold it if counted in or placed there by fraud_. Either party can afford
to be disappointed in the result. _The country cannot afford to have the
result tainted by the suspicion of illegal or false returns._" And
again: "The presence of citizens from other States, I understand, is
requested in Louisiana, to see that the Board of Canvassers makes _a
fair count of the vote actually cast_. It is to be hoped that
representative and fair men of both parties will go."

Did the President of that day misrepresent his party, or his successor,
or has the party changed and the successor also? Had the virtuous
impulses of November faded away in February? Was there a change of heart
or a change of opportunity? Neither Congress nor the Electoral
Commission could give an _honest_ title, without investigating the
honesty of the transactions on which the title was founded; and yet a
President has been installed, in the face of rejected offers to prove
frauds, the grossest, the most shameless, and the most corrupting, in
all our history.

Then what was the object of the committees of each House of Congress,
sent into the disputed States? Was it to blind the people? Was it to
conceal a meditated fraud? On the very first day of the session,
December 4th, Mr. Edmunds, in the Senate, moved certain resolutions, of
which this was one:

     "_Resolved further_, That the said committee" (the Committee on
     Privileges and Elections) "be, and is hereby, instructed to inquire
     into the eligibility to office under the Constitution of the United
     States of any persons alleged to have been ineligible on the 7th
     day of November last, or to be ineligible as electors of President
     and Vice-President of the United States, to whom certificates of
     election have been, or shall be, issued by the Executive authority
     of any State, as such electors, and _whether the appointment of
     electors_, or those claiming to be such, in any of the States, _has
     been made either by force, fraud, or other means otherwise than in
     conformity with the Constitution and laws of the United States, and
     the laws of the respective States_; and whether any such
     appointment or action of any such elector has been in any wise
     unconstitutionally or unlawfully interfered with; and to inquire
     and report whether Congress has any constitutional power, and, if
     so, what and the extent thereof, in respect of the appointment of
     or action of electors of President and Vice-President of the United
     States, or over returns or certificates of votes of such electors,"
     etc.

Was all this parade of committees sent hither and thither, summoning
witnesses from far and near, committing the recusant to prison, and
looking into State archives; was all this a mock show, a piece of
pantomime, for the amusement of the lookers-on, while conspirators were
plotting how to conceal what they pretended to be wishing to discover?
Taken all in all, the sounding profession, the bustling search, and the
studied concealment, make a drama, half comedy and half tragedy, the
like of which this generation has not seen till now, but the like of
which it and its successors may see many times, if the audience does not
hiss the play, and remit the actors to the streets.

It has been objected, as a reason for not receiving offered evidence,
that there was not time to take it before the 4th of March. How was that
known? Perhaps it could have been taken in an hour. Why was not the
question asked, how much time the evidence would take, before it was
excluded? If the certificate was false, and the falsehood was
susceptible of proof, every effort possible should have been made to
receive it, and receive it all. It is not commonly accepted as good
reason for not searching after the truth, that the search may be
difficult. Nor is it an unusual occurrence to require an argument or
decision to be made within a period limited. Ten minutes' speeches in
Congress, two hours' argument in the Supreme Court, a jury shut in a
room until they agree upon a verdict, a court required by statute to
render its decision by a day fixed, are not so strange as to be
remarkable, or found in practice so embarrassing as to cause the
practice to be abandoned.

Nor is it any answer to say that, if the offer of evidence had been
accepted, the proof would have fallen short of the offer. That does not
lie in the mouth of any one to say, who excluded the evidence, or
justified its exclusion. The characters of the counsel who made the
offer, and of the commissioner who moved its acceptance, are a guarantee
not only of their good faith, but of a reason for their belief. No man
has any right to deny that the proof offered would have been made good,
who refused the opportunity. They who closed their ears should in
decency keep their mouths shut. But it was not the counsel and the
commissioner alone who believed that the proof offered would be made
good. Every one who witnessed the examinations in Washington, every one
who read the testimony taken by the Congressional Committees in
Louisiana, must have been satisfied that the conduct of the Returning
Board was throughout unlawful, wicked, and shocking, to the last degree.

The title of the acting President, however valid in law, if valid at
all, is tainted with fraud in fact. There was fraud in certifying that
Brewster had received a majority of the votes of Louisiana, and fraud in
attempting to evade that part of the Constitution which pronounced his
disqualification. When the Electoral Commission advised Congress, and
Congress accepted, by not rejecting, the advice, that fraud could not be
proved, that advice being but the equivalent of saying that fraud was of
no consequence; when it advised that the incompetency of the Returning
Board, for want of jurisdiction, could not be proved, such proof being
but the equivalent of proof that the pretended board was not a board at
all; when it advised that the forgery, by direction of the board, of the
statements and affidavits on which it pretended to act as true could not
be proved, that proof being but the equivalent of proof that the
pretended statements and affidavits were not statements and affidavits
at all; when it advised that the barrier raised by the Constitution
against the appointment of a Federal officer to choose a Federal
President, was not a barrier at all--the moral sense of the whole
American people was shocked. No form of words can cover up the
falsehood; no sophistry can hide it; no lapse of time wash it out. It
will follow its contrivers wherever they go, confront them whenever they
turn, and as often as one of them asks the suffrages of his countrymen,
he may expect to hear them reply, "Why do you reason with us, why seek
to persuade us into giving you our votes, you that have taught us such a
contempt for votes, that one fraudulent certificate is better than ten
thousand of them?"


THE POLITICAL QUESTION.

The advice of the Commission, with the consequent action of Congress,
was a virtual affirmation of this proposition, that if on the morning of
the 6th of December the Federal general commanding in Louisiana had
surrounded the State-House with soldiers, and marching in eight of his
captains, had compelled the Returning Board to certify their
appointment as electors, and the Governor to add his certificate,
Congress and the country would have been obliged to accept the votes of
these captains as the constitutional and lawful votes of Louisiana
electors. Whoever supposes that the union of these States can endure
under such an interpretation of their fundamental law, must be endowed
with credulity beyond the simplicity of childhood. The doctrine is an
open invitation to transgression and usurpation. The judicious
disposition of a few troops in the capitals of disputed States, on the
day of the electoral vote, will perpetuate an Administration just so
long as the audacity of a President, or the cupidity of his
office-holders, may find it desirable; unless, indeed, it be found, as
is most likely, that the ways of fraud are cheaper, easier, and less
palpable than the ways of force.


THE LEGAL QUESTION.

_As to the conclusiveness of the Governor's and canvassers'
certificates._ The doctrine of the majority of the Commission, and of
the Senate, is, that the certificate of the Governor "_on and according
to the determination and declaration_" of the State canvassers, cannot
be shown to be false, though it may have been obtained by force or
fraud. This doctrine admits that the truth of the _Governor's_
certificate can be inquired into, else why the qualification that it
must be "_on and according to_" the canvasser's certificate. It is said
to be good only when in such accord; therefore, when not in accord, it
is good for nothing. We may, then, dismiss the Governor's certificate as
of no account, and to be left therefore out of further discussion. The
substance of the doctrine is, that the _certificate of the State
canvassers_ cannot be contradicted.

This language must, of course, be understood, as used in reference to
the question at that time depending; that is to say, whether evidence to
contradict or annul the certificate was then and there admissible. It
had already been decided in the Florida case that no action of the State
authorities, after the electors had voted, could affect the validity of
the vote. Whether such action before the vote would have been of any
avail was not decided, and will never be decided, unless a radical
change is made in the laws, since, according to present legislation, the
vote of the electors treads fast on the heels of their appointment. In
Florida, they were declared appointed at three o'clock in the morning,
and they voted at twelve, just nine hours afterward. In Louisiana the
interval was even less. To suppose that any State action would or could
be had in such an interval, or in any interval possible under present
laws, would be as wild as to suppose that counting in a President by
fraud will not be followed by imitators at future elections.

Taking the doctrine, however, precisely as it was applied in the
instance of Louisiana, it is this: that the certificate of State
canvassers cannot be impeached by evidence showing either that they had
no jurisdiction to canvass the electoral vote at all, or that they had
no jurisdiction to throw away votes that were actually cast, inasmuch as
the power to throw away came into existence only when affidavits were
laid before them, and there were no affidavits except such as they had
caused to be forged, which, in the eye of the law, were not affidavits
at all.

One would say that such a doctrine, held up in its nakedness, need
hardly be attacked, for no man, not maddened by the fanaticism of party,
would be found willing to defend it; yet if not defended, the
disposition of the Louisiana case must be pronounced as unsound in law
as it was injurious in policy and offensive in morals. But I go further,
and deny the conclusiveness of the canvassers' certificate under any
circumstances. Suppose the question to be put thus: Can the certificate
of State canvassers, acting within the scope of their authority, be
questioned by evidence of mistake, fraud, or duress; what should be the
answer? Most certainly it can, should be answered.

The statutes of the State may or may not have declared the effect of the
certificate. In the case of Louisiana, this was the only statute
relevant:

     "The returns of the elections thus made and promulgated shall be
     _prima-facie_ evidence in all courts of justice and before all
     civil officers, until set aside after a contest according to law,
     of the right of any person named therein to hold and exercise the
     office to which he shall by such return be declared elected."

Whatever doubt may have been expressed or felt whether this statute
applied to the canvassers of a presidential election, or whether the
words _prima facie_ really meant _prima facie_, or whether "courts of
justice," and "civil officers," included the Electoral Commission and
the two Houses of Congress, there can be no doubt that "the returns of
the elections thus made and promulgated" do not include returns
canvassed without jurisdiction, or made under cover of pretended
affidavits which the returning officers themselves caused to be forged.

But, passing from this view of the subject, although this is sufficient
to dispose of Brewster's pretensions, let us suppose a stronger
case--the strongest supposable--that of a State Legislature directing
not only the manner in which electors shall be appointed, but directing
also that the certificate of the State canvassers shall be conclusive
evidence that the State has appointed in the manner directed.

Because the Constitution provides that electors shall be appointed by
the State, in the manner directed by its Legislature, it is thence
inferred that the State must furnish the evidence of the appointment,
and of course that none can be received except that which the State has
furnished. And this is said to be the true States-rights doctrine. It is
a strange sight, that of gentlemen clamoring for State rights who will
not allow the people of Louisiana and South Carolina to take care of
themselves; who are even now debating at Washington whether they shall
not order new elections in those States, or which of two State
governments they shall put up and which put down, and who since the war
have treated the South as if no States were there, parceling it into
military districts, and denying recognition until constitutional
amendments were ratified. Their assertion of the conclusiveness of false
and fraudulent canvassers' certificates, on the pretense of upholding
State rights, should seem to be thrown in our faces by way of bravado,
unless it be meant, indeed, for burlesque masking hypocrisy. But if the
sight were not strange, and those gentlemen had been all along as
careful of the rights of the States as they are of their own places,
there is nothing in the claim for the conclusiveness of canvassers'
certificates which receives support from the doctrine of State rights.
On the contrary, the rights of the States are best preserved by fencing
them against force or fraud, by leaving them untrammeled in their own
action, and leaving us untrammeled in finding out what that action has
been. No rights are ever lost by letting in the light.

A certificate can be conclusive evidence of the States' action, only
when the act and the certificate are identical. If the Constitution had
provided that there should be sent from each State a certificate signed
by such persons as the Legislature might designate, declaring who should
cast the electoral votes, then the only inquiry that could have been
made at Washington would have been, whether the certificate sent up was
so signed and the persons therein mentioned had voted; but the
Constitution has provided nothing of the kind. It has provided that the
State shall appoint in the manner directed by its Legislature, and the
inquiry thereupon to be made at the Capitol is, "Whom has the State
appointed in the manner directed?"

We agree that the State has complete power, within certain limits
regarding the persons who may be appointed, to appoint its electors in
any manner its Legislature may direct, but whether the State has done so
is open to inquiry. Canvassers of votes are not the State, or the
Legislature of the State, and their certificate is nothing but evidence.
Two facts are to be shown: one that the State has acted, and the other
that the act has been in conformity to the directions of the
Legislature. There is nothing in positive law, or in the reason of
things, which, if the fact certified do not exist, requires that its
falsity should not be open to proof.

The Electoral Commission and the Senate read the Constitution as if the
words following in italics were part of it:

     "Each State shall appoint, in such manner as the Legislature
     thereof may direct, a number of electors equal to the whole number
     of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled
     in the Congress; but no Senator or Representative, or person
     holding an office of trust or profit under the United States, shall
     be appointed an elector." _And the certificate of such officers as
     the Legislature of the State may designate shall be conclusive
     evidence, not only that the persons certified were appointed by the
     State, but that they were appointed in the manner directed by its
     Legislature, any mistake, fraud, or duress, of the certifying
     officers to the contrary notwithstanding_.

But the words of the Constitution as they stand do not carry with them
the words in italics, or their substance; and if it had been proposed to
add them when the Constitution was presented to the people, I do not
believe that they would have been accepted.

Had it been suggested to the freemen of Massachusetts or Connecticut
that they should give to the Legislature of another State not only the
right of designating how the electors should be chosen, whose voices
might make a President for them, but also the right to designate a
permanent board, with power to say, in the face of the truth, who had or
had not been chosen, the voices of John Hancock and Oliver Ellsworth
would surely have warned the good people of their native Commonwealths
against so dangerous a proposition.

There is no necessary connection between an appointment and the
certificate of it, unless the two acts are performed by the same
persons. If the appointment of electors for Louisiana had been committed
to the Returning Board, then there might be reason for saying that the
certificate was conclusive, because they appointed when they certified.
But the board had not the power of appointment. That power could not
have been given to them, if the Legislature of Louisiana had so
intended, and it did not so intend.

The power to give a conclusive certificate of appointment--that is, a
certificate that precludes further inquiry--is virtually a power to
appoint, since no one is then permitted to go behind the certificate to
show that there was neither valid appointment nor form of appointment.
Unless, therefore, the Legislature of Louisiana could, under the
Constitution, confer upon the Returning Board power to appoint
presidential electors for Louisiana, it could not confer upon it power
to give a conclusive certificate of appointment. The constitution of
this Returning Board is known to us all. It was a permanent body,
holding for an undefined period, or for life, consisting of four
persons of one party, when there should have been five, of different
parties; and the four had persistently refused for years to select a
fifth. To pretend that such a body was, or could lawfully be, empowered
to appoint eight electors for the people of Louisiana, to match the
eight who were appointed by the people of Maryland, would be simple
effrontery; and most certainly, as I have said, if they could not
appoint, they could not give an incontrovertible certificate of
appointment. The certificate is one thing; the appointment another. The
State appoints and the Legislature directs the manner of appointment,
but neither can make true that which is false.

_Now as to the person appointed._ Brewster was one of the very persons
sought to be excluded by these words of the Constitution: "No Senator or
Representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit under the
United States, shall be appointed an elector." He was, nevertheless,
appointed, and he voted, and his vote made the President. How was this
brought about? The Commission answer, "That it is not competent to prove
that any of said persons so appointed electors as aforesaid held an
office of trust or profit under the United States at the time when they
were appointed." Of course, if it was not competent to prove it, the
fact itself must have been of no importance.

Bentham's "Book of Fallacies" may be enriched, in another edition, with
another fallacy, as remarkable as any he has recorded, to wit, that
prohibition in the American Constitution means prohibition! Talleyrand
was once asked the meaning of non-intervention. "Non-intervention," he
replied, "non-intervention means about the same thing as intervention."
So, in our new constitutional vocabulary, prohibition means about the
same thing as permission.

It was, indeed, mentioned in the course of the argument, though the
Commission does not appear to have thought much of it, that Brewster,
having resigned his Federal office, and come in upon a new appointment,
to fill his own vacant place on the 6th of December, being then both
present and absent, the question of eligibility did not arise. But
enough has been said about this resignation sham. If such a trick had
been played in respect to a note-of-hand of five dollars, there is not a
justice of the peace who would not have denounced the trick, as
conferring no right and affording no protection.

The people of New York were amused, three or four years ago, with the
feats of a juggler, who dressed one side of him as a man, and the other
as a woman, and who turned about so quickly that he showed himself as
two persons of different sexes in the same instant. Brewster's feat was
not less remarkable: he was at once absent and present; absent that he
might be appointed, and present that he might vote; went through the
whole performance in less than an hour, absenting himself that he might
be called in to be present, presenting himself though absent, voting
ballots and signing certificates, showing himself to be as versatile and
as agile as that master of jugglery.

Upon what theory the Commission held that evidence could not be
received of Brewster's Federal office at the time of his appointment
does not appear. He certainly was in the prohibited category. A marriage
between persons within prohibited degrees is not good, even if
consummated. The prohibited union of two offices in the same person
should not be thought a legal union, simply because it is practised. It
has been said, though the Commission did not say it, that Brewster was
at least elector _de facto_, and his vote was good, whatever may have
been his title. Then why should we trouble ourselves about the returning
officer's certificate? If, as elector _de facto_, his vote was good,
then it was good without the certificate, and all that the Commission
should have looked into was the _fact of voting_, without troubling
themselves about the certificate of anybody or any other evidence of
title. But, in truth, the distinctions between officers _de facto_ and
officers _de jure_ have no application to the present case, and for this
reason, among others, that two persons cannot hold the same office _de
facto_. It is of the essence of a _de facto_ possession of office that
it should be exclusive. The Chancellor of New York said, in a judicial
opinion, more than thirty years ago: "When there is but one office there
cannot be an officer _de jure_ and an officer _de facto_ both in
possession of the office at the same time." This is true even when the
office is a continuing one. Who, for instance, can say which of the
rival Governors in Louisiana or South Carolina at this moment is the
Governor _de facto_? In deciding between them, would not all the world
pronounce this the only question, which is Governor _de jure_? Much more
is it true when the office is temporary, existing but for a moment, even
if the doctrine of a _de facto_ officer can be applied to such an office
at all. In the present case, Brewster went into the State-House and
voted for Mr. Hayes; at the same instant his rival went into the same
State-House and voted for Mr. Tilden. It is absurd to pronounce
Brewster, under such circumstances, an elector _de facto_, so as to make
his vote for that reason good against his rival in the Tilden college,
who was as much an elector _de facto_ as was Brewster, and had this
difference in his favor, that he was elected, and was eligible, while
Brewster, the intruder, was not eligible, and was not elected. The only
returns which went to the Electoral Commission were the double ones,
where rival colleges of electors had acted at the same time in the same
State. In those cases, as already observed, the question of a _de facto_
elector could not arise. There was but one case, that of Wisconsin,
where it could have arisen, and in that there was but a single return,
which, of course, did not go to the Commission.


CONCLUSION.

Although these pages have been occupied with the vote of Brewster in the
electoral college, it should not be understood, that the other seven
votes which were counted from that State, and the four votes counted
from Florida, were any better than his. The one here considered had its
peculiarities; the others had theirs. All of them were tainted, and the
counting in of the President _de facto_ was twelve times fraudulent.
What may be the outcome I do not know. That will depend upon the spirit
of this generation and the spirit of those to follow. It is a
consolation to know that the questions will be reviewed by a tribunal
higher than the Electoral Commission, higher even than the two Houses of
Congress-the American people--from whose judgment there is no appeal but
to the final judgment of history.

NEW YORK, _March 28, 1877_.

       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's note


The following changes have been made to the text:

Page 4: "contine" changed to "confine".

Page 7: "recived" changed to "received".

Page 22: "de-facto" changed to "de facto".


All other inconsistencies are as in the original.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vote That Made the President, by
David Dudley Field

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VOTE THAT MADE THE PRESIDENT ***

***** This file should be named 30231.txt or 30231.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/2/3/30231/

Produced by Meredith Bach, Carla Foust, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
