The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Conflict between Private Monopoly and
Good Citizenship, by John Graham Brooks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Conflict between Private Monopoly and Good Citizenship

Author: John Graham Brooks

Release Date: October 31, 2009 [EBook #30375]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONFLICT--MONOPOLY AND CITIZENSHIP ***




Produced by Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)






The Weinstock Lectures on The Morals of Trade


THE CONFLICT BETWEEN PRIVATE MONOPOLY AND GOOD CITIZENSHIP.
  By JOHN GRAHAM BROOKS.

COMMERCIALISM AND JOURNALISM.
  By HAMILTON HOLT.

THE BUSINESS CAREER IN ITS PUBLIC RELATIONS.
  By ALBERT SHAW.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CONFLICT BETWEEN PRIVATE MONOPOLY AND GOOD CITIZENSHIP

BY

JOHN GRAHAM BROOKS

PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL CONSUMERS' LEAGUE
AUTHOR OF "THE SOCIAL UNREST,"
"AS OTHERS SEE US," ETC.

[Illustration: Publisher's logo]

BOSTON AND NEW YORK

HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

The Riverside Press Cambridge

1909


COPYRIGHT, 1909, BY THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

_Published December 1909_

       *       *       *       *       *

BARBARA WEINSTOCK LECTURES ON THE MORALS OF TRADE


This series will contain essays by representative scholars and men of
affairs dealing with the various phases of the moral law in its bearing
on business life under the new economic order, first delivered at the
University of California on the Weinstock foundation.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CONFLICT BETWEEN PRIVATE MONOPOLY AND GOOD CITIZENSHIP


For a special purpose, I have had occasion to examine with care the
comments upon American life and institutions made by foreign critics
during the period that extends from the later part of the eighteenth
century up to the present time. If one puts aside the frivolous and
ill-tempered studies and considers alone the fairer and more competent
observers, the least pleasant of all the criticisms is that we are
essentially a lawless people.

If the critic, like de Tocqueville and Miss Martineau, had sympathy and
admiration for us, the revealed lawlessness came as an astonishment,
because it seemed to upset all sorts of pretty theories about democracy.
The doctrinaires had worked out to perfection the idea that a people who
could freely make and unmake their own laws would, for that plain
reason, respect the laws. Of course, a people who had laws thrust upon
them from above would hate them and disobey them. But a democracy would
escape this temptation.

It was apparently an amusement of many of these writers to collect, as
did the jaunty author of "Peter Simple" in his Diary, interminable pages
from our own press to illustrate the general contempt for those laws
which really interfered with pleasures or economic interests. Harriet
Martineau drove through Boston on the day when Garrison was being
dragged through the streets. The flame of her indignation burned high;
but it burned with new heat when she found that the very best of Boston
culture and respectability would not lift a finger or pay a copper to
have the law enforced in Mr. Garrison's favor. Beacon Street and Harvard
professors told her that the victim was a disreputable agitator, richly
deserving what he got. They seemed to think this English lady very
cranky and unreasonable. The mob had the entire sympathy of the best
people in the community, and that should satisfy her. De Tocqueville
had an awakening at a polling-booth in Pennsylvania that in the same
way disturbed all his presuppositions about us.

It is not my purpose to bristle up and strike back at these critics of
American behavior. Amid possible exaggeration, they are telling a great
deal of truth about us. It is a truth that it has its own natural
history. A long adventurous border-life was in some respects the great
fact of the nineteenth century in moulding our national habits. A large
part of the population lived under conditions where no appeal to legal
restraints was possible. There were no courts,--no police. The whole
constructive work of life was thrown so absolutely upon the man fighting
his life-battle alone, that excessive individualistic habits were
formed. Every self-reliant instinct was developed until it became a law
unto itself. They do not, says de Tocqueville of the Americans, ask
help. They do not "appeal." They understand that everything rests with
themselves. Every immigrant of those days had come from what Freeman
calls "overgoverned" countries. They escaped from highly organized
social constraints to have their fling on a continent as illimitable in
extent as it was in the prizes which its natural resources offered. That
such a large proportion of the strong lived this free border-life
through the entire century has resulted in making a standard of
individualistic action almost dominant in the community.

There is, first, this natural history of extreme individualistic habits
and of their reactions on our whole national life. There is, further,
the almost universal concentration on wealth-production as a means of
winning what average men most crave in this world. What the strong of
any race work for is not, ultimately, money, it is social power. This
power has many symbols in a monarchy. There are titles and decorations
for which armies of able men will do hard public service for years. This
same passion is as lively in the United States as in Germany, but we
exclude the symbols. Wealth everywhere gives power, but with us it is
almost the only symbol that has wide and practical recognition. This
passion, working in a vigorous people upon the resources which the
United States offers, has intensified the competitive struggle in
industry to a degree hitherto unknown in the world. This struggle has
absorbed the thought and strength of the people to an extent without
known parallel.

It is the magnitude and stress of this competition that have bent and
subdued politics to business ends. The engendered business rivalries in
this game develop qualities that are indifferent to laws.

The last ten years of investigation have disclosed one further reason
for heedlessness of law. The chances of promotion among the abler and
more ambitious young men in the service of large concerns are known to
depend on the fact of a good showing in their departments. Can they keep
down expenses? Can they enlarge and maintain sales? These have been the
supreme tests for rapid and sure promotion. When these are done, few
questions are asked by manager or director. Among the largest interests
in this country, and among all interests that have to do with franchises
and legislation, skill to evade laws may have the highest value in a
fight against competitors. A magnate recently accused of law-breaking
denies it roundly, and it may be with honesty. When the evidence of
long-practiced frauds against the laws in his own business is produced,
he insists that he never knew it. But he also turns on the light: "I do
not ask my heads of departments _how_ they succeed; it is enough for me
that they do succeed." This explains, but does not excuse, the guilt.

I make no use here of theory. I am thinking of definite large business
interests in which the evil will remain as common as it is inevitable so
long as the business is unregulated and its shady practices concealed
from public authorities and public opinion. In some of our huge concerns
it is the traditional procedure to bring the various heads of
departments together at regular intervals and pit them against each
other as if running a race for life. What is the showing that each can
make against the other? Has this one cut down the cost of his product;
has he reduced this or that item of expenditure; has he got the most out
of the workmen under his charge; has he been able to dodge practical
difficulties--legal, sanitary, or any other--that stood in his way?

In this relentless contest before their superiors, the foreman or agent
learns that the one key to favor and advancement is that no other shall
make a better showing. If he can safely get this superior result out of
his labor group, that is one way; if he can reach his end by introducing
children under age, or by any other questionable device, the temptation
is there in the subtlest form it can assume for the average man. When,
recently, a swarm of sharp practices came out in another of the great
concerns whose products reach half the homes of the nation, the man at
the top doubtless told the truth when he replied: "In my position, it is
not my business to know those details. I have no time except for the
results sent in." Thus the president or director stands apart from and
above this underworld of tolerated illegalities.

Here, then, are three reasons for lack of obedience to the law,--the
long border struggle, the excessive concentration upon
wealth-exploitation, and the ways through which successful subordinates
are rewarded in severely competitive industries.

But another, weightier reason must now be added,--namely, our private
monopolies with their influence and reactions on our whole community
life. In the earlier and looser stages of development, when vast
resources still remain unappropriated, private monopoly may aid a city
or a nation. At first no public protection of fish and game is
necessary, but the pressure of population will eventually compel a
common rule to which the individual must submit. As surely as a growing
town sooner or later requires a common water-supply, a common drainage,
common sanitary provisions, and regulated hack charges, just so surely
will the private monopoly somewhere and at some time require strict
social control,--that is, control from the point of view of all of us
and not from that of a few money-makers. A generation ago the stripping
of our forests did not matter vitally. The interests that were to suffer
from this stripping had not appeared. To-day a forestry policy derived
absolutely from the common, social point of view has become a necessity
so commanding that the nation's attention is at last caught. A
generation ago no one had even guessed at the franchise-value of our
streets,--not even those of New York city. After Jacob Sharp had made
these values known, a struggle began which reads like an Arabian tale.
It is a story of business and political corruption that has gone on in
varying degrees in scores of our cities and in scores of great
industries where strong men have been fighting to get control of mines,
forests, lands, and oil, the development of which depended on favorable
transportation. The carrying trade--whether of goods or people--is never
to be omitted in this story. Until very recent years, this mother of
monopolies, the railroad, was thought of as a purely private possession.
A dozen years ago one of our ablest railroad lawyers (often before the
United States Supreme Court with great cases) told me it had long been
one of his intellectual amusements to try to force into the heads of
railroad presidents the fact that their ownership of that kind of
property was profoundly different from the ownership of a horse or a
grocery store. "I finally," he said, "had to give it up." It meant
nothing to them that society had given them stupendous privileges which
qualified their ownership. These franchise-grants once in their pockets,
everything that was built upon them came to be used in any conceivable
game to enrich the owner.

Properly informed persons no longer discuss whether it is right and
moral to allow railroad magnates to do as they like--to act as if these
properties were strictly a private possession. We know, at last, how
society has suffered from leaving this form of ownership so long without
social control. We have seen the devastating conflict between
unregulated possession of this kind of property and all the higher
welfare of the community. If we add to the railway the common city
monopolies of lighting and transportation; if we add industries in iron
and steel, much of our mining, oil, and forest exploitation, all of
which, in connection with railways, take on inevitably the form of
monopoly, we have the whole buccaneer-group that has done upon our
politics the deadly work, which we know so well that its retelling is a
thing to avoid from very weariness.

Though a dozen other cities would serve as well, look for a moment at
the monopoly of the New York street-railways. A people, careless and
ignorant of their own interests, so far give away the rights in their
streets, that a few men get them into their possession. With the grip
once fast upon this power, it becomes not a machinery primarily to serve
the people: primarily it becomes an enginery to filch vast unearned
increments from the public. It becomes a device for gambling, with the
dice so heavily loaded in your favor that you cannot lose. You change
power from one kind to another; you merge one line with another or with
the whole; you create holding companies; and at every change you
recapitalize. Your million dollars is turned into five or ten or twenty
millions, in order that multiplied dividends taken from the public may
drop into private pockets. Every bit of bookkeeping meant for the public
eye is a mass of jugglery. If you are frightened by the challenge of an
indignant public, the most important records are destroyed. Surplus
funds belonging to the stockholders are freely loaned to personal
friends or put to private speculative ventures.

This shell-game has gone on decade after decade, so gayly that it seems
as if it were a delight to the American people to have their pockets
picked. And yet, let us say it over and over again, the pocket-picking
is not the worst of it. That the people's money should be used to
debauch their own chosen representatives in city and state legislatures
is the uttermost evil. Part and parcel of the uttermost evil is the
resulting suspicion and distrust that eat their way deep through the
masses of the wage-earning world. Not to mention their own trade papers,
or the socialistic sheets with the scandals of high and low finance,
wage-earners have only to read the capitalistic sheets, presidential
messages, and summarized reports from scores of legislative committees,
in order to believe that almost everything investigated--insurance, city
traction companies, mining syndicates, railway finance--is heavy with
rottenness. Any one interested enough to run through the files of the
distinctively labor press at the present moment, will find a body of
convinced opinion about those who control us industrially that has an
extremely ugly look. The labor-world is drawing the only natural
inference it can from the data given.

How often we have seen within a year or two the lament that the
efficiency of labor has lessened in many of our great industries! What
in Heaven's name can we expect? If that labor-world believes what is
everywhere cried on the housetops about the crooked exploiting devices
of these monopolies, why should not its interest and its fidelity fall
off? The law of cause and effect will work here as it works elsewhere in
the universe. Labor is learning that unfair industrial privilege flouts
every essential principle of democratic government. The real iniquity of
it is hidden from us until we see that secrecy, cunning, and
unscrupulousness may be good pecuniary assets. Yes, this has to be
plainly stated. A man who should happen to have the people's interest
really at heart could not be an active partner in the worst of these
monopolies. The unscrupulous, the men bent upon the stock-watering game
and their own immediate enrichment, would crowd the honest men to the
wall. Every line of least resistance is with the get-rich-quick type of
manager. To hold his power and to corrupt us politically; to appropriate
continuous unearned increment through overcapitalization, he must work
not for the public good, but largely against it. In most free
competitive business there is no such inherent antagonism between
private and public good.

The privileged monopoly is found not only in the lighting and
transportation combinations in cities like New York, Philadelphia, St.
Louis, and Chicago: it is in a whole nest of industries--oil, mining,
and timber--which are interknit with our railroad system.

Here is the real antagonism between monopoly and good citizenship.
Anthracite coal is not a business apart--it is a railroad business; and
if there are abuses, they cannot be corrected apart from railroad
regulation. There is nothing that we now need to know so thoroughly as
that the railroad is the one key to the control of all monopolies,
including those that often last just long enough to gut the properties
according to get-rich-quick principles. The waste of the public wealth
under this concentrated stimulus is the darkest economic fact, as the
ugliest political fact is the corruption of officials and legislators.
Think of a product so vital to the future as the forests; and then
picture, if you can, the waste and despoiling of this strictly common
wealth that has gone on, and still goes on, in connection with
unregulated railroad affiliations,--properties, larger than several
Eastern states, stolen, and then burned, and skinned, and devastated, so
that two generations cannot repair the loss! And now by highest federal
authority we are warned that our timber supply cannot last twenty-five
years without a new controlling policy.

Yet it is not, of course, the monopoly that is the evil. It is solely
the way in which we have allowed the monopolies to be owned and
controlled. We have admitted a kind of irresponsible proprietorship that
has so debased political methods in the United States that we are made
at the present moment (in this one respect) a warning to the world.

Last year a social investigator returned from New Zealand. He said: "I
found their able men chiefly anxious to avoid the example of the United
States. Their problem is to develop a rich and prosperous industrial
life, but escape the rottenness of American politics. Whether they
succeed or fail, their purpose is great." Their plan is to use the
strength of the government to prevent the formation of private
monopolies such as have debauched our politics until we have become a
mockery among the nations.

How long we ourselves have talked of political corruption as if it were
separable from the privileged monopolies in business! That we now see
this sorry partnership as it is, and are daily more and more aroused by
it, and bent on its dissolution, is the surest sign of progress, as it
is the surest sign that democracy need not fail.

Again and again we wonder how long it will require for the sovereign
people to learn a lesson so simple. How many more facts or revelations
do we need?

The other day a liberal theologian told me that he had been preaching
some elemental truths about a larger religious life. A sturdy old
listener, who knew they were truths, but didn't quite like to adjust
himself, said to the preacher: "I guess that's all true that you've been
preaching; but--I don't more'n half believe it."

We, too, know these truths about the monopolies; but we still
hesitate,--we still act as if we didn't "more'n half believe it." But if
the monopoly as such is not an evil,--if the evil is the practice of
political abuse by irresponsible private ownership,--what are our
alternatives when the question of remedies is raised? Are we forced to
the logic of the socialist,--that the city or state should take these
monopolies out of the categories of private property, owning and
managing them directly for the people? The socialist tells us that these
combined interests in transportation--mines, oil, timber, etc.--have
become a power with which city and state cannot cope; that we are at the
present moment governed by these monopoly interests, and shall continue
so to be governed until the state has absolute possession of them.

To this claim of the socialists, one reply is obvious. Every immediate
political duty now before us is committed to the principle of
regulation. For some years we are going to try that. We are not going to
assume that mines, oil, timber, elevators, and our vast transportation
system with its connecting monopolies, are all to be taken under state
proprietorship and managed as our postal system is now managed. For any
future worth discussing, we are going to use our strength to regulate
these monopolies in the public interest. In that decade when the people
are at last convinced that these monopolies are more powerful than
government; that we have no hope of curbing them into obedience before
the law,--in that decade the cry will go up for government ownership on
a scale far wider than that of railways and telegraphs.

At this point I do not wish to hedge or shuffle. That the younger of my
hearers will see far more government and city ownership than we now
have, seems to me so obvious that the discussion of it is not even
interesting. Our government must have an economic basis strong enough
and broad enough to give it footing against all unfair private monopoly.
But this degree of government ownership does not land us in Socialism.
It may, indeed, protect us from every dangerous excess which Socialism
carries with it.

When the German government secures a large mining property with the
distinct understanding that, if necessary, it shall be worked in the
public interest to break a private coal monopoly, we have an
illustration of one step which our own government ought also to take.
The object, in this case, is not to go into a new business, but to break
monopoly power, actual or threatened. Or consider that brave experiment
station, New Zealand! Her Compulsory Arbitration may fail; she may be
forced to an industrial pace slower than we like; but the main purpose
of her social policy is sound to the core; and we are now trying
clumsily to imitate it. Yet we are still afraid--we "don't more'n half
believe it." Her purpose is to use the power of city and state in New
Zealand to prevent the private fleecing of the people through monopoly.
Whether it is her land policy or her insurance policy, the aim is to
check at their source inherent monopoly abuses.

One is forever hearing that New Zealand is being given over hand and
foot to Socialism. The only trouble with the statement is that it is not
true. If you tax a vast estate down there so that it must be cut into
small holdings upon which some twenty times more people can live than
lived on the private estate, and if this added population is encouraged
to win more and more interest and profit-bearing forms of wealth, you
have a situation in which the thoroughpaced socialists may be entirely
out of the game.

The essence of the socialist's logic is, that all interest on money and
all profits on goods made for the market (as well as all rent) are
inherently vicious and antisocial so long as they drop into private
pockets. There is no distinction between the greedy _abuses_ of
capitalism through organized privilege and the possible _uses_ of
capitalism under regulation.

But think of this issue as we may, we are as a fact now committed to
regulation--committed to a long and hard struggle to bring monopoly
evils under social control. This is now our situation and our problem.

Yet how easy it is to put these evils into phrases! How hard it is to
relate ourselves to definite and effective proposals for the elimination
of the evils! Such proposals have nevertheless been at last put before
us with coherence and with deliberation. They have been put before the
American people with a clearness which cannot be shirked without bad
faith on our part. They have been brought within the sphere of practical
politics, where their decision now waits upon the choice of the people
as a whole.

This commanding policy for future as well as for present interests, for
the entire people as well as for the few, has been stated in its
integrity in two messages from President Roosevelt. Men may differ about
the Philippines; about our military and naval ambition; about
nature-fakirs and race-suicide; but about the ordered and constructive
purpose to curb the abuses of our ill-regulated private monopolies,
there should be no disagreement among sane and disinterested men. No one
has ever yet shown genius enough to do disagreeable duties agreeably to
all men. To the end of time, if we ourselves are inconvenienced, we
shall probably say: "Of course this thing ought to be done,--but it
should be done in some other way." The various methods of railroad
regulation may irritate us, but that the railroad must be brought so far
under public control as to obey the law and serve all men with
approximate fairness, no human being who is intellectually and morally
awake can longer deny.

To begin this great task with the machinery of transportation was the
first clear duty. Scarcely one of the gigantic abuses can be touched
apart from these highways of distribution. We have but just waked up to
the plain stupidity of giving away so recklessly all sorts of franchise
grants, and are beginning to see the equal stupidity of parting madly
with such an overwhelming part of the main and primary sources of
wealth--mines, forests, water-power, oil deposits, and ground areas in
large towns. These are the sure nesting-places of monopoly, and
therefore, of all the fantastic extremes of wealth which make puppets of
our politicians and set before the youth of the nation snobbish and
materialistic ideals. This policy, be it remembered, does not ask, as
the socialists do, for all forests, all mines, or all the water-power.
It asks that the hand of government control be kept firmly upon such
portions of these resources as are susceptible to vicious monopoly. All
this is possible along the lines of state regulation, without even
raising the question of universal ownership. We have a chief executive
who sees what the evils are and dares to face them. Yet the courage
involved is not his highest gift; but, rather, the intelligence with
which he has so stated and grouped the issues as to give us a coherent
administrative policy that works toward equality and not away from it.

To group those sources of monopoly that may still be saved; to show how
this retention will fortify the government in its great struggle to
regulate privileged capital,--is a service that should command the
intellectual and moral sympathy of an entire people. It is a policy
broadly public and social, as against any lower and partial interest. It
is a policy for the whole and for the many, rather than for the
monopoly-coddled few. It is a policy that looks to the future rather
than to the possible dividends of the next six months. Not separable
from it is the President's proposal to put upon these huge accretions a
decent inheritance tax. He does not spoil his case by conventional or
academic timidities. He does not ask this tax merely as a fiscal device,
but as a measure that makes for more rational, social equalities. He
asks it in order that the common wealth may grow larger and the
top-heavy fortunes (the larger portion of which privilege has made) may
be lessened for the common good. The fatuous outcry that this is to be
opposed because it is "Socialism" will, of course, continue, although
the most conservative governments in the world have long proclaimed it
with such conspicuous success, from the public point of view, that it
is no longer questioned.

With jaunty prodigality we have scattered these primary sources of
wealth precisely as we scattered transportation and other franchises
upon which dangerous private monopolies were built. The kind of mistakes
that have been made with the franchises, we have in this generation come
to see clearly. In the teeth of extreme difficulties, we are trying to
protect the public through legislative control of these corporations. We
are learning the same lesson in our forestry. We have the lesson still
to learn in remaining mines, oil-lands, water-powers, and
phosphate-beds. Nothing in the statesmanship of President Roosevelt will
more surely win him laurels in the future than his pluck and
consistency in forwarding this policy, which stands for the whole people
and for the future. It is as serenely above party as it is above
corporate or private interest.

The warring and balancing of sectional, partial, and immediate interests
will always have their claims; but the next clearest step in
civilization is to learn the political habit of acting also for the
social whole. Social politics, so called, already has this character.
The forestry legislation of Switzerland or Germany has its inspiration
in the thought for the whole people and for future generations.

Many years ago I heard a discussion in Germany among three
art-teachers,--two of them with a world-wide fame,--that was as new to
me as it was amazing. They seemed to agree that the art of the sculptor
reached its height in the Age of Phidias; that never again would men
give shape to figures fit to be put, let us say, beside the Elgin
Marbles. As some nineteen centuries passed by, another art came to its
finest flowering in the Italian Cinquecento, when Raphael, Da Vinci, and
Michael Angelo added color to form. They agreed that never again would
paintings be produced fit to be classed with the Sistine Madonna.
Another two centuries passed, and the Bachs began the great music which
these three modern artists thought of as the reigning art of our time.
Here came their question, "What is to be the next and coming art that
shall compare with the Greek period, with the Cinquecento, and with
modern music?" One thought it would be the theatre. He wrote, I believe,
a pamphlet to prove this. I do not recall the guess of either of the
others; but I venture to make my own guess.

Art is knowledge in its applications; and to apply our experience and
our knowledge to the shaping of a higher social justice is also an art.
It is an art already showing itself in the field of politics and social
reconstruction; a politics, enriched and ennobled by ideals of
citizenship, freed at last from that party machinery whose boss has
been the puppet of business men fighting for monopoly privilege. It
will be a politics not for the few or the favored; not alone for the
strong and successful; but a politics for the common weal, for the
common and inclusive good of every citizen according to his good will
and honest endeavor.

Here is a sphere for art as much nobler than that of sculptor or painter
as the destinies of human life and society are higher than those of any
inanimate object, even though carved by Phidias or painted by Raphael.
It is, above all, an art that should touch by its inspiration the
gallantry of the whole student class. The very breath of it is the
shaping and directing of those conditions out of which may emerge a
society in which the spirit of justice and equal opportunity will be
realized at least so far that it will be no longer a mockery among
honest men.


The Riverside Press

CAMBRIDGE. MASSACHUSETTS

U. S. A





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Conflict between Private Monopoly
and Good Citizenship, by John Graham Brooks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONFLICT--MONOPOLY AND CITIZENSHIP ***

***** This file should be named 30375.txt or 30375.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/7/30375/

Produced by Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
