The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Passenger, by Kenneth Harmon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Passenger

Author: Kenneth Harmon

Illustrator: Connell

Release Date: November 19, 2009 [EBook #30500]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PASSENGER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE PASSENGER

By KENNETH HARMON


 _The classic route to a man's
 heart is through his stomach
 --and she was just his dish._


Illustrated by CONNELL


The transport swung past Centaurus on the last leg of her long journey
to Sol. There was no flash, no roar as she swept across the darkness of
space. As silent as a ghost, as quiet as a puff of moonlight she moved,
riding the gravitational fields that spread like tangled, invisible
spider webs between the stars.

Within the ship there was also silence, but the air was stirred by a
faint, persistent vibration from the field generators. This noiseless
pulse stole into every corner of the ship, through long, empty
passageways lined with closed stateroom doors, up spiraling stairways to
the bridge and navigational decks, and down into vast and echoing holds,
filled with strange cargo from distant worlds.

This vibration pulsed through Lenore's stateroom. As she relaxed on her
couch, she bathed in it, letting it flow through her to tingle in her
fingertips and whisper behind her closed eyelids.

"Home," it pulsed, "you're going home."

       *       *       *       *       *

She repeated the word to herself, moving her lips softly but making no
sound. "Home," she breathed, "back home to Earth." Back to the proud old
planet that was always home, no matter how far you wandered under alien
suns. Back to the shining cities clustered along blue seacoasts. Back to
the golden grainlands of the central states and the high, blue grandeur
of the western mountains. And back to the myriad tiny things that she
remembered best, the little, friendly things ... a stretch of
maple-shadowed streets heavy and still with the heat of a summer noon; a
flurry of pigeons in the courthouse square; yellow dandelions in a green
lawn, the whir of a lawnmower and the smell of the cut grass; ivy on old
bricks and the rough feel of oak bark under her hands; water lilies and
watermelons and crepe papery dances and picnics by the river in the
summer dusk; and the library steps in the evening, with fireflies in the
cool grass and the school chimes sounding the slow hours through the
friendly dark.

She thought to herself, "It's been such a long time since you were home.
There will be a whole new flock of pigeons now." She smiled at the
recollection of the eager, awkward girl of twenty that she had been when
she had finished school and had entered the Government Education
Service. "Travel While Helping Others" had been the motto of the GES.

She had traveled, all right, a long, long way inside a rusty freighter
without a single porthole, to a planet out on the rim of the Galaxy that
was as barren and dreary as a cosmic slag heap. Five years on the rock
pile, five years of knocking yourself out trying to explain history and
Shakespeare and geometry to a bunch of grubby little miners' kids in a
tin schoolhouse at the edge of a cluster of tin shacks that was supposed
to be a town. Five years of trudging around with your nails worn and
dirty and your hair chopped short, of wearing the latest thing in
overalls. Five years of not talking with the young miners because they
got in trouble with the foreman, and not talking with the crewmen from
the ore freighters because they got in trouble with the first mate, and
not talking with yourself because you got in trouble with the
psychologist.

They took care of you in the Education Service; they guarded your diet
and your virtue, your body and your mind. Everything but your happiness.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was lots to do, of course. You could prepare lessons and read
papers and cheap novels in the miners' library, or nail some more tin on
your quarters to keep out the wind and the dust and the little animals.
You could go walking to the edge of town and look at all the pretty gray
stones and the trees, like squashed-down barrel cactus; watch the larger
sun sink behind the horizon with its little companion star circling
around it, diving out of sight to the right and popping up again on the
left. And Saturday night--yippee!--three-year-old movies in the tin
hangar. And, after five years, they come and say, "Here's Miss
So-and-So, your relief, and here's your five thousand credits and
wouldn't you like to sign up for another term?"

Ha!

So they give you your ticket back to Earth. You're on the transport at
last, and who can blame you if you act just a little crazy and eat like
a pig and take baths three times a day and lie around your stateroom and
just dream about getting home and waking up in your own room in the
morning and getting a good cup of real coffee at the corner fountain and
kissing some handsome young fellow on the library steps when the Moon is
full behind the bell tower?

"And will the young fellow like you?" she asked herself, knowing the
answer even as she asked the question.

She whirled about in the middle of the stateroom, her robe swirling
around her, and ended with a deep curtsy to the full-length mirror.

"Allow me to introduce myself," she murmured. "Lenore Smithson, formerly
of the Government Education Service, just back from business out on the
Rim. What? Why, of course you may have this dance. Your name? Mr.
Fairheart! Of the billionaire Fairhearts?" She waltzed with herself a
moment. Halting before the mirror again, she surveyed herself
critically.

"Well," she said aloud, "the five years didn't completely ruin you,
after all. Your nose still turns up and your cheeks still dimple when
you smile. You have a nice tan and your hair's grown long again.
Concentrated food hasn't hurt your figure, either." She turned this way
and that before the mirror to observe herself.

Then suddenly she gave a little gasp of surprise and fright, for a
cascade of laughter had flooded soundlessly inside her head.

       *       *       *       *       *

She stood frozen before the mirror while the laughter continued. Then
she slowly swung around. It ceased abruptly. She looked around the
compartment, staring accusingly at each article of furniture in turn;
then quickly spun around to look behind her, meeting her own startled
gaze in the mirror.

Opening the door slowly, she ventured to thrust her head out into the
corridor. It was deserted, the long rows of doors all closed during the
afternoon rest period. As she stood there, a steward came along the
corridor with a tray of glasses, nodded to her, and passed on out of
sight. She turned back into the room and stood there, leaning against
the door, listening.

Suddenly the laughter came again, bursting out as though it had been
suppressed and could be held back no longer. Clear, merry, ringing and
completely soundless, it poured through her mind.

"What is it?" she cried aloud. "What's happening?"

"My dear young lady," said a man's voice within her head, "allow me to
introduce myself. My name is Fairheart. Of the billionaire Fairhearts.
May I have the next dance?"

"This is it," she thought. "Five years on the rock pile would do it to
anyone. You've gone mad."

She laughed shakily. "I can't dance with you if I can't see you."

"I really should explain," the voice replied, "and apologize for my
silly joke. It was frightfully rude to laugh at you, but when I saw you
waltzing and preening yourself, I just couldn't help it. I'm a telepath,
you see, from Dekker's star, out on the Rim."

That would explain, she thought, his slightly stilted phraseology;
English was apparently not his native tongue--or, rather, his native
thought.

"There was a mild mutation among the settlers there, and the third
generation all have this ability. I shouldn't use it, I know, but I've
been so lonely, confined here to my room, that I cast around to see if
there were anyone that I could talk to. Then I came upon you considering
your own virtues, and you were so cute and funny that I couldn't resist.
Then I laughed and you caught me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I've heard of telepaths," she said doubtfully, "though I've never heard
of Dekker's star. However, I don't think you have any right to go
thinking around the ship spying on people."

"Sh!" whispered the silent voice. "You needn't shout. I'll go away if
you wish and never spy on you again, but don't tell Captain Blake, or
he'll have me sealed in a lead-lined cell or something. We're not
supposed to telepath around others, but I've been sitting here with all
sorts of interesting thoughts just tickling the edges of my mind for so
long that I had to go exploring."

"Why not go exploring on your own two feet like anyone else? Have you so
much brains, your head's too heavy to carry?"

"Unfortunately," the voice mourned, "my trouble is in my foot and not in
my head. On the second night out from Dekker's star, I lost my footing
on the stairs from the dining hall and plunged like a comet to the
bottom. I would probably have been killed but for the person of a stout
steward who, at that moment, started to ascend the stairs. He took the
full impact of my descent on his chest and saved my life, I'm sure.
However, I still received a broken ankle that has given me so much pain
that I have been forced to remain in my cabin.

"I have had no one to talk to except the steward who brings me my meals,
and, as he is the one whom I met on the stairs, he has little to say. In
the morning he frowns at me, at noon he glowers, and in the evening he
remarks hopefully, 'Foot still pretty bad?' Thus, I'm starved for
conversation."

[Illustration]

Lenore smiled at this earnest speech. "I might talk with you for a
minute or two, but you must admit that you have one advantage over me.
You can see me, or so you say, and know what I look like, but I can't
see you. It isn't fair."

"I can show myself to you," he said, "but you'll have to help me by
closing your eyes and concentrating very hard."

       *       *       *       *       *

She closed her eyes and waited expectantly. There was a moment of
darkness; then there appeared in the middle of the darkness a point of
light, a globe, a giant balloon of color. Suddenly she was looking into
the corner of a stateroom which appeared to hang in space. In the center
of the area stood a handsome young man in a startling black and orange
lounging robe, holding on to the back of a chair.

She opened her eyes; for an instant the vision of the young telepath
hung in the air over her couch like a ghostly double exposure. Then it
faded and the room was empty.

"That's a terrible effort," came his thought, "particularly when I have
to balance on one foot at the same time. Well, now are we even?"

Abandoning her post by the door, she moved to the couch and sat down.
"I'm really disappointed," she smiled. "I was sure you'd have two heads.
But I think you do have nice eyes and a terrible taste in bathrobes."
She took a cigarette from her case and lit it carefully. Then she
remembered her manners and extended the case to the empty air. "Won't
you have one?"

"I certainly would like to. I'm all out of them until the steward brings
my dinner. But I'm afraid I'll have to wait, unless you can blow the
smoke through the ventilators to me, or unless ... you bring me one?"

Lenore blushed and changed the subject. "Tell me, what do you do all day
in your stateroom? Do you read? Do you play the flute? Do you telepath
sweet nothings across the light-years to your girl friend on Dekker's
star?"

"I'm afraid my telepathic powers are a bit short-ranged to reach
Dekker's star," he replied. "Besides, what girl would commune with me
through the depths of space when some other young man is calling her
from the dancing pavilion? And my musical talents are limited. However,
I do read. I brought some books connected with the research I intend to
do on Earth for my degree, and I have spent many happy hours poring over
the thrilling pages of _Extraterrestrial Entomology_ and _Galactic
Arachnida_."

"I came better prepared than you did," she said. "Perhaps I could lend
you some of my books. I have novels, plays, poetry, and one very
interesting volume called _Progressive Education under Rim Star
Conditions_. But," she lowered her voice to a whisper, "I must tell you
a secret about that last one."

"What is it?"

"I haven't even opened it."

       *       *       *       *       *

They laughed together, her merriment bubbling aloud in her cabin, his
echoing silently inside her mind.

"I haven't time to read a novel," his thought came, "and drama always
bored me, but I must confess to a weakness for poetry. I love to read it
aloud, to throw myself into a heroic ballad and rush along, spouting
grand phrases as though they were my own and feeling for a moment as
though I were really striding the streets of ancient Rome, pushing west
on the American frontier or venturing out into space in the first wild,
reckless, heroic days of rocket travel. But I soon founder. I get swept
away by the rhythm, lost in the intricacies of cadence and rhyme, and,
when the pace slows down, when the poem becomes soft and delicate and
the meaning is hidden behind a foliage of little gentle words, I lose
myself entirely."

She said softly, "Perhaps I could help you interpret some verses."

Then she waited, clasping her hands to keep them from trembling with the
tiny thrill of excitement she felt.

"That would be kind of you," he said after a pause. "You could read,
there, and I could listen, here, and feel what you feel as you read ...
or, if you wished ..." Another pause. "Would you care to come down?"

She could not help smiling. "You're too good a mind reader. A girl can't
have any secrets any more."

"Now look here," he burst out. "I wouldn't have said anything, but I
was so lonely and you're the only friendly person I've come in contact
with and ..."

"Don't be silly," she laughed. "Of course I'll come down and read to
you. I'd love to. What's your cabin number?"

"It hasn't got a number because--actually I work on this ship so I'm
away from the passengers' quarters. But I can direct you easily. Just
start down the hall to your left and ..."

"My dear sir," she cried, "just wait a minute! I can't come visiting in
my robe, you know; I'll have to change. But while I dress, you must take
your spying little thoughts away. If I detect you peeking in here at the
wrong moment, I'll run straight to Captain Blake and have him prepare
his special lead-lined cell for one unhappy telepath. So you just run
along. When I'm ready, I'll call you and you can lead me to your lair."

He thought only the one word, "Hurry," but in the silence after he was
gone she fancied she heard her heart echoing him, loud in the stillness.

       *       *       *       *       *

She laughed gaily to herself. "Now stop acting like a schoolgirl before
the Junior Prom. You've got to get busy and wash and dress and comb and
brush." And then to her reflection in the mirror: "Aren't you a lucky
girl? You're still millions and billions of miles from Earth and it's
starting already, and he's going to do research there for some time, and
maybe at the university in your home town if you tell him just how nice
it is, and he doesn't know any other girls, you'd have an inside track.
Now you'd better get going or you'll never be ready.

"For reading poetry, don't you think this dress is just the thing, this
nice soft blue one that goes so well with your tan and shows your legs,
which are really quite pretty, you know.... And your silver sandals and
those silver pins ... just a touch of perfume.... That's right; and now
a little lipstick. You do have a pretty smile.... There, that's right.
Now stop admiring yourself and let's go."

She moved to the bookshelf, frowning now, considered, selected and
rejected. Finally she settled on three slim books bound in russet
leather, in glossy plastic, in faded cloth. She took a little purse from
the table, put the cigarette case into it. Then, with a laugh, she took
one cigarette and slipped it into a tiny pocket on her skirt.

"I really meant to bring you one," she whispered to the empty air, "but
wasn't I mean to tease?"

In the corridor, she walked quickly past the rows of closed doors to the
tiny refreshment stand at the foot of the dining room stairs. The
attendant rose from his stool as she approached, and came to the
counter.

"I'd like two frosted starlights, please," she said, "on a tray."

"Two," said the attendant, and nothing more, but his eyebrow climbed up
his forehead, hung for a second, then slowly drooped back to normal, as
if to say that after all these years he no longer puzzled about a lovely
young girl who came around in the middle of a Wednesday rest period,
dressed like Saturday night and smelling of perfume, ordering two
intoxicating drinks--when she was obviously traveling alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenore felt a thrill of secret pleasure go through her, a feeling of
possessing a delicious secret, a delightful sensation of reckless
gaiety, of life stirring throughout the sleepy ship, of a web of secrets
and countersecrets hidden from everyone but this unconcerned observer.

She walked back down the corridor, balancing the tray. When a little
splashed over the rim of the tall glasses, she took a sip from each,
tasting the sweet, cold liquid in her throat.

When she came to the head of the stairs, she realized that she did not
even know her telepath's name. Closing her eyes, she said very slowly
and distinctly inside her head, "Mr. Fairheart?"

Instantly his thought was with her, overpowering, as breathless as an
embrace. "Where are you?"

"At the head of the central stairs."

"Down you go."

She went down the stairs, through more corridors, down more stairs,
while he guided her steps. Once she paused to sip again at each glass
when the liquid splashed as she was going down. The ice tickled her nose
and made her sneeze.

"You live a long way down," she said.

"I've got to be near my charges," he answered. "I told you I work on the
ship; I'm a zoologist classifying any of the new specimens of
extraterrestrial life they're always picking up. And I always get stuck
with the worst quarters on the ship. Why, I can't even call all my suite
my own. The whole front room is filled with some sort of ship's gear
that my steward stumbles over every meal time."

She went on and on, down and down. "How many flights?" she wondered.
"Two or twelve or twenty?" Now, why couldn't she remember? Only four
little sips and her mind felt so cloudy. Down another corridor, and what
was that funny smell? These passages were poorly ventilated in the lower
levels; probably that was what made her feel so dizzy.

"Only one more flight," he whispered. "Only one more."

Down and along and then the door. She paused, conscious of rising
excitement, conscious of her beating heart.

Dimly she noticed the sign on the door. "You--you mean whatever it is
you're taking care of is in there with you?"

"Don't be frightened," his persuasive thought came. "It can't hurt you.
It's locked in a cage."

Then she slid the bolt and turned the handle. Her head hurt for an
instant; and she was inside, a blue and silver shadow in the dim
anteroom, with the tray in her hand and the books under her arm and her
pulse hammering.

She looked around the dim anteroom, at the spidery tangle of orange and
black ropes against the left-hand wall; then at the doorway in the
right-hand wall with the warm light streaming through. He was standing
in the second room, one hand on the chair for support, the other
extended toward her. For the first time he spoke aloud.

"Hello, butterfly," he said.

"Hello," she said. She smiled and walked forward into the light. She
reached out for his hand.

Then she stopped short, her hand pressed against an impenetrable wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

She could see him standing there, smiling, reaching for her hand, but
there was an invisible barrier between them. Then, slowly, his room
began to fade, the light dimmed, his figure grew watery, transparent,
vanished. She was standing, staring at the riveted steel bulkhead of a
compartment which was lit only by the dim light filtering through the
thick glass over the transom.

She stood there frozen, and the ice in the glasses tinkled nervously.
Then the tray slipped from her fingers and clattered to the floor. Icy
liquid splashed the silver sandals. In the silent gloom she stood
immobile, her eyes wide in her white face, her fist pressed to her
mouth, stifling a scream.

Something touched her gently at head and wrist and ankle--all over her
body. The web clung, delicate as lace, strong as steel.

Even if she had been able to move, she could not have broken free as the
thing against the wall began to clamber down the strands on eight furred
legs.

"Hello, butterfly," he said again.

                                                      --KENNETH HARMON




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ February 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Passenger, by Kenneth Harmon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PASSENGER ***

***** This file should be named 30500.txt or 30500.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/5/0/30500/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
