The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Terrible Answer, by Arthur G. Hill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Terrible Answer

Author: Arthur G. Hill

Release Date: November 24, 2009 [EBook #30539]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TERRIBLE ANSWER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 _They came to Mars inquiring after the
 stuff of Empire. They got--_


       The
     TERRIBLE
      ANSWER

 By Arthur G. Hill


They came down to Mars ahead of the rest because Larkin had bought an
unfair advantage--a copy of the Primary Report. There were seven of
them, all varying in appearance, but with one thing in common; in the
eyes of each glowed the greed for Empire. They came down in a flash of
orange tail-fire and they looked first at the Martians.

"Green," marveled Evans. "What a queer shade of green!"

"Not important," Cleve, the psychologist, replied. "Merely a matter of
pigmentation. White, yellow, black, green. It proves only that God loves
variety."

"And lord how they grin!"

Cleve peered learnedly. "Doesn't indicate a thing. They were born with
those grins. They'll die with them."

Of the seven strong men, Larkin exuded the most power. Thus, his role of
leader was a natural one. No man would ever stand in front of Larkin. He
said, "To hell with color or the shape of their mouths. What we're after
lies inside. Come on. Let's set up a camp."

"For the time being," Cleve cautioned, "we must ignore them. Later--we
know what to do. I'll give the nod."

They brought what they needed out of the ship. They brought the plastic
tents, broke the small, attached cylinders, and watched the tents bulge
up into living quarters. They set up the vapor condenser and it began
filling the water tank from the air about them. They plugged a line into
the ship and attached it to the tent-line. Immediately the gasses in the
plastic tents began to glow and give off both light and heat.

They did many things while the Martians stood silently by with their
arms hanging, their splay-feet flat on the ground, their slash-mouths
grinning.

The seven sat down to their first meal under the Martian stars and while
they ate the rich, delicate foods, they listened to the words of Larkin.
"A new empire waiting to be built. A whole planet--virgin--new."

"Not new," Dane, the archeologist, said. "It's older than Earth. It's
been worked before."

Larkin waved an impatient hand. "But hardly scratched. It can have risen
and fallen a thousand times for all we care. The important thing is the
vital ingredient of empire. Is it here? Can it be harnessed? Are we or
are we not, on the threshold of wealth, splendor, and progress so great
as to take away the breath?"

And as Larkin spoke, all seven men looked at the Martians; looked
covertly while appearing to study the rolling plain and the purple
ridges far away; the texture of the soil; the color of the sky; the food
on their plates; the steaming fragrance of their coffee. They looked at
all these things but they studied the Martians.

"Stupid-looking animals," Evans muttered. "Odd though. So like us--yet
so different."

At first there had been only a handful of Martians to grin at the
landing of the ship. Now they numbered over a hundred, their ranks
augmented by stragglers who came to stare with their fellows in happy
silence.

"The prospects are excellent," Cleve said. Then he jerked his attention
back to Larkin from whom it had momentarily wandered. When Larkin spoke,
one listened.

       *       *       *       *       *

Larkin had been directing his words toward a young man named Smith.
Smith had inherited a great deal of money which was fine. But Larkin
wasn't too sure of his qualifications otherwise. "--the pyramids,"
Larkin was saying. "Would they have ever been built if the men up
above--the men with vision--had had to worry about a payroll?"

Smith regarded the Martians with not quite the impersonal stare of the
other six Earthlings. Once or twice he grinned back at them. "I'll grant
the truth of what you say," he told Larkin, "but what good were the
pyramids? They're something I could never figure."

Smith had a sardonic twist of mouth that annoyed Larkin. "Let's not
quibble, man. I merely used the pyramids as an example. Call them
Empire; call them any Empire on Earth from the beginning of known
history and let's face facts."

"Facts?" Smith asked. He had been looking at a six-foot-six Martian,
thinking what a magnificent specimen he was. If only they'd wipe off
those silly grins.

"Yes, facts. The building must be done. It is a law of nature. Man must
progress or not. And what empire can arise without free labor? Can we
develop this planet at union scale? Impossible! Yet it's crying to be
developed."

Cleve knocked the ashes off his cigar and frowned. Being a man of direct
action, he inquired. "Do you want your money back, Smith?"

The latter shook his head. "Oh no! Don't get me wrong, gentlemen. I'm
for empire first, last and always. And if we can lay the foundations of
one on the backs of these stupid creatures, I'm for it."

"I still don't like your--"

"My outspoken manner? Don't give it a thought, old man. I just don't
want to be all cloyed up with platitudes. If we're going to chain the
children of Israel into the house of bondage, let's get on with it."

"I don't like your attitude," Larkin said stubbornly. "In the long run,
it will benefit these people."

"Let's say, rather, that it may benefit their children. I doubt if these
jokers will be around very long after we start cracking the whip."

Dane was stirred. "The whip," he murmured. "Symbol of empire." But
nobody heard him. They were too busy listening to Larkin and Smith--and
watching the Martians.

The Martians stood around grinning, waiting patiently for something to
happen. Larkin's attitude toward them had changed again. First there had
been curiosity. Then a narrow-eyed calculation; now he regarded them
with contempt. The careful, studied checks and tests would be made of
course. But Larkin, a man of sure instincts, had already made up his
mind.

He stretched luxuriously. "Let's call it a day and turn in. Tomorrow
we'll go about the business at hand with clearer heads."

"A good idea," Cleve said, "but first, one little gesture. I think it
would be judicious." He eyed the Martians, settling finally upon one--a
male--standing close and somewhat apart from the rest. Cleve scowled.
Standing erect, he called, "Hey--you!" He interpreted the words with a
beckoning gesture of his arm. "Come here! Here, boy! Over here!"

The Martian reacted with a typically Earthian gesture. He pointed to his
own chest with one green finger, while a questioning expression
reflected through the eternal grin.

"Yes, you! On the double."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Martian came forward. There was in his manner a slight hesitation,
and Smith expected to see his hind quarters wriggle like that of a
dog--uncertain, but eager to please.

Cleve pointed with a martinet gesture toward the smoked-out cigar butt
he'd thrown to the ground. "Pick it up!"

The Martian stood motionless.

"Pick--it--_up_, you stupid lout!"

[Illustration: _Larkin--now beyond sanity--was gibbering in the
grave._]

The Martian understood. With a glad little whimper, he bent over and
took the cigar butt in his hand.

"There," Cleve said. "Garbage can! Get it? _Garbage can._ Place for
trash--for cigar butts. Put it in there."

Smith wasn't sure whether the grin deepened or not. He thought it did,
as the Martian laid the cigar butt carefully into the trash can.

"Okay, you fella," Cleve barked, still scowling. "Back and away now.
Stay out there! Get it? Only come when you're called."

It took a few eloquent gestures, including the pantomime of swinging a
whip, before the Martian understood and complied. After he backed into
the circle of his fellows, Cleve dropped the cruel overseer manner and
turned with satisfaction to Larkin. "I think there will be no trouble at
all," he said. "Tomorrow we'll really get down to cases. I predict
smooth sailing."

They said goodnight to each other and went about the business of
preparing for slumber. As he raised the glowing flap of his tent, Larkin
saw Smith lounging in a chair before the electric heat unit. "Aren't you
going to get some sleep?"

"In a little while. I'm going to wait around until those two famous
moons come. Want to see them first hand."

"A waste of time," Larkin said. "Better keep your mind on more important
things."

"Goodnight," Smith said. Larkin did not reply, and Smith turned his head
to look at the Martians. He wondered where they had come from. They
probably had a village somewhere over the rise. He regarded them without
fear or apprehension of what might occur during the sleeping hours. He
had read the Primary Report, brought back by the pioneer expedition.
These people were entirely harmless. Also they were possessed of
remarkable stamina. They had stood for days, watching the first
expedition, grinning at it, without nourishment of any kind.

Maybe they live off the atmosphere, Smith told himself dreamily. At any
rate, they were ideal specimens to use as the foundation stones of an
empire. He lay back, thinking of Larkin; he did not like Larkin
personally, but he had to admire the steel in the man; the unswerving
determination that had made him what he was.

His mind drifted back to the things of beauty around him. The far purple
ridges had changed now, as a light bloomed behind them to gleam like
azure through old crystal. Then the two moons shot over the horizon;
huge silver bullets riding the thin atmosphere.

The oldest planet. Had it ever been great? Were the bones of any dead
civilizations mouldering beneath this strange yellow soil? Smith closed
his eyes while the cool Martian breezes soothed his face. Greatness.
What was greatness after all? Merely a matter of viewpoint perhaps.

Smith got up and moved slowly toward his tent. Out in the shadows he
could feel the grins of the Martians. "Goodnight," he called.

But there was no answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I put them out there," Cleve said. "It seemed as good a place as any."

"Fine," Larkin rumbled. He wore boots and britches and a big,
wide-brimmed hat. He had on soft leather gloves. He looked like an
empire builder.

The Martians were standing around grinning at the pile of shovels lying
in the fuzz-bush. The Martians seemed interested and appeared to
communicate with one another in some imperceptible manner.

Larkin shoved through the circle of green men, pushing rudely. He
stopped, picked up one of the shovels; thrust it toward a Martian. The
Martian took it in his hands.

"It's very important that you _tell_ them--that you don't show them,"
Cleve said. "You must not do any of the work yourself."

"I'll handle it," Larkin snapped. "Now, you--all of you! Grab a shovel.
Pick 'em up, see? Pick 'em up! We've got work to do. A ditch to dig."

Larkin's pantomime was a universal language. "We start the ditch here.
Right here--you fella! Get digging! And put your back into that shovel.
Hit hard or maybe it gives the whip--understand?" Larkin made a
threatening motion toward the lash coiled at his belt.

Smith, already on the scene, turned as Evans and Dane arrived carrying
undefined plastic. They snapped the cylinders and chairs appeared;
chairs--and a table upon which Carter and Lewis, bringing up the rear,
placed a pitcher of beer, glasses and a box of cigars.

Cleve, the psychologist, looked with satisfaction upon the string of
Martians manipulating the shovels. "All right," he said. "Let's sit
down. Pour the beer, one of you."

"Allow me," Smith said. He fought to straighten the smile bending his
lips. He picked up the pitcher and poured beer into the glasses. It all
seemed so absurd; these grim-faced men acting out an asinine tableau.

Cleve caught the smile. "I wish you'd take this seriously," he said.
"It's a mighty touchy and important business."

"Sorry," Smith said, raising his glass. "Here's to empire."

Larkin was striding up and down the line of straining Martians. The
scowl had become a part of him.

_It's getting him_, Smith marveled. _Act or no act, he likes it.
Experiment or not, he's in his element._

The six men sat drinking their beer and watching Larkin. But only Cleve
was aware of the skill with which the man worked. The gradual
application of pressure; the careful moving forward from bog to bog with
the path of retreat always open. From sharpness to brusqueness. From the
brusque to the harsh. From the harsh to the brutal.

"Will you tell me," Smith asked, "why we have to sit here drinking like
a pack of fools? I don't like beer."

"I'm not enjoying it, either," Cleve said. "But you can certainly
understand that the roles must be set right from the beginning. They
must understand we are their masters, so we must conduct ourselves in
that manner. Never any sign that could be interpreted as compromise."

Larkin, satisfied with the progress of the entirely useless ditch, came
to the table and raised a glass of beer. He wiped the foam from his
mustache and asked, "What do you think?" directing the question toward
Cleve.

       *       *       *       *       *

The latter regarded the sweating Martians with calculating eyes. "It's
going entirely as I predicted. The next step is in order, I believe."

"You think it's safe?"

"I'm certain of it."

Smith, studying Larkin, saw the latter smile, and was again struck by
its quality.

_Whatever the test, Larkin's for it, even above the call of scientific
experimentation._

Larkin was uncoiling the whip from his belt. He strode toward the
fast-deepening ditch. He selected a subject. "You--fella. You're lazy,
huh? You like to gold-brick it? Then see how you like this!" He laid the
whip across the green shoulders of the Martian.

The Martian winced. He raised an arm to shield off the whip. Again it
curled against his flesh. He whimpered. His grin was stark, inquiring.

"Hit that shovel, you green bastard!" Larkin roared.

The Martian understood. So did the other Martians. Their muscles
quivered as they drove into their work.

Larkin came back, smiling--almost dreamily, Smith thought. Cleve said,
"Excellent. I'd hardly hoped for such conformity. Hardly expected it."

"You mean," Smith asked, "that this little scene can be projected from a
dozen to a hundred? From a hundred to a thousand--?"

"From this little plot to the whole, surface of the planet," Cleve said.
"The mass is nothing more than a collection of individuals. Control the
individual and you've got the mob. That is if you follow through with
the original method. Set the hard pattern."

"Then we're in--is that it? They've passed every test with flying
colors."

"I'm sure they will," Cleve said, frowning. "But we must be thorough."

"There's still another test?"

"Yes. The test of final and complete subservience. It must be proven
beyond all doubt that they know their masters."

"You don't think they're aware yet that we _are_ their masters?"

"I'm sure they know. It only remains to be proven." Cleve glanced up at
Larkin. "Maybe this is as far as we should go today. We've made
marvelous progress."

That characteristic wave of Larkin's hand; the gesture of the empire
builder brushing away mountains. "Why wait? I want to get this thing
over with. You said yourself they're under our thumb."

Cleve pondered, staring at the Martians. "Very well. There's really no
reason to wait."

Larkin smiled and turned toward the diggers, only half visible now from
the depths of the ditch. He walked forward, appearing to exercise more
care, this time, in the selection of his subject. Finally, he pointed at
one of the Martians. "You--fella! Come here!"

Several of them looked at one another a trifle confused. "You--damn it!
What are you waiting for?"

One of them climbed slowly from the trench. While he was engaged in so
doing, Smith noticed two things. He saw the look of rage, simulated or
otherwise, that came into Larkin's face. And he saw Cleve's fingers
tighten on the edge of the table.

Larkin had a gun in his fist; a roar in his voice. "When I talk--you
jump! Get that? All of you!"

He fired three bullets into the Martian's brain. The latter slumped
grinning to the ground. Larkin, his breath coming jerkily, stood poised
on the balls of his feet. The men at the table sat frozen--waiting.
Around them--on the plain--some two hundred Martians stood motionless.

_The final test_, Smith thought. _To prove they're cattle._

       *       *       *       *       *

A full minute passed after the echo of the gun faded out. Silence.

And nothing.

The Earthmen picked up their breathing where they'd dropped it. Larkin's
breath exploded in savage voice--triumphant voice. The Martians were
his.

"Come on, some of you! Dig a hole and bury that carrion! And if anybody
still wonders who's boss around here--let him step forward!"

"They took it!" Cleve whispered. "Glory be--they took it!"

Four Martians climbed grinning from the trench. They faced Larkin and
stood as though awaiting instructions.

"Dig there," Larkin said.

They went stolidly to work and Larkin pocketed his gun, making the
pocketing a gesture of contempt.

"You see," Cleve said, with the tone of one explaining an abstract
problem, "we were at somewhat of a disadvantage because they are
incapable of indicating emotion by facial expression. Thus the last test
was necessary. If we could have judged the degree of fear previously
instilled, that last might not have been necessary."

"Just as well to have a double check nonetheless," Dane said. "Look at
them! You'd think nothing out of the ordinary had happened."

Larkin strode back to the table. "Glad we got it over with," he said.
"Now we _know_. Cleve can head back for Earth tomorrow. Initial supplies
will come to about twenty million, I estimate. The rest of us can stay
here and really drive these beggars. Get the foundations dug; get the
rock down from the hills."

"A planet in glorious resurrection," said Dane, the poet of the group.

"They've got the grave dug," Cleve observed. "They're waiting for
orders."

"Such cattle," Evans muttered.

Larkin strode back to the grave. He pointed. "Him--body into the grave.
Snap into it. We've got work to do."

The Martians put the body into the grave.

Then a tall, green man appeared behind Larkin. He put his arms around
Larkin's body. Another Martian took the gun from Larkin's pocket.

And they pushed the screaming Earthman down into the grave.

Smith sprang to his feet. "For God's sake!"

"Sit down, you fool!" Cleve hissed. "Do you want to die? We've
miscalculated. Something's wrong."

The big Martian was standing on Larkin. The others threw in the soil.
Larkin, now beyond sanity, was gibbering like an animal.

Smith sat down. The Earthman presented a frozen tableau. Soon the
gibbering could no longer be heard and the big Martian stepped out of
the grave.

"Leave everything," Cleve whispered. "Get up very casually and walk back
to the ship. Get inside it."

"May God help us," Dane quavered.

"Shut up! Act natural."

They went back and got into the ship while the Martians stood patiently
about waiting for something to happen. Their patience was rewarded when
the ship arose on a great flaming tail from the surface of the planet.

It was a sight worth waiting for.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ July
    1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Terrible Answer, by Arthur G. Hill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TERRIBLE ANSWER ***

***** This file should be named 30539.txt or 30539.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/5/3/30539/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
