The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Unthinking Destroyer, by Roger Phillips

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Unthinking Destroyer

Author: Roger Phillips

Illustrator: W. E. Terry

Release Date: December 15, 2009 [EBook #30683]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNTHINKING DESTROYER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE UNTHINKING DESTROYER

by ROG PHILLIPS


    Gordon and Harold both admitted the possibility of thinking entities
    other than human. But would they ever recognize the physical form of
    some of these beings?


"Hey, Gordon!"

Gordon Marlow, Ph.D., straightened up and turned in the direction of the
voice, the garden trowel dangling in his dirt-stained white canvas
glove. His wide mouth broke into a smile that revealed even white teeth.
It was Harold Harper, an undergraduate student, who had called.

"Hop over the fence and come in," Gordon invited.

He dropped the trowel and, taking off his work gloves, reached into his
pocket and extracted an old pipe. He filled it, the welcoming smile
remaining on his lips, while Harold Harper approached, stepping
carefully between the rows of carrots, cabbages, and cauliflower.

Harold held a newspaper in his hand. When he reached Gordon Marlow he
held it open and pointed to the headline. ROBOT ROCKET SHIP TO MARS.

Gordon took the paper and read the item, puffing slowly and contentedly
on his old pipe. His eyes took on an interested look when he came to the
reporter's speculations on the possibility of intelligent life on Mars.

Finally he handed the newspaper back to Harold.

"You know, Harold," he said, "I wonder if they would recognize
intelligent life if they saw it on other planets."

"Of course they would," Harold replied. "Regardless of its form there
would be artifacts that only intelligent life could create."

"Would there?" Gordon snorted. "I wonder."

He squatted down, picking up the trowel and lazily poking it into the
rich soil at his feet.

"That's why I wonder," he continued. "We are so prone to set up tests on
what intelligent life is that we are likely to miss it entirely if it
doesn't conform exactly to our preconceived notions. We assume that if a
being is intelligent it must get the urge to build artifacts of some
kind--pots and vases, houses, idols, machinery, metal objects. But MUST
it? In order to do so it must have hands and perhaps legs. Suppose it
doesn't have such things? Suppose that no matter how intelligent it
might be, it could not do those things!"

"Then it wouldn't be intelligent, would it?" Harold asked, puzzled.

"We are assuming it is," Gordon said patiently. "There are other
outlets for intelligence than making clay pots. As a last resort for
an intelligent being there is always--thinking."

He chuckled at his joke.

[Illustration: Harold held a newspaper in his hands.]

"I've often wondered what it would be like to be a thinking, reasoning
being with no powers of movement whatsoever. With bodily energy provided
automatically by environment, say, and all the days of life with nothing
to do but think. What a chance for a philosopher! What depths of thought
he might explore. What heights of intellectual perception he might
attain. And if there were some means of contact with others of his kind,
so that all could pool their thoughts and guide the younger generation,
what progress such a race might make!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"And so we see," Ont telepathed, "that there must be a Whole of which
each of us is a part only. The old process which says 'I think,
therefore I am,' has its fallacy in the statement, 'I think.' It assumes
that that assertion is axiomatic and basic, when in reality it is the
conclusion derived from a long process of mental introspection. It is a
theory rather than an axiom."

"But don't you think, Ont," Upt replied, "that you are confusing the
noumenon with the phenomenon? What I mean is, the fact of thinking is
there from the very start or the conclusion couldn't be reached; and the
theoretical conclusion, as you call it, is merely the final recognition
of something basic and axiomatic that was there all the time!"

"True," Ont replied. "But still, to the thinking mind, it is a theory
and not an axiom. All noumena are there before we arrive at an
understanding of them. Thought, if it exists as such, is also there. But
the theoretical conclusion I think has no more degree of certainty than
any other thing the mind can deal with. To say 'I think' is to assert
the truth of an hypothesis which MAY be true, but not necessarily so.
And then to conclude, 'Therefore I am,' is to advance one of the most
shaky conclusions of all time. Underneath that so-called logical
conclusion lies a metaphysics of being, a theory of Wholes, a
recognition by differentiation of parts, with a denial of all but the
one part set apart by that differentiation, and, in short, the most
irrational hodgepodge of contradictory conclusions the thinking mind can
conceive. This pre-cognition that enables one to arrive at the tenuous
statement, 'I think, therefore I am,' is nicely thrown out by tagging it
with another metaphysical intangible called illusion--as if the mind can
separate illusion from reality by some absolute standard."

"I believe you're right, Ont," Upt replied slowly, his telepathed
thoughts subdued with respect. "It is possible that the concept, 'I
think,' is the illusion, while the so-called illusions are the reality."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Even without the benefit of past thoughts," Gordon was saying, whacking
off a weed a yard away and nearly upsetting himself, "a mind with
nothing to do but think could accomplish miracles. Suppose it was not
aware of any other thinking entity, though it might be surrounded by
such similar entities. It would be born or come into existence some way,
arrive at self-awareness and certain other awarenesses to base its
thinking on, depending on its structure, and--" he looked up at Harold
startled at his own conclusion--"it might even arrive at the ultimate
solution to all reality and comprehend the foundations of the Universe!"

"And eventually be destroyed without any other entity having the
benefit of it all," Harold commented dryly.

"What a pity that would be," Gordon murmured. "For the human race to
struggle for hundreds of years, and have some unguessable entity on Mars
do all that in one lifetime--and it all go to waste while some
blundering ass lands on Mars and passes it by, looking for artifacts."

       *       *       *       *       *

"But that is only the start in the blunders contained in that most
profound philosophical revelation of old," Ont stated. "After arriving
at a precarious conclusion about existence the ancients were not
satisfied. They had to say, 'If I am I must have been created!' Then
they go on and say, 'If I was created there must be a Creator!' And thus
they soar from their precarious perch in existence, soar on nonexistent
wings, and perch on the essence of evanescence! They do not recognize
the alternative--that to exist does not necessarily imply a beginning.
They do not recognize it because they have derived all their tools from
reality around them and then denied the reality while accepting the
validity of the tools of thought derived from it. And in this way they
arrive at an absolute existence of Something they have never sensed or
felt in any way, while denying all that they have felt and sensed, and
give it attributes which their sense of idealism dictates it must have,
and call it God."

"Then," Upt said thoughtfully, "I take it you are an atheist?"

"Certainly NOT," Ont growled telepathically.

"But you implied that in your comments on the conclusions of the
ancients," Upt insisted.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But if there are no artifacts," Harold said. "And no signs of
intelligence whatever, how could we ever know that there WAS
intelligence some place?"

"There must be some way," Gordon said. "I've taught logic at the U for
fifteen years now, and I've done a lot of thinking on the subject. If we
ever reach Mars I think we should be very careful what we touch. We
would be clumsy bulls in a china shop, not knowing the true worth of
what we found, destroying what might be found to be priceless by later
and more careful explorers. Mars is older than the Earth, and I can't
help being convinced that there is SOME form of intelligence there."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I implied no such thing as atheism," Ont insisted. "I merely said that
the reasoning used by the ancients to arrive at the Creator was the most
slipshod and illogical possible. There was another line used long ago
that was more solid, but still very weak. It started out with the
statement, 'I can be aware of nothing but thoughts.' External stimuli,
if such there are, must be transformed into thought before I can be
aware of them. Since I can never be aware of anything other than
thought, why assume anything except thought exists? You, and all other
things, exist as thoughts in my mind. There is nothing except what
exists in my mind. Therefore, by that token, _I_ am God!"

"But," Upt chuckled, "by the same token I can insist that _I_ am God and
you are just a product of my own creation."

"Yes," Ont agreed. "So it presents a dilemma. To resolve it, it is
necessary to postulate a Supreme Mind, and to say that all things are
just thoughts in God's Mind. That makes us both the same then and there
is no argument about who is God!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Harold kicked a lump of moist earth absently.

"It seems to me, Gordon," he said cautiously, "that you are biting the
air with your teeth. If there are intelligent beings on Mars they will
be aware of us, and make themselves known. If for no other reason they
will do that to keep us from destroying them."

Gordon stood up and arched his back. He placed the garden trowel and
gloves in the hip pocket of his coveralls and tapped his pipe on the
heel of his shoe.

"You are assuming," he said, "that such beings can find a way to
communicate with us. But have you thought of the possibility that if
their abilities to reason are undetectable to us, by the same token they
might not be aware we are intelligent? A mad bull in a pasture can think
after a fashion, but would you try to reason with him? You would run if
he charged you, and if he caught up with you and mauled you it would
never occur to you to say, 'Look here, old boy. Let's talk this thing
over first.'"

Both men laughed. Gordon started walking along the row he was standing
in, toward the house. Harold kept pace.

"I see your point," he agreed.

"There are so many things we assume unconsciously when we speculate on
the possibilities of intelligent life on Mars," Gordon went on, stooping
over to pull a weed he had missed in his earlier weeding. "Rate of
thinking is most probably a function of the material organism. Some
other thinking creature might think faster or slower--perhaps so much so
that we couldn't follow them even if we could tune in on their thoughts
directly. Imagine a mind so ponderous that it takes a year for it to
think as much as we do in a minute! Speed wouldn't necessarily have to
be a function of size, either. Something incredibly small might take
ages to think a simple thought. Have you ever heard the German tale
called The Three Sleepers, Harold?"

"No, I haven't," Harold replied.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, in a small town in Germany there were three men so fat that they
could barely walk. They spent nearly all their time sleeping. The only
trouble was that every day or so someone would disturb them by singing
or walking by, or some other trivial thing that is always happening in a
small town, no matter how dead it is.

"One time when they were disturbed three days running they got mad and
decided to go to the hills. They looked in the hills until they found a
nice dry cave. There they relaxed with deep sighs of contentment and
went to sleep. Day after day, week after week, they slept undisturbed.

"Then one day a dog wandered into the cave, saw the three breathing
mountains of flesh and heard the din of their deep snoring; and, scared
half to death, let out a shrill yip and skedaddled.

"A week later one of the three sleepers stirred, opened his eyes
briefly, and muttered, 'What was that noise?' Then he promptly went back
to sleep.

"Ten days later the second sleeper stirred, muttered, 'Damfino,' and
went back to sleep.

"Nearly a month later the third sleeper opened his eyes suddenly, stared
at the roof of the cave for a moment, and said, 'I think it was a dog.'
Then he went back to sleep. The way the story goes nothing ever came
near the cave again, so they are still there, fast asleep--still fat,
too, I suppose."

"I see what you're driving at," Harold said, chuckling over the story.
"We assume that any intelligent being whatever, if it exists, thinks at
the same RATE we do; but it might not."

"That's right," Gordon admitted. "And there are even more subtle
assumptions we make unconsciously. For one, we assume that a thinking
creature must think in the same way we do. We might not even be able to
recognize thinking when we meet it, on another planet. No--" he held up
his hand to silence the question on Harold's lips, "--I don't know
exactly what I mean. I'll put it this way. We have steam engines and
gasoline engines. We also have electric motors. Suppose we have
steam-engine thought. How would we recognize electric-motor thinking?

"Or perhaps a little closer to what I'm trying to express, we have
arithmetic and algebra. Suppose with our arithmetic minds with no
slightest inkling of the existence of a variable, we run into an algebra
mind? We might mistake it for something far removed from thinking or
intelligence. We go on the assumption that anything that doesn't stomp
up, give a salute, and solemnly announce 'How', is unintelligent."

"It might just be more interested in its own thoughts than in the
visitors from Earth," Harold suggested.

"It might," Gordon said. "Or it might be intensely curious and studying
the Earthmen very closely with senses other than sight and hearing."

       *       *       *       *       *

"But," Ont added thoughtfully, "although the conclusion that we are all
thoughts in the mind of the Creator is logically unshakeable, it isn't
very satisfying, from a logical point, because it makes God nothing more
than the compromising of a cute dilemma. It places the Creator in the
same light as the final decision to locate the Capitol of the United
States at Washington."

"Where's that?" Upt asked quickly.

"I don't know," Ont said testily. "That's just something I picked up out
of the blue, so to speak. Inspirational thought. For all I know it's
just a figment of my imagination."

"I've had inspirational thoughts too," Upt said excitedly. "I haven't
spoken of them to you because I was afraid you might think I was
becoming disorganized in my thoughts."

"I've done a lot of thinking about the inspirational stuff I get now and
then," Ont said matter-of-factly. "If it came all the time I would be
inclined to think it was the Voice of the Supreme Being Itself! But it
doesn't come that way."

"Neither does mine," Upt said. "I often think there must be angels that
hover over us at times and bless us with their wise thoughts, perhaps
looking into us to see if we are 'ready' yet. When I seem to sense these
powerful thoughts about me I try to feel humble and worshipful. I hope
in that way one of them will see fit to reveal himself to me someday."

"They might," Ont said hopefully. "I wouldn't mind actually talking to
one of them myself. But speaking of that, we don't know for sure that
these inspirational thoughts aren't actually our own. They SEEM
different, but that may be because they arise in some part of our deep
subconscious thought processes. I've been trying to extend my sense of
awareness in order to reach into my subconscious mind and actually plumb
it to its depths. One thing I've found is that most of my REAL thinking
goes on there, and only rises to the surface of consciousness when it is
completed! That lends probability to the theory that ALL such voices of
inspiration are merely my own subconscious mind giving me the end
products of carefully thought out trains of reasoning it had dreamed
up."

"I think I'll try that line of development myself," Upt said. "I'd never
thought of it. Maybe inspiration is only subconscious thought rising to
the surface of consciousness. Maybe it is. But if so, I'll be very
disappointed. I'd hoped sometime to be able to commune with some
intelligence infinitely superior to mine and really learn the true
nature of things."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I sincerely hope I'm wrong about it," Ont said. "I too would like to
believe that there is more in reality than just us. I wonder if other
kinds of entities are possible? I mean thinking beings with different
forms, different senses, perhaps different types of thinking. It may be
they exist and we aren't equipped to detect them. They may be around us
all the time, aware of us and our puerile thoughts, but so superior to
us in every way that they don't think it worth while even to consider
our feeble cogitations."

"I wouldn't call YOUR cogitations feeble, Ont," Upt exclaimed
admiringly.

"That is a point of relativity," Ont said, somewhat flattered. "It does
seem in vain, though. We spend our existence in solving the problems of
reality, and when we have solved them we have no need of the solution.
It gives us a feeling of satisfaction to gain the theoretical basis of
reality from our point of view. But I for one would feel much better if
we could be of service to some entity who is unable to accomplish that
himself, but might be able to comprehend it if we taught him."

"All very noble," Upt said skeptically. "But I can't even imagine a
thinking creature different from us in any way."

"That's why it's so difficult," Ont said. "In our own minds we tend to
become absolute rather than relative in our conceptions. Some other
entity might, for example, think much more slowly than we, or with
incredible rapidity, so that our thoughts would be sluggish to him, or
so swift that he would never be able to grasp them until long after we
were gone.

"Also, we tend to think that thought as we experience it, is the only
possible type of thought. In reality there may be others. Different
mental principles. Different material structure. Perhaps concepts
outside our ability to grasp, while ours might be outside the ability of
such creatures to grasp also."

"I don't believe I grasp what you're trying to say," Upt hesitated.

"Well, put it this way," Ont said patiently. "All things are relative.
Why not thought? It might be possible to have two thinking minds which
are relatively non-thinking. Each, from EVERY standard of the other,
being totally thoughtless and without intelligence or mind."

"Now you're going too far," Upt said. "Thought is thought, I think,
and--it's real. If any other entity thinks, its thinking must be real
too."

"Of course," Ont murmured. "You miss the point entirely. If from every
possible angle, some entity, to YOU, can't think and doesn't, it is
non-thinking and unintelligent. Right?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Gordon and Harold paused at the edge of the garden.

"Nice crop of vegetables you have there, Gordon," Harold said
appreciatively.

"Thanks," Gordon said. "Say, wouldn't your wife like some fresh
vegetables?"

Without waiting for an answer he stepped back into the garden, taking a
knife from his pocket.

"These are nice now," he said, bending over and cutting. "Won't be much
longer though. Brown spots developing already. I'll scrape off the brown
stuff for you, but tell your wife to cook them right away. In a couple
of days they'll spoil."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Upt!" Ont exclaimed, exasperated. "Why don't you answer me, Upt? Upt!
Where are you, Upt? Why don't you answer?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"There you are," Gordon said, smiling, as he handed Harold the head of
cauliflower.

"Thanks," Harold said, accepting the white, fresh head, and balancing it
in his palm.

The two men continued up the walk to the house.

"As I was saying," Gordon took up their conversation, "when men get to
Mars, if they aren't careful they may destroy a civilization, or even
thousands of intelligent beings, without knowing it...."


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ December 1948.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Unthinking Destroyer, by Roger Phillips

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNTHINKING DESTROYER ***

***** This file should be named 30683.txt or 30683.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/6/8/30683/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
