The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Straw, by William J. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Last Straw

Author: William J. Smith

Illustrator: George Schelling

Release Date: December 23, 2009 [EBook #30746]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST STRAW ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction September
    1963. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            THE LAST STRAW


                    Some hypotheses are rational--
                         if not logical--but,
                           by their nature,
                         aren't exactly open
                      to controlled experiment!


                         by WILLIAM J. SMITH


                   ILLUSTRATED BY GEORGE SCHELLING

       *       *       *       *       *




"There's absolutely nothing we can pin it down to with any real
certainty," Kessler said. "No mechanical defects that we're sure of,
no sabotage we can put our finger on, no murder or suicide schemes,
nothing! We've put that plane back together so perfectly that it could
almost fly again! We've got dossiers an inch thick on practically
everybody who was aboard, crew and passengers. We've done six months'
work and we don't have one single positive answer. The newspapers were
yelling about the number of insurance policies issued for the flight
but none of them looks really phony."

He stood at the huge window of Senator Brogan's office, looking out at
the shimmering sunlight on one of Washington's green malls. Over the
treetops he could catch a glimpse of the Capitol dome.

Brogan sat comfortably in the big chair behind his desk. "But weren't
there an unusually large number of policies issued?" he asked. His big
hands toyed with a little silver airplane propeller, a souvenir of his
long-standing interest in the problems of commercial aviation. "You
know," he went on, leaning forward on his elbows and replacing the
propeller neatly on the base of his fountain pen stand, "this is a
matter of interest to me in more than an official sense. Eileen
Bennett was one of my wife's best friends. She was on her way to
Washington to visit us after a stopover in New York."

Kessler nodded. "I know that's one of the reasons you wanted to
compare notes." He stood with his back to the window now, a stocky man
with a jaw to match and short-cropped graying hair. "The newspapers
were quite right, of course. There were an unusually large number of
insurance policies issued for the flight but nearly all were for the
minimum amount."

"What about Pearlow?"

Kessler frowned. "Pearlow had reason to be nervous. You know he
survived a crash just three years ago. But anyway, the fact remains
that we've looked into the backgrounds of every one of those people.
None of them was facing any real financial difficulties!"

"That sounds odd in itself," George Brogan said, smiling slightly.

Kessler ran his hand over his hair and returned to sit in a leather chair
beside the senator's desk. He smiled in response. "I know it sounds odd
but it's true. Their troubles were all run-of-the-mill--getting taxes
paid, the mortgage, a new car, a long-overdue raise in salary--that sort
of thing. Nothing that anybody in his right mind would kill or commit
suicide over."

Brogan lifted a bushy eyebrow in question. "Maybe you've put your
finger on it there?"

Kessler ticked off his reply, holding up one hand. "One former mental
patient, pronounced cured ten years ago and apparently perfectly
normal; a well-established businessman; a used-car dealer; three
currently under psychoanalysis; a college girl twenty-one; a housewife
with four children; an injured veteran just out of service. None
showed any violent tendencies according to their doctors."

"Any criminals?"

Kessler regarded him wryly from beneath his eyebrows. "Don't kid me,
senator. I know you've done your own investigation on this. But to
answer your question: Evan Prewitt's your man--only one who could
qualify. Tried on a manslaughter charge for killing his brother-in-law
while they were out hunting. He said it was an accident and the jury
agreed. He was acquitted. True, he had one of the large insurance
policies, but then I'm sure you know Miss Bennett had one, too."

The senator nodded. "I knew that. But I know very little of Eileen's
financial situation otherwise. Not," he added hastily, "that I would
for a moment suspect Eileen Bennett of harming a fly. She's one person
I could rule out. It would be just like her to fall down the steps
getting off the plane, but as for her planning her own death or anyone
else's, that's out of the question. She was much too scatterbrained. I
hope that's not speaking ill of the dead."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kessler frowned. "You'll forgive me, senator, in that regard, if I
ask you a question? Miss Bennett didn't drink, did she?"

"Eileen? Heavens, no! Oh, she'd have a drink to be sociable, but it
was usually a sherry and half the time she wouldn't finish that. I
don't suppose you were envisaging the possibility that she highjacked
the plane from four officers and two stewardesses and then wrecked
it?" This time he smiled the broad toothy smile that made him a
favorite with Washington news photographers.

"Hardly. The thing is, I've gotten so I feel I knew every one of those
seventy-three people personally. You know, I've interviewed almost two
thousand friends and acquaintances of those people and I'm not quite
finished yet, just hoping I'll run across something that makes sense.
I could have told you Miss Bennett's habits with a glass of sherry,
that's why I was a little surprised."

Senator Brogan shook his head. "Oh, no, I didn't mean to suggest
anything like that. It's just that Eileen was ... well, clumsy is an
unkind word ... unco-ordinated I guess, though she tried to make a
joke of it. She was always bumping into things, spilling her glass of
water and things like that, but not because she had been drinking too
much."

"As for drinking," Kessler said, "there were quite a few real guzzlers
on the plane. I don't mean that actor, who was notorious. He'd just
lost a part because of his drinking and he was sober for a change. But
it's amazing what you'll turn up about respectable people when you
start investigating."

"I'm very interested in that aspect, as you may know," Brogan said.
"We periodically get bills which would outlaw drinking aboard planes.
What are your ideas on that subject?"

"Well, I don't mind a drink aboard a plane myself. Helps me relax. But
I have seen some pretty unpleasant things develop during a flight when
you get a nasty drunk riled up."

"Did you find any suggestion of that?"

"Not really. The plane took off from Chicago just after lunch time and
a good many of the people who got on there had had a drink or two, but
there wasn't really enough time to make trouble. The plane had hardly
cleared the runway. All the passengers, except one, had their seat
belts fastened."

"Now there is something I didn't know! Who was this?"

"Preston, a lawyer from New Jersey. You know how tentative any
reconstruction of events must be under the circumstances, but we're
pretty sure of this, especially since there was no fire. Preston
apparently broke a fingernail trying to fasten his seat belt and one
of the stewardesses had brought him a little first-aid kit. He had
torn open a Band-Aid and was trying to fasten it around his finger.
Obviously this was just before the crash."

"But how do you know he did it with the seat belt?"

"Guesswork, except that it wasn't fastened and we think maybe it just
got overlooked after he hurt himself."

"Was he one of the drinkers?"

"No, not at all. Never touched it. In point of fact, nobody was really
drunk at the time of the take-off. The flight engineer however had had
two drinks at lunch."

Brogan raised his eyebrows. "You _were_ thorough. You're sure?"

Kessler nodded. "Brown was a problem drinker though it didn't seem to
interfere with his work. The two drinks are all he had that day so far
as we can determine. He showed up for lunch at a girl friend's
apartment with a black eye. Made some joke about walking into a door
and wouldn't tell her anything else about it. She gave him the drinks
at his request, and a big lunch, and put a little makeup on his eye
because he'd been pulled from a flight a few months before when he
showed up looking as though he'd been in a scrap."

"How did he really get the black eye?"

"There you've got me. Maybe he was telling his girl friend the truth.
He had an estranged wife, incidentally, but she hadn't seen him for
years. Good riddance, she said."

Senator Brogan picked up the propeller again and rolled it
reflectively between his palms. He looked intently at Kessler.
"Nothing seems really conclusive, does it? You know some of the wild
rumors that have been going around about this crash?" Kessler nodded
and started to speak. Brogan held up his hand. "Let me finish. You
know and I know--or at least we think we do--that there's nothing to
most of these rumors. And I'm not even talking about the wilder ones,
like the little people from outer space who are knocking our airplanes
down without leaving a trace. You get three or four of these
unexplainable accidents and somebody is sure to come up with a really
crackpot idea. The general public will not be convinced that this sort
of thing can happen with no discoverable reason. Usually we have no
way of reconstructing what happened before the accident. Just a couple
of unintelligible remarks on the radio, as there were here, and then
everyone is dead, the plane is totally demolished, and witnesses on
the ground come up with ten different hysterical accounts--if there
are any witnesses at all!"

"But this was a little different, after all, senator," Kessler
interjected.

Brogan held up his hand again. "Just let me have my say. You know we
folks down here in Washington always have a lot to say and we hate
being interrupted." He smiled briefly. "This sort of thing has been
going on in aviation history for the last fifty years--these
unexplained accidents--and there's nothing especially new about this
last one. You're shaking your head, but let me continue. One of the
reasons they are now getting so much attention is that with the big
jets the loss of life is apt to be pretty appalling when an accident
does happen, but the actual number of accidents per flight--as you
well know--is far fewer than it used to be and has been going down
steadily over the years."

Kessler, slumped deep in his chair, fingers arced together before him,
stared morosely but said nothing. "Secondly," Brogan went on, "it is
not true that these accidents are happening more to American planes
than foreign ones. Again it is chiefly that we are scheduling more and
more flights. On the law of averages we are doing very well. You know
how many crashes the foreign carriers have chalked up in the last
year. And just about the same proportion are these so-called
unexplainable crashes. It's not that they are unexplainable! It's
simply that we don't have the information that would explain them! The
very circumstances preclude that. Am I making any sense?"

Kessler nodded. "Yes, senator, I suppose you are, but it doesn't make
me any happier. I want to find out why and stop them."

"So do I, I assure you. But let me finish briefly. Among the other
wild rumors are suggestions that we are being sabotaged by foreign
agents or by their tools. Well now, I'd be the last one in the
world--you know my record--to deny the possibility of some folks doing
this if they thought they could get away with it. If I thought for one
moment--or if I thought that you thought for one moment--that there
was some international sabotage going on here, I'd say go on with your
investigation till you get the answer!"

Brogan flung himself back dramatically in his big chair, throwing out
his arms. "Meanwhile, what are you accomplishing? You've spent--and I
happen to know this for a fact--almost a million dollars on this
investigation. By your own account you have personally talked to two
thousand people about it! You have kept this accident in the public
eye and given it far greater importance than it deserves--through no
malicious fault of your own, to be sure! But what have you got?
Nothing. Exactly what I came up with. Nothing. Tell me, for example,
where you got with the political possibilities of this thing. I know
you didn't overlook it!"

Kessler smiled wearily. "Just about everything you say is true,
George. Only, you see, I would probably never have ended up running
this investigation if I were the sort of person that comes up with a
question mark for an answer. I said 'human error' in my report, but
that doesn't satisfy me. I want to know what human error. I don't
think anything happens without a reason. Somehow I feel that it's all
there, the answer, in those couple of million details we've pieced
together about the plane and the crew and the passengers and it's
staring me in the face if I could only see it."

"I agree with you." Brogan raised his hand again in his imperious
gesture then dropped it to the desk. "No. I asked to have my say. Now
you have yours." He sat patiently.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kessler grinned. "Thanks, senator. As for the political sabotage
possibilities, you've undoubtedly seen a copy of my confidential
report. Three of the passengers had definite subversive connections in
the past. I know, I'm not trying to make much of this. Their
associations all date back to the 1930s and one of them was just a
girl flirting with a Communist fellow student, but we didn't want to
overlook any possibilities. Pearlow, on the other hand, was Russian
born. He's the one who barely survived another airline crash three
years ago."

"Pearlow was perfectly loyal. Just an ironic coincidence, that's all.
I know the papers tried to make something out of it but I find it hard
to believe that you took it seriously. As for Stepowski, he testified
openly about his past here in Washington five years ago."

"I know. I even know that Stepowski's favorite television program was
'I Led Three Lives.' I tell you there's very little I don't know about
anybody who was aboard, with one possible exception."

Brogan was alert. "Who's this?"

"Oh, it's no great mystery, senator. Robert J. Spencer, of Keokuk,
Iowa. We know quite a bit about him, actually, but it's all third
hand. He was a retired court stenographer, seventy-three years old,
going to New York for his sister's funeral at the time of the crash.
He boarded the plane at Chicago. He took a train to Chicago because he
didn't like to fly, then he got sick there, apparently from some
mushrooms he picked at home and had for lunch before he left. He had
to lay over in Chicago for a day and then he got on the plane at the
last minute so he wouldn't miss the funeral."

"Sounds to me as though you knew everything about him."

"Funny thing, though," said Kessler, "I have yet to speak to a single
person who ever exchanged ten words with Robert J. Spencer. He lived
alone, a complete recluse. Neighbors never saw him. Probably his
sister would have been able to tell me something about him but she's
dead. Actually, while I'm here in Washington I'm going to stop by and
see an old acquaintance of his, a Miss Valeria Schmitt. They worked
together as court stenographers in Iowa City more than twenty-five
years ago. They were engaged but they never married. She moved here
during World War II and they never saw much of each other after that."
He shrugged. "I know it's a long shot, but I don't want to miss a
chance."

Senator Brogan shook his head, smiling. "I have to admire you,
Kessler. But may I express some little reservation? Do you really
think looking up an acquaintance of Mr. Spencer's from twenty-five
years ago is going to help materially in solving the mystery of a
plane crash that occurred just last February? Or that the taxpayers
could be very happy at this sort of expenditure of their money?"

Kessler flushed darkly and leaned forward in his chair, clasping his
hands. "Senator," he said, his voice cracking a little, "the taxpayers
are not spending a cent currently on this investigation. My staff has
been dismissed or returned to their regular duties. I went off the
payroll three weeks ago. My final report has been submitted. I'm doing
this at my own expense because I feel that I have to. I'm not
satisfied. There has to be an answer!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Brogan turned the emotion away from himself with professional skill.
"Bob, look," he said, addressing Kessler by his given name for the
first time during their interview, "I'm not criticizing you personally
for a second. And that's not why I asked you to stop by. I asked you
to come over and see me as a favor. You're not working for me and I
don't pretend to be in any position of authority as far as your
investigation goes. I asked you here because I'm deeply concerned
myself about these accidents and I wanted to know if you could
enlighten me in any way. May I say one personal thing though? Aren't
you getting emotionally involved in this?"

"Of course I'm emotionally involved!" Kessler burst out. "I'm sorry,
George." He passed his hand over his face and went on in a lower
voice. "It's just that I've been eating, breathing, sleeping, dreaming
this thing for the last six months. I feel as though I knew everyone
of those seventy-three people personally. The Patterson girl, who
looked as though she might be going to have a little good luck for a
change. I even know that the pilot nicked himself shaving that
morning. His friends called him Mike even though his name was Edward.
He had a fight with his wife the night before. She wanted to eat out
and he wanted to stay home. He was working with this crew for the
first time though they all knew each other very well."

"Really?" Brogan perked up. "I suppose I knew that. Is it possibly
significant?"

"Possibly, possibly. Everything is possibly significant but nothing
really adds up. The routines were all standard, the four men were all
vets. Aside from the pilot they had all worked together for years, off
and on."

"Still, couldn't wires have gotten crossed as a result of some
misunderstanding with a new pilot aboard?"

"Sure they could. What with the flight engineer being a souse and the
pilot new to the crew and the co-pilot just back after a two-month
layoff because of a ski accident. 'Human error,' that's what I said."

"Ski accident? I thought it was the stewardess that had the ski
accident? I'm not going to trip you up in your own bailiwick now, am
I?"

"Stewardess?" Kessler frowned. "You must be mistaken, senator."

"I felt quite sure," Brogan said musingly.

"I know your reputation for a fact, senator," Kessler said
uncomfortably, "but a stewardess with a ski accident. Oh! Oh, yes.
But not recent. That was Miss Sosnak, but it was almost a year before.
The newspaper accounts got garbled. Both she and the other stewardess,
Miss Prentiss, were ski enthusiasts. They were thinking about spending
the weekend at Stowe after they got to New York, even though they had
both broken ankles previously. Their friends in San Francisco were
joking with them about it before they left. They gave Miss Sosnak a
doll with a cast on its leg as a gag. The doll was found in the
wreckage. Apparently Miss Sosnak had given it to the little girl who
was killed on the flight, Barbara Patterson, who actually had a cast
on her leg at the time. She had fallen and hurt herself a few days
before."

       *       *       *       *       *

A buzzer on Senator Brogan's desk hummed two short discreet hums.
Brogan made no attempt to answer it. He stood and came around the
desk, putting his hand on Kessler's shoulder. "Don't get up just yet,"
he said. "My secretary buzzes me every fifteen minutes in case I want
to show my constituents how busy I am. If there's anyone waiting, let
them wait. There's just a little bit more I'd like to say." He sat in
the wide embrasure of the window and leaned forward on a crossed knee.
He looked the picture of negligence but he was obviously pausing to
choose his words with care. Kessler shifted his chair to face him.

"I won't mince words," Brogan said, "because I think we understand
each other. We always have. Thanks to your splendid investigation, and
my only little efforts perhaps, we know more about the circumstances
of this crash than any other in aviation history. I had exactly your
feeling that the answer ought to be there. But I don't see it and you
don't see it. We know absolutely everything but one thing. We don't
know what caused it. And we're never going to know that. I really
think you are doing the aviation industry, yes and the country itself,
a real injury by going on. I won't say what I think you're doing to
yourself because it will sound like a sentimental appeal and you've
known me too long not to know I'm pretty hard-headed."

"The investigation is over," Kessler said sullenly.

"Yes, I know, officially, but you've just told me you're going on with
it personally."

"It's one last remote chance."

"Well, tell me this, Bob, if this last remote chance doesn't work out,
will you call it quits and not start in on another last remote chance?
Will you and Margaret get on up to that place of yours in Maine and
take a good long vacation?"

Kessler smiled wryly. "Margaret has ideas of her own along that line.
She's followed through on this with me all the way but she came down
to Washington to meet me today and she says she's going to drag me off
when I'm through here."

Brogan smiled his famous smile. "Good girl, Margaret. If she's here
and has a leash on you, I know I don't have anything to worry about.
There's nothing I admire more than a woman who has a mind and uses it.
I'll tell you something else," he said, standing and permitting
Kessler to rise this time. "I was truly sorry about Eileen Bennett's
death on this plane, but Eileen was getting along like me. Sarah
Pollitt's was the really tragic case, to have accomplished so much so
young and with that fearful handicap! From childhood, too, wasn't it?"

[Illustration]

"Actually, she was about seventeen. Someone threw a firecracker in a
car in which she was riding, but she could see partially with one
eye."

Brogan nodded. "But a beautiful woman, for all that. And then to have
achieved so much. I understand nothing about chemistry but I know her
international repute. She had just become head of the chemistry
department at Wellesley, hadn't she?"

"Radcliffe."

Brogan laughed loudly. "I might have known I couldn't trip you up. But
tell me this," he added slyly, "did you know that Dr. Pollitt had once
been a good friend of Bergmann?"

"Our former Commie on the plane? Yes, as a matter of fact, we came
across that quite accidentally. You did a good job, senator."

"Well, you know we have some sources not generally accessible."

"Then you undoubtedly found out that though Sarah Pollitt and friend
Bergmann knew each other well at one time she dropped him like a hot
cake when he suggested she do a little undercover work for the
Commies. Their being on the same plane was the sheerest coincidence."

Brogan stood with his hand on the door with led to the corridor. He
nodded. "That was a little hard to take, wasn't it? We really thought
we had something there for a while." He sighed. "It's like the whole
thing, Bob, irrational and unexplainable. And believe me, I hope I
haven't sounded critical of the job you did. I hope we can call on you
whenever we need really expert advice?"

"Of course, senator, though I don't feel much like an expert on
anything right now."

"You did your best, Bob." He patted him on the shoulder in farewell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kessler walked down a long marble corridor to a rotunda. His wife
waved to him from across a staircase. She looked pert and cool and
girlish in her ice-blue suit and perky hat. "Here, darling! Oh, you
look so discouraged! Did George give you a hard time? He can be a
brute when he wants to."

"Not really. He thinks I ought to call it quits."

"And don't you think so, dear?" she asked, taking his arm as they
started down the stairs.

"Who me?" He grinned with sudden boyishness. "You know me. Never say
die! If I thought we ought to give it up would I be trying to find
this old bag Valeria Schmitt or whatever her name is? Brogan was
right, that's just about as farfetched a notion as has come down the
pike in a long time."

"Well, it may be farfetched, but she's not an old bag. I called her to
make sure she'd be at home. I didn't know how long you'd take in
there. She was very excited that you were coming to see her."

"Did she know who I was?"

"Of course, even aside from the letters. She's been following the
investigation very carefully. She didn't seem to think it was at all
curious that you wanted to see her because she knew someone
twenty-five years ago."

Kessler laughed as they stepped out into the hot sunlight. "Well, if
she's not a bag she's a bat. The more I think about it the crazier it
seems. Suppose we get it over with now and start for Maine tonight.
We'll be all set to go."

"Good! Good! That's the way I like to hear you talk. We'll make it a
second honeymoon."

Margaret was still musing dreamily when they finally got to the car
and started off in the direction of Silver Spring, where Valeria
Schmitt lived in maiden retirement. "It will be just wonderful, dear,"
she said and then sighed. "Oh, but it reminds me of those poor
Valentes, going off on their honeymoon."

"Now, now. I'm the one who's supposed to be obsessed with the crash,
not you."

"Oh, but that was so sad. He was so handsome. And she was a pretty
little thing, too, if you could tell from the wedding pictures. And
then having postponed the wedding twice, too! It seems just like some
fate was dogging them."

Kessler chuckled. "I don't think mumps really qualifies as an evil
fate."

"No, but can you imagine! First him and then her! If it had been only
one or the other they would both be alive and happy today."

"Alive anyway. I talked to some of his friends who suggested he was a
mean one even before he had mumps." He smiled at his wife. "Even if he
was good-looking. And now will you look out for Miss Schmitt's number
before I pile us up and we miss out on our second honeymoon?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Schmitt proved to look as well as sound much younger than Kessler
knew her to be, a bright and plump little woman with very very blond
hair tightly curled. Margaret had come along into her little apartment
without much urging. Miss Schmitt had apparently been expecting both
of them because she had three flower-painted glasses out for lemonade.

"I suppose I'm old-fashioned," she was saying cheerfully before they
were even settled, "but I don't hold by cocktails. Nothing more
cooling than good old lemonade. Real lemons, too, not this bottled
stuff. You know what they say--you can take them out of the country
but you can't take the country out of them!" She laughed breathlessly.
"I've been living in the big city for twenty-five years now but I'm
still an Ioway girl. Get back almost every year, too, still perfectly
at home there. I'll be sitting out on the veranda next month drinking
lemonade and shooing flies like I'd never been away!" She laughed her
breathless laugh again.

Margaret was obviously enjoying herself as much as Valeria Schmitt.
Even Kessler was relaxed now, leaning back in the choice chair by the
window with his collar pulled open. His search _had_ been a neurotic
one, he decided, as he listened to Miss Schmitt's pleasant chatter. He
realized he would learn nothing here, but now he was not angry even
with himself.

Miss Schmitt had taken the first opportunity to explain that she was a
lot younger than her old boy friend, who had died in the crash at the
age of seventy-three. "Of course my family were against Bob Spencer
for that reason, too. He was almost fifteen years older than me."
Kessler suppressed a smile. He knew the difference in age was more
like ten years, but Miss Schmitt was secure in her blond, plump good
cheer. "It's a little too much," she went on, "fifteen years, but then
we never really did hit it off. Never really broke off, either." She
held up her hand, displaying a ring. "See. Just got it out a few
months ago. Haven't worn it for I don't know how many years. When I
left Iowa City--"

"I thought it was Keokuk?" Margaret interrupted. She was perfectly at
home with Valeria as she sipped her lemonade.

"No, honey." It was girl-talk now and Kessler was happy to let it go
on, feeling suddenly very tired. "We worked together as stenographers
in Iowa City. I was from right near there, but Bob was from Keokuk.
That's where he retired to. Anyway I got this job in Washington during
the war--World War II, that is--and I went back pretty often and saw
Bob but I was young and foolish at the time and kept putting off and
putting off the wedding and then it just never did happen. I offered
Bob his ring back but he wouldn't hear of it. Said maybe it would
still work out for us. Course by this time I knew it never would."

"Oh, I'm so sorry." Kessler caught the note of real sincerity in
Margaret's voice. "That seems too bad."

"Oh, why be sorry?" Valeria asked gaily. "I'm not. Bob was real sweet
in his way but he was a real stick-in-the-mud even when I first met
him."

"I understand he was actually a recluse in his later years," Kessler
said.

"Later years! Lord, he was a recluse when he was thirty-five. Worried
about everything. I never regret it. My friends used to say I was
snapping him out of it but I could never see much sign of it. Wore
gloves all the time to protect his hands and so he wouldn't get any
germs. It must have been the lemonade I was making a little while
ago, Mrs. Kessler, when you called, reminded me of one time when he
was visiting me back in Iowa. Just like I said, we were sitting on the
veranda drinking lemonade I do believe and swatting flies and Bob was
laughing and talking along with everyone else. Well, he was in a
rocker just like this one and I gave him the fly swatter because he
was laughing at me and I said, 'O.K., mister, you go ahead and try to
hit one if you're so smart.' And he gave a great big swing, laughing,
and that rocker went right over the edge of the veranda!" She laughed
her breathless laugh till she had to dab at her eyes.

Kessler and Margaret smiled at her innocent memories. Kessler
suppressed a yawn. "Oh, my," Margaret said, "the poor man! How
embarrassing if he was that shy."

Miss Schmitt examined her lacy handkerchief in sadly smiling
recollection. "I shouldn't laugh now," she said, "but it was so funny.
He didn't think so, of course! He stomped right out of the yard
without a word. I wouldn't have thought it was funny then if I'd known
how bad he hurt himself. He was laid up for about three weeks. I guess
that was the beginning of the end for us. Bob said every time he went
out something terrible happened to him. Poor fellow. He was right at
that. Just a bad luck artist."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Schmitt was prepared to reminisce indefinitely. Kessler decided
he had better come to the point. "I don't suppose, Miss Schmitt," he
asked, "that you and Mr. Spencer ever discussed politics?"

She shrugged. "Why, yes, I guess we did a little, being among
politicians in court and all. We were both good solid Republicans
though, so we didn't have much to say back in those days. I voted for
Roosevelt in 1940 but Bob didn't mind."

"This may sound farfetched, Miss Schmitt, but to your knowledge was
Mr. Spencer ever interested in Communism?"

"Bob?" she asked incredulously. "Bob interested in Communism? We
didn't even know what Communism was out there. Never! You can count
that out, mister."

"I'm sure we can," Kessler said. "Did he drink?"

"Not a drop! I wouldn't have put up with that myself."

"Would you ever have thought he was suicidally inclined?"

She thought about this one. "You mean he might have put a bomb on the
plane? Like that fellow did a few years ago?" She shook her head
slowly. "I can't believe Bob would kill anybody else just to kill
himself. What would be the point?"

"Exactly. He left no one behind him. Didn't even take out an insurance
policy. But, of course, people sometimes do crazy things."

Miss Schmitt's plump little face was silent and reflective. "Bob was
an odd one. And, of course, I haven't seen him for years but I got a
Christmas card and a little note every single year and he always
seemed perfectly sane to me. As for killing himself or anybody else,
I'd say he was much too timid a man for that. God forgive me if I'm
being cruel to an old friend who's gone now, but he was afraid to step
outside the house. I don't know how he got to work. He was always
getting sick or getting hurt and staying home for weeks. I think he
welcomed sickness just so he could hide at home safe." There were
tears of another sort in Miss Schmitt's eyes now. Kessler thought he
detected a brightness in his wife's eyes. "No," Miss Schmitt said,
"Bob was afraid of life. Just plumb scared." She refused to let the
tears flow. "Oh, but I'm being a terrible hostess! I have so few
visitors now. How about some more lemonade?"

Margaret flicked a glance at her husband and gave him the floor.
"You've been a wonderful hostess," Kessler said, rising, "and I want
to thank you for being good enough to talk to us."

"Well, I'm afraid I haven't been much help," she said, rising to
flutter over the glasses.

"That's not your fault," Kessler said. "As you know, we haven't come
up with an answer on this investigation, but at least they can't say I
didn't try."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Schmitt waved to them from the window of her apartment as they
got in their car. "She was sweet, you know," Margaret murmured as she
waved back gaily. "Sad about them, too."

"Well, investigation's over," Kessler smiled at Margaret as he drove
away. "Results, nil. Second honeymoon, anyone? We've got nothing to
keep us now. How do we get to the highway from here?"

"Yes, dear," Margaret murmured, still bemused by Miss Schmitt. "But
wasn't it a shame they never got married? He was such an unhappy man.
She might have brought him out of it."

"I doubt that," Kessler said, adjusting the sun blind against the
evening glare of the sun.

"Like she said, he was a hard luck artist. It's a personality type, it
doesn't change."

"What?" Kessler asked, maneuvering a corner in heavy traffic.

"Accident prone. You know, everything happened to him. Like those
mushrooms he got sick on just before he left home; falling off the
porch. No wonder he didn't want to leave home."

They drove in silence for some time, Kessler intent on the evening
flood of traffic, Margaret almost drowsing in the evening sunlight and
the cool of the breeze in her hair. When Kessler pulled up at a drug
store she said, "What?" sleepily.

"Phone call I have to make. You wait here," he said. She nodded.

Kessler got through to Senator Brogan's office quickly. "Hello, Miss
Persons? I'm glad you're still there. This is Bob Kessler. Do you
have any idea where the senator is now? Good, would you put me through
to him?"

Brogan sounded anything but sleepy. "Yes Bob? Finally wind it up?"

"I think maybe I have," Kessler said. "I've seen Miss Schmitt."

"Ah, Spencer's old flame? And what did you learn?"

When Kessler was finished telling him there was a long pause. "Are you
still there, George?" he asked.

Brogan's voice was heavy. "Yes, Bob, I'm still here. Where are you
calling from? A public phone? Well, I think maybe you'd better come up
here. We have more to say than you have dimes and it won't hurt to
keep this to ourselves if we can--or till we're sure. Better bring
your complete files. Good. One point, though! Did anything I said this
afternoon help? I wondered. I couldn't really believe it myself. If
you'd said something, I wouldn't have felt I was going crazy. I've
been sitting here wondering if I should see a head doctor."

Margaret smiled philosophically when Kessler told her he had to go
back to see Brogan. "Some second honeymoon," she complained. "Well,
anyway, what about that drink and a steak dinner. I'll get us a hotel
room. Maybe tomorrow, like I always say."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was nearly ten o'clock when Kessler and Brogan met Margaret at the
hotel dining room. "It's about time!" she declared. "I'm starving.
Hello there, George. What are you doing to my husband? Or vice versa?
We were going to go on a second honeymoon and now he has that
fiend-for-work look in his eye!"

"My dear Margaret," Brogan said, holding her hand and smiling
gallantly, "I must deeply apologize for keeping Bob. And I'm almost
frightened to say that it looks as though it will be for some time
longer. We will have to go back after dinner and it may be some days
before either of us has much free time."

Margaret looked at them suspiciously, with the brightness in her eye
that came from her first martini. "What are you two up to now? Some of
this top secret stuff? I might know! I can't get away from it! Never
mind, I'll worm it out of Bob when I get him alone. If that ever
happens!"

They carefully avoided any further reference to the investigation
until they were halfway through dinner in the nearly deserted dining
room. Margaret, mellowed by a second martini and all of her steak
which she ate, sighed. "Poor Miss Schmitt," she said. "I've been
feeling sorry for her all evening when I haven't been feeling sorry
for myself."

"Why Miss Schmitt?" Kessler asked, chewing.

"Oh, I shouldn't, I know. Bob Spencer would probably have been a worse
husband than you are. But at least I'm glad I went along with you to
visit her. I settled something that's been bothering me."

"What was that, dear?" Kessler asked, raising a juicy morsel of steak
to his lips.

"Why, that he was accident prone."

Kessler lowered his fork. "Yes, you mentioned that before," he said
carefully. "I was telling George about it. But why did you think he
might be?"

Margaret looked at their startled faces. She fluttered her hands.
"Well, everyone else on the plane was."

The three of them stared at each other. "Did I say something wrong?"
she asked nervously. "Well, they were, you know! The stewardesses both
had broken their legs. And the flight engineer got a black eye walking
into a door. You remember, Bob, you couldn't be sure how it happened,
but that must have been it. Even the pilot had cut himself shaving.
That very morning!"

Kessler and Brogan had stopped eating and were watching her intently.
"Stop staring," she said indignantly. "You're making me nervous.
What's wrong?"

"Nothing, dear," Kessler said quietly. "It's very interesting. Go on."

She looked at him suspiciously. "Well, when it comes to the
passengers! What do you mean? You know all this!"

"Go on," Brogan said.

"Well, one man was even in another plane crash before. I forget his
name."

"Pearlow," Kessler murmured.

"Pearlow, yes. And Dr. Pollitt who was blinded in an accident. I don't
really know about your friend Miss Bennett, senator."

Brogan nodded. "She qualifies."

"And the little girl, Barbara? Who had the automobile accident? The
veteran? Prewitt, who accidentally killed his brother? At least two of
those people were going to psychiatrists. Well, Mr. Spencer had me
worried because I didn't know if the mushrooms qualified him as
accident prone. Then, of course, when I found out about him definitely
I figured the Valentes qualified, too, with the mumps. The man who
broke his fingernail! Oh, just about everybody I think."

Kessler and Brogan glanced at each other. Brogan nodded. "Just about
everybody," he said. "And all on the same plane. It's something that
would happen once in ten thousand times. Like being dealt a solid suit
in bridge. But it can happen. It seems to have happened this time. And
I think maybe it's happened before. Maybe one person who was not
accident prone could make the difference. But when I think about a
plane taking off with those particular seventy-three people aboard it
really scares me."

Margaret looked from Brogan to Kessler, confused. Kessler put his hand
over hers on the table cloth and gripped it tightly. "Darling," he
said, "when we have finished our coffee, George and I are going back
to his office and I think maybe you'd better come along with us. We
have a lot of thinking to do, the three of us, and we could use a
feminine touch."

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Straw, by William J. Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST STRAW ***

***** This file should be named 30746.txt or 30746.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/7/4/30746/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
