Project Gutenberg's The Minus Woman, by Russell Robert Winterbotham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Minus Woman

Author: Russell Robert Winterbotham

Release Date: December 26, 2009 [EBook #30761]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MINUS WOMAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


  THE MINUS WOMAN

        _By
 Russ Winterbotham_


    What made the mass of this tiny asteroid fluctuate in defiance of
    all known physical laws? It was an impossible fact--but then, so was
    the girl who they knew couldn't exist!


Red Brewer had plugged his electric razor into the lab circuit and he
was running it over his pink jowls while I tried to discover what was
haywire about the balance scales.

"Have you noticed," Red said above the clatter of his shaver, "how much
less you have to shave on an asteroid?"

"I still shave every day," I said. There was something definitely wrong
with the scales. The ten-gram weight didn't balance two five-gram
weights. Instead it weighed 7.5 grams. And then, suddenly, the cockeyed
scales would get ornery and the two five-gram weights would weigh 7.5
grams and the ten-gram slug would weigh what it should.

"I don't," said Red. "I shave once a week. Back on terra I shaved every
day, but not here. And I don't even have a beard to show for it."

I didn't answer. There were tougher problems on my mind than whiskers,
but of course Red Brewer wouldn't understand them. He was good at
machinery, and with a camera, and for company on a lonely asteroid which
right now was 300,000,000 miles from the earth, but he certainly wasn't
a brain.

"What do you make of it, Jay?" he asked. "Oh, Mr. Hayling, I'm speaking
to you."

"Maybe it's your thyroid," I said. "Shut up."

"I'm twenty-seven," said Red. "Too old to have thyroids."

"You mean adenoids."

Red growled and shut off the razor. He ran his hand over his face. "I've
got a face like a school-kid's," he said. "If there was only a girl on
this god-forsaken piece of rock to see it."

There were no girls on Asteroid 57GM. This place didn't have anything
excepting a lonely shack with paper-thin walls made of special
heat-insulating material. There wasn't a blade of grass; not a puff of
wind; no soil for violets; not even a symmetrical shape, it was lopsided
like a beaten-up baseball. Or at least that was what I thought until
something happened to the balance scales.

The idea of sending Jay Hayling, which is me, and ruddy Red Brewer to
Asteroid 57GM, was simply to check up on some figures which said that
this little 10-mile chunk of rock didn't have the right mass. Twice it
had been clocked on near passages to Jupiter and twice it had behaved
differently, as if it had suddenly lost some of its mass. So Red and I
had been sentenced to fifteen months alone in space on an asteroid just
to find out that somebody had made a mistake in arithmetic.

The sonar equipment showed what kind of rock it was--iron and basalt.
And I'd made borings which checked. We'd tested the speed of escape
which was a good push so we had to be careful, and its force of gravity,
which wasn't much. And then I'd discovered that the balance in the lab
had a habit of being 25 per cent wrong one way or the other every time
I tried to use it.

Red put away his razor and went through the little door leading to the
living quarters. The partition was crystal clear plastic so I could see
him pulling himself along by the hand rail toward the bookcase. I knew
he would presently find himself something to read while I worked.

       *       *       *       *       *

We seldom walked in the laboratory. Our muscles, conditioned by
terrestrial gravity, were too strong for walking. We'd have bumped our
heads on the ceiling at every step and possibly we might even have
punched a hole in the roof, losing our air. So we sort of pulled
ourselves along by a system of hand rails on all of the anchored desks,
furniture and walls. It was like pulling yourself along the bottom of
the ocean by hanging onto rocks, since the air in the lab was dense
enough to support our almost weightless bodies.

I checked the scales every way I could and finally gave up. I'd tackle
the problem again tomorrow. Maybe something on the asteroid, some
magnetic rock or something, threw it off. I washed my hands in the
laboratory sink and then, while I wiped them on a towel, glanced at Red,
who was lying on his bunk reading. For the first time I noticed how
skinny he was getting. Lack of exercise, I presumed. We were going to
have to do something to build up our muscles again. I supposed I had
lost weight just as much as he had. It would be tough to weigh ourselves
here, since we had only the balance in the laboratory. Spring scales
wouldn't work on the asteroid--we wouldn't have weighed enough to
register, even though our mass was probably about the same as an average
man's on earth.

Red put the book aside, closed his eyes and smiled. My eyes fell on the
book for some reason. Then suddenly I saw a page flip over. I didn't
realize at first that this couldn't happen.

There wasn't any draft in the place, I was sure of that. A draft would
mean a leak in the laboratory and alarms would tell us when that
happened. There was no motion, nothing to cause a page in the book to
turn.

Another page turned and I was sure I wasn't dreaming. I pulled myself
over to the door, opened it a trifle.

"Red!" I called softly.

"Dollie!" He was dreaming. Dollie was one of the dozen or so girls he
was always talking about in his sleep.

I pulled myself to his side and punched him gently. Red woke up. "You're
a hell of a guy," he said.

"Yes," I said. "You were dreaming about Dollie. But I saw something
happen here and I wanted you to see it too." I pointed at the book. The
pages were still now. Suddenly one of them flipped over.

"Somebody, or something is reading your book," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

We didn't figure it out then and I wasn't even sure that I'd made the
right diagnosis, but things went on every day afterwards that left me
convinced there was something else living on this hunk of rock besides
Red and me. It didn't have mass, apparently, because we tried our best
to touch it.

Once when it got to fooling around with the laboratory balance, Red and
I encircled the balance with our arms and then squeezed together without
feeling a thing.

It wasn't energy, because we tried every instrument to detect
electricity, heat, light, and radio. But it was alive, because it moved.
It read books and monkeyed with the lab scales.

And at last I decided that maybe _it_ had something to do with the
apparent discrepancy in the asteroid's change in mass. After that I had
a great deal to work on.

Red began behaving queerly too. He swore that he was getting too small
for his clothing. His shoes, he said, were almost a size too large. I
was too busy to check, so I put it down as a loss in weight.

We'd spent a year on the asteroid when we were due to pass Mars. So our
first anniversary was spent in checking our movements with a telescope,
a camera and a chronometer. We discovered our mass--or that of Asteroid
57GM--had depreciated another 25 per cent. It now had only half the mass
it was supposed to have. This was too much of an error for even a grade
school student.

"I'll bet some astronomers back on earth will get redder than my hair
when we get home," Red said.

I shook my head. "It hasn't anything to do with their observations," I
said. "It's what is happening now to you and me. We're losing mass
someway."

There was only one way to check it and that was to weigh ourselves. So I
rigged up a rude sort of a balance by weighing out chunks of rock until
we had a mass equal to what we should weigh, placing them on a
teeter-totter arrangement I rigged up in the lab.

"It'll be close enough to learn if we've lost half our mass," I said.

Red showed a weight loss equal to about 20 pounds on earth. I had gained
a little weight. These figures were only relative, and dependent on
whether or not the rocks we'd used on the balance had lost mass also.
But something was wrong with Red and I decided to watch him carefully.

"Your scales are cockeyed," Red said. "I feel fine. Never felt better,
in fact. Except that I'm lonesome ... not that I don't enjoy your
company, pal, ole pal, but I'd like Dollie's better."

Something on the far side of the room caught my eye. It was along the
glass partition between the lab and the living room. It might have been
a reflection of some sort, because the sun was up and its beams were
coming right through the transparent roof at that moment. But for a
fleeting instant I thought I saw a figure there. A tall, shapely,
black-haired girl, dressed in a flowing robe of orange. The next instant
she was gone.

I said I thought it might be a reflection, but I was pretty sure it
wasn't. "Red," I said. "We've got company."

"Huh?"

"I'm sure of it, Red. There's somebody else here besides us."

"There's no one else. You're crazy." Red looked around the room. Then he
looked at me. His gaze was sharp and penetrating.

"You can't see it now," I said. "But I'm sure I saw something. A woman.
Over there." I pointed to where I'd seen the thing that might have been
a reflection.

"Maybe you'd better lie down, Jay. You've been working too hard. A year
out on this rock could make a man see King Solomon's harem."

"No, Red," I said. "Those funny things we saw, your book pages turning;
the cockeyed balance; maybe your loss of weight. They aren't natural.
Something is here and what I just saw makes me think it's human and it's
trying to get in touch with us."

Red's stomach muscles squeezed with laughter and he held onto a guard
rail to keep from being sent across the room by the exertion.

"What I saw was a woman, Red," I went on.

Red laughed out loud and hung on again. "I could use a babe," he said.
Suddenly he jerked. "Who hit me?" he asked. Across his face was a red
welt, the shape of a woman's hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

We called them "manifestations" after that and Red called her his ghost
sweetheart, although the slap had convinced him it wasn't a ghost. Red's
getting slapped was the first indication that perhaps this thing did
have matter of some sort, but its ability to remain invisible made it
appear that the matter wasn't the ordinary kind.

Finally I came up with some sort of an answer. It was just a crazy idea
and there was no way to prove that I was right. I tried to explain it to
Red, who didn't know much about atomic physics, but he seemed to get the
idea.

"You see, Red, it could be _negative_ matter," I explained.

"What's that?"

"Well, you know what an electron is, I suppose, a negatively charged
sub-atomic particle?"

Red nodded.

"And a proton, which is positively charged?"

Again he nodded.

"Well, scientists have learned that there could be positive electrons,
as well as negative, and negative protons. In other words each
sub-atomic particle has a 'minus quantity' counterpart."

"You're saying it, I'm believing it," said Red. "A guy's gotta believe
something."

"Well, this leads to a great deal of speculation. If these minus
quantities got together they might form a minus matter."

"You've got me in a hole, so I'm minus too."

"You don't have to understand it, but try to imagine that two universes
could exist side by side, one minus, one plus, and that neither could be
aware of the other. Every star, every planet and every speck of matter
could have its counterpart, but neither would be aware of that
counterpart's existence."

Red grinned and shook his head. "Crazy," he said.

"Yes, crazy. But dig this, supposing that some sixth sense made it
possible for one of our minus counterparts to get in contact with us
through extra-sensory perception."

"How'd they do it?" Red asked.

"I don't know. We don't know how to do it, but it may be that our
scientific progress wouldn't keep abreast of each other. We might know
more than our minus counterparts in some fields, and they might know
more in others. But their special knowledge enabled them to bridge the
gap briefly--long enough to see us, and watch us--"

"And read our books." Red nodded.

"And perhaps learn our language--remember you got slapped."

"I'll watch it," said Red.

"There's no reason why the gap couldn't be bridged. Science and minds
have done a lot of things that looked impossible."

We went to bed on that and all night long I dreamed of negative
universes, with suns like old Sol except that they shone black in bright
heavens and planets of space floating in vacuums of matter. Red must
have dreamed about it too, because he had a question over the dehydrated
ham and eggs the next morning.

"Does that explain the loss in mass for this asteroid?"

"I think it does. Either the method our minus counterparts have in
bridging the gap, or perhaps some sort of space warp that permits them
to do it. At any rate enough of the minus world has been projected
through to our side of the equation to displace the mass of this
planetoid. Our lab scales being haywire might be the result of a being's
nearness to it, or something."

Red didn't digest it all, but I could see he was thinking. "I wonder
what all this has to do with my whiskers," he mused.

We were busy making some further checks on the planetoid's mass later in
the day when Red got a glimpse of the vision I'd seen. Red didn't take
it quietly. He yelled loud and pointed.

I turned just in time to see her fade away. It was the same woman,
dressed the same. But this time she had been a bit more than a vapor.

Red forgot where he was and made a dive toward her. His body shot like a
bullet across the room, skimming over laboratory equipment, and his head
crashed solidly against the telescope.

Red literally bounced back halfway again. Then a long thin arm seemed to
reach out of nowhere and seize him by the jacket and hold him long
enough to stop him.

Red drifted down to the floor, knocked cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had happened so swiftly that I hadn't had time to move. Now I pulled
myself toward Red. The arm was still there in space, and it had added a
shoulder, a rather pretty shoulder. Next there was a body, clothed in
the flowing orange cape, and finally a woman's head. It was the same
one--the minus woman.

"It's true," I said.

The woman seemed to understand. "Yes," she said. "All that you told Red
Brewer is true, Jay Hayling. For you, I am a minus woman. For me, you
are a minus man. But we have bridged the gap. For the first time in
eternity, plus and minus, positive and negative, can meet on even
terms."

"Better not come too close," I said.

"Nothing will happen," she replied. "We are now alike." She stooped
toward the fallen figure on the floor. "Help me with this child. He's
unconscious."

"Child!" I said. "If he's a child, they grow 'em big in the minus
world."

But as I lifted Jay off the floor I wondered if he was as big as I'd
always thought. It wasn't his weight. Nothing weighed very much on this
asteroid, but it was his frail body. He seemed to be a boy of sixteen,
rather than a man stationed 300,000,000 miles in space.

I carried him out of the laboratory into the living quarters and placed
him on his bunk. I loosened his clothing, noting at the time that he had
been right about his garments not fitting him.

"You've made him lose weight," I said.

"What makes you think so?" the woman asked.

"Because every screwy thing that has happened since we came here a year
ago must have an explanation."

The woman smiled. "Don't think too harshly of me." She looked very solid
now. Her body had lost that tenuous look. She was no longer nebulous and
cloud-like. "Certain things were necessary in order for me to proceed
safely through the gap between the positive and negative worlds," she
explained.

I looked at Red again. His face was smooth and I knew he hadn't shaved
in more than a week. "You've made him younger," I said. "Well, he
shouldn't kick at that."

The woman nodded. "I turned the young man inside out. In a moment the
transition will be complete. You will be our next entrance to this
universe...."

From Red's bunk came a wail. A bawl, like a tiny baby. A dying baby.

Some people die of age. Red died an infant. As for the minus woman--she
was murdered on an asteroid.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Imagination Stories of Science and
    Fantasy_ July 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor
    spelling and typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Minus Woman, by Russell Robert Winterbotham

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MINUS WOMAN ***

***** This file should be named 30761.txt or 30761.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/7/6/30761/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
