The Project Gutenberg eBook, George Borrow, by Thomas Seccombe, Edited by
James Thursfield


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: George Borrow
       Times Literary Supplement, 10th July 1903


Author: Thomas Seccombe

Editor: James Thursfield

Release Date: January 7, 2010  [eBook #30887]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEORGE BORROW***


Transcribed from the July 10th, 1903, Times Literary Supplement by David
Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org





                          GEORGE BORROW. {213a}


It is a singular coincidence, perhaps, that during one and the same
summer we should be celebrating centenaries of Samuel Pepys and George
Borrow.  Pepys died in the early summer of 1703; Borrow was born in July,
1803.  Unlike each other in almost every respect, they are _dui palor_,
{213b} as Borrow would say, in one very material point.  The reputation
of each of them has risen to such a point that, except for injudicious
and exaggerated praise, it can have little to fear in the future; and in
each case this reputation is based primarily upon autobiography.  Among
the world's autobiographers the author of "Lavengro" is entitled, we feel
sure, to rank with St. Augustine, Cellini, Pepys, Rousseau, Franklin;
and, for truthfulness, it is very probable, if we could only estimate it
properly, that he would have to be put at the top of the class.  His
nearest competitor in this respect would undoubtedly be Pepys, and the
veracity in both cases not the result of a double share of innate
truthfulness, but very largely an accident, due to lack of invention and
an absence of that powerful literary style which in the case of a Leigh
Hunt or a Stevenson distorts everything that passes through it.  In Pepys
the malignity of the literary fairy is more than compensated by the
worthy secretary's insatiable appetite for life; in Borrow by the
_wanderlust_ or extraordinary passion and faculty for adventure, which
makes his best books such an ambrosial hash of sorcery, Jews, Gentiles,
gipsies, prisons, half-in-halves, _cosas de Espana_--what you will.

George Henry Borrow, to give him for once his full baptismal name, was
born at East Dereham, "a beautiful little town in the western division of
Norfolk," on July 5, 1803.  His father, who came of an old Cornish
family, was in his forty-fifth year when Borrow was born, having married
ten years previously Anne Perfrement, of a family which had migrated from
Dauphine in the days of Dutch William.  The father was captain in a
marching regiment, the West Norfolk Militia.  Like Sterne's therefore,
Borrow's early life was nomadic, and his school-life was broken between
Edinburgh, Clonmel, and Norwich.  But his real mentors were found in this
last city, where he came in contact with a French _emigre_ named
d'Eterville.  Here, too, he fell under the influence of "godless Billy"
Taylor, and dreamt of writing plays and poems and abusing religion.
Here, too, while he ought to have been studying law, he was claiming
acquaintance with gipsies, bruisers, and shady characters, such as the
notorious Thurtell.  A more dangerous influence to Borrow than any,
perhaps, was that of Sir John Bowring, a plausible polyglot, who
deliberately used his facility in acquiring and translating tongues as a
ladder to an administrative post abroad.  Borrow, as was perhaps natural,
put a wrong construction upon his sympathy, and his apparently
disinterested ambition to leave no poetic fragment in Russian, Swedish,
Polish, Servian, Bohemian, or Hungarian unrendered into English.  He
determined to emulate a purpose so lofty in its detachment, and the
mistake cost him dear, for it led him for long years into a veritable
_cul de sac_ of literature; it led also to the accentuation of that
pseudo-philological mania which played such havoc with the ordinary
development of rational ideas in a man in many respects so sane as
Borrow.

An entirely erroneous belief in the marketable value of Danish ballads,
Welsh triads, Russian folk-songs, and the like in rococo English
translations after the Bowring pattern led Borrow to exchange an
attorney's office for a garret in Grub-street.  His immediate ambition
was something between Goldsmith's and Chatterton's ballads, Homeric odes,
epics, plays; he was, at all hazards, to write something grand--"to be
stared at, lifted on peoples' shoulders."  He found his Griffiths in Sir
Richard Phillips, the radical alderman and philanthropic sweater, under
whose tender mercies he rapidly developed a suicidal tendency, until in
May, 1825, a windfall of 20 pounds enabled him to break his chain and
escape to the highway and the dingle and the picturesque group of
moochers and gipsies enshrined for ever in the pages of "Lavengro."  The
central portion of this marvellous composition is occupied by the Dingle
episode, in which Lavengro (the "word-master," Borrow's gipsy name for
himself) is revealed to us in conflict with "the flaming Tinman" and in
colloquy with his Romany friend, Jasper Petulengro, with a subtle
papistical propagandist, "the man in black," with the typical gipsy chi,
Ursula, and with the peerless Isopel Berners.  His account of his
relations with her we take to be strictly and almost literally accurate.
He was powerfully attracted by the magnanimity of spirit no less than by
the physical charm of this Brynhildic damsel, tall, straight, and blonde,
with loose-flowing flaxen hair, and with a carriage, especially of the
neck and shoulders, which reminded the postilion of a certain marchioness
of his acquaintance.  But Borrow was of a cold temperament, a despiser
and mistruster of young women, whom he regarded primarily as invaluable
repositories of nursery lore, folk-song, tradition, and similar toys,
about which his male friends were apt to be reticent.  The attraction was
so strong that he had serious thoughts of emigrating with "the beauteous
Queen of the Dingle," but he dallied with the idea with characteristic
waywardness until it was too late.  He sought to postpone awkward
decisions, to divert himself and amuse Isopel by making his charmer learn
Armenian--the language which he happened at the time to be studying.
Isopel bore with it for some time, but the imposition of the verb "to
love" in Armenian convinced her that the word-master was not only insane,
but also inhuman.  Love-making and Armenian do not go well together, and
Belle could not feel that the man who proposed to conjugate the verb "to
love" in Armenian was master of his intentions in plain English.  It was
even so.  The man of tongues lacked speech wherewith to make manifest his
passion; the vocabulary of the word-master was insufficient to convince
the workhouse girl of one of the plainest meanings a man can well have.
When the distracted Borrow had reached the decision that it was high time
to give over his "mocking and scoffing," and returned with this resolve
to the dingle, Isopel Berners had quitted it, never to return.  She ran
away to the nearest sea-port, and took shipping to America.  Lavengro
with some anguish steeled his heart against following her.  The scene of
these transactions was a wooded glen or dingle a few miles from
Willenhall, in Staffordshire, where Lavengro and Isopel were encamped in
their respective tents, having as their neighbours the gipsy clan of
which Jasper was the chief.  Upon the whole the Dingle chapters are
perhaps the most brilliant and the most enduring that Borrow ever
achieved.  Their interest is greatly enhanced by the fact that they are
probably a naked transcript from actual fact, for Borrow was a poor hand
at invention.  He rarely, if ever, invented a character.  His surest
source of inspiration was the unadorned truth.

After the experience of a summer in the open, Borrow, who was now
twenty-two, relapsed into the indifferent versification of Danish ballads
and Welsh bards, was severely fleeced in obscure journeyings in Southern
Europe, and so gained some experience for future use, vainly sought a
post, on the strength of his linguistic attainments, as an assistant in
the British Museum Library, and was reduced to writing reactionary
political leaders for a Norwich paper; he was, in fact, waiting, like Mr.
Micawber, for something to turn up, or, in his own graphic phrase,
"digging holes in the sand and filling them up again."

His deliverance was effected in rather a singular manner.  About 1833 he
became acquainted with the Skeppers of Oulton Hall, in that pleasant
stretch of country which borders on the river Waveney.  By Mrs. Clarke
(afterwards Mrs. Borrow), the widowed sister of the owner of the Hall, he
was introduced to the Rev. Francis Cunningham, rector of Pakefield, a
fine type of the Evangelical clergyman of a past generation, who had
married the sister of Joseph John Gurney.  It seemed to this good man
that Borrow's gift of tongues might well be employed in the service of
the Bible Society, of which the famous Norfolk Quaker was an influential
member.  The hour of the former would-be martyr to infidelity had now
come; he was taken into the regular service of the society upon an
average salary of about 250 pounds, in addition to expenses, and was
employed as editor, translator, and colporteur of Bibles in strange
lands.  The labours of the next eight years of his life were as fruitful
and honourable as those of the preceding eight had been desultory and
obscure.  His first commission was to go to St. Petersburg and there edit
and superintend the setting up and printing of Lipoftsof's version of the
New Testament into Manchu.  Borrow acquired the language and performed
his task with an almost incredible expedition.  He also learned Russian,
and in the summer of 1835 proposed to the society that he should himself
distribute the work which he had seen through the press upon the confines
of the Far East.  This scheme was scotched by the refusal of the Russian
Government to grant him the necessary authorization and passports.  But
Borrow's energies were transferred to a project which scarcely, if at
all, less deserves the epithet Quixotic.  It was to disseminate a
Castilian translation of the Vulgate (made by Father Scio at Valencia
between 1790 and 1793) in Spain and Portugal.  To disperse Bibles in
Papua or in Park-lane were, it might be argued, an enterprise fully as
hopeful as to scatter them in Galicia or La Mancha; but this is neither
here nor there, and the stimulus that was lacking in other directions was
abundantly supplied to the society and their emissary by the fact that,
according to the _regla quinta_ of the old Index, all Spanish versions of
the Bible or of any part of it were absolutely forbidden, and that as a
necessary consequence the Bible was a book as unfamiliar in Spain as it
was held to be dangerous and revolutionary.  Spain was to Borrow what the
Harley Ministry was to Swift.  It seemed to develop in him an almost
superhuman activity and power; and, fond of cant as Borrow's employers
too often were, it is infinitely to their credit that they not only
tolerated but even applauded the unconventional epistles which he wrote
to them of his exploits during his three long journeys in Spain, which
with two brief intervals occupied him from November, 1835, down to April,
1840.  These letters with the addition of a few chapters and a number of
insignificant changes made up "The Bible in Spain," which was published
by John Murray on December 10, 1812, when "El Gitano," as the
enthusiastic Ford dubbed the author, literally woke up to find himself
famous.  His experience for a season was that of "the man Sterne"; he
dined with peers, Ambassadors, and Bishops, and, like Major Pendennis,
was particularly complacent with Bishops.  We might here for a moment
compare his position to that of Johnson in 1763.  He had gone down into
the arena and fought his wild beasts, and had come up triumphant, as
Johnson had done after the Dictionary.  He still had difficulties to meet
and debts to face, for he had gradually become estranged from "the
sub-committee," and the Bible Society suddenly found that "no sphere
remained open in which his services could be utilized."  Fortunately, he
had provided for his future, not by obtaining a pension, but by marrying,
in April, 1840, an old ally of his, Mary Clarke, a widow with a good
jointure (over 400 pounds a year), a skilful hand at dumplings and
treacle posset, and "an excellent woman of business."  He was now fifteen
years older than when he had "lost" Isopel.  The motives which prompted
this scorner of matrimony to marry a woman seven or eight years his
senior were similar, it may be surmised, to those which actuated Disraeli
on his marriage.  The compact was based upon convenience and mutual
esteem, and there is no reason to doubt that it conduced not only to
Borrow's comfort and security, but also to his happiness.  There were no
children.  The "daughter" whose accomplishments Borrow celebrated in the
exordium to "Wild Wales" was his stepdaughter, Henrietta Clarke.  He
seemed now in an enviable position, with a small but agreeable freehold
on the banks of Oulton Broad, able to indulge in "idleness and the pride
of literature" to his heart's content.  If he had had a "club" or a
Boswell about him, he might still have been tolerably happy.  But he was
not a clubbable man, Borrow!  Nevertheless it was during the years that
followed that, like Johnson, he achieved his best title to fame, the
wondrous five volumes of autobiography so capriciously planned and so
strangely entitled "Lavengro--Romany Rye."  The stimulus in his case was
largely, we believe, if not mainly, pecuniary.  "Money is our best
friend" he wrote to his wife in 1844.  He wanted a purse of his own to
travel and give dinners with, for the edge of episcopal hospitality was
already wearing off.  He desired too, no doubt, to put a coping stone to
his fame.  Already in January, 1843, he wrote to his publisher that he
had begun upon a Robinson Borrow, and Murray, Ford, and other friends
threw up their caps.  The publisher may have well seen a veritable gold
mine in prospect.  One has only to imagine the fervent curiosity which
the personal element in "The Bible in Spain," so suggestive of mystery
and romance, must have exalted in the reading public of 1843, to perceive
that any such anticipation was fully warranted by the facts of the case.
Here was a book which bore upon its title-page its passport to Sunday
reading as a good, serious, missionary work, but for which it was
manifest, as the surprised and delighted reader proceeded, that not
Bishop Heber or the good Schwartz, but Mendoza and Lesage had been taken
as models.  May not people well have wondered (the good, pious English
folk, to whom "luck" was a scandal, as the Bible Society's secretary
wrote to Borrow) what manner of man this muleteer-missionary might be?
The incongruity was only heightened by familiarity with Borrow's
Pharaoh-like visage, abundant grey hair, and tall blonde Scandinavian
figure, which reminded those who came under his spell of those roving
Northmen of the days of simple medieval devotion, who were wont to
signalize their conversion from heathen darkness by a Mediterranean
venture, combining the characters of a piratical cruise and a pious
pilgrimage.  But if publisher and client were justified in believing that
they had discovered an autobiographical El Dorado, they were, none the
less, to be sadly undeceived.

To whatever cause the disappointment may be attributed, it was certainly
not due to any lack of pains on the part of Don Jorge.  The labour which
he bestowed upon his Life was immense, quite disproportionate to his
previous efforts.  "The Gypsies in Spain," for instance, was built up
upon already existing jottings, extracts, and notes, very loosely thrown
together; while "The Bible in Spain" itself was, in regard to its
composition, nothing more than an _olla podrida_ of journalized letters.
But he wrote "Lavengro," as it were, with his life's blood.  It cost him
the same agony that parts of "David Copperfield" cost Dickens, while he
had none of Dickens's trained fluency or descriptive power.  His lack of
ease in writing often gives a wrong impression of insincerity or
artificiality.  Most of his apostrophes, even the most strained, are
expressions of genuine feeling, which he was simply incapable of
assimilating to the prevailing tone of the book, that of a _novela
picaresca_.  His determination to be original and to tell the truth, to
avoid all padding and second-hand ideas, kept him on the rack; yet he
persevered, working hard at the Life with intervals of discouragement for
no less than six years.  "Lavengro" eventually appeared, in three
volumes, in February, 1851, and was received not merely with coldness and
unconcern, but with hostile carping and even derision.  The critics and
Borrow pronounced themselves mutually disillusioned.  It was natural that
a man like Borrow should magnify and should misinterpret this unexpected
blow.

The attitude of his critics was due to a very complex system of causes.
The English have always been the most self-complacent of peoples, and
1851 was perhaps the one year in the whole of our history when this
little weakness reached its climax.  The Oxford Movement, with Newman and
Ward as its prophets, had been succeeded by the Manchester Movement, upon
which Cobden and Macaulay had long been busily engaged in shedding the
most brilliant rays of the prevailing Whig optimism; factories, railways,
penny postage, free trade, commercial expansion, universal peace and
plenty, industrial exhibitions, religious toleration, general
education--these were the watchwords of the day, and all these things
alike were repulsive in the highest degree to George Borrow.  He was as
conservative as a gipsy or a tramp, while his hatred of novelty was
worthy of the race among whom _Vaya usted con Dios_, _y que no haya
Novedad_! is a common form of valediction.  His hatred of aesthetic
culture, of sentimental toleration, and of the modern woman amounted to a
positive mania.  Of the great writers of his own century he never spoke
unless it were to condemn, as in the case of Scott, Wordsworth,
Thackeray, and Keats, of whom he once asked, "Have they not been trying
to resuscitate him?"  In his conversations with Agnes Strickland and Miss
Cobbe, as recorded by the latter, he appears to have behaved like an
escaped lunatic, while, upon the occasion of his meeting with Anna
Gurney, we know that he literally took to flight and ran without stopping
from Sheringham to the Old Tucker's Inn at Cromer.  An interview with
Mrs. Browning or George Eliot would have probably driven him stark
staring mad.  Another stumbling block to the critics of 1851 was the
peculiar dryness, if we may so describe it, of Borrow's style.  He could
respond to the thrill of natural beauty.  He could enjoy and find
utterance for his mood when it came upon him, just as he could enjoy a
tankard of old ale or linger to gaze upon a sympathetic face; but he
refused to pamper such feelings, still more to simulate them; he refused
to allow himself to become the creature of literary or poetic ecstasy; he
refused to indulge in the fashionable debauch of _dilettante_ melancholy.
His life was in many ways the reverse of normal, but he insisted in
writing about it quite naturally, "as if there were nothing in it."  It
is perfectly true, then; Borrow is dry.  What needs to be appreciated is
that his dryness is not that of dry rot, but the dryness of high
elevation, of a somewhat solitary and craggy humour--the dryness of
"Robinson Crusoe," of "Gil Blas," of "Hadji Baba," and, we might add, of
"Don Quixote."  There is an absence of verdure.  You will not find much
sentiment in Borrow.  As to word-painting, picturesque glamour and
deference to the prejudices of earnest people, a quality so dearly prized
by Englishmen of every rank and period, Borrow would have none of them.
You will find none of them in his works; but you will find "part of the
secret, brother," especially in the Dingle.  For there Borrow is at his
best, in the open air, among the gipsies--with Jasper, Pakomovna, Tawno,
Ursula, the Man in Black, and Belle Berners, interlocutors in dialogues
of the greenwood unrivalled since the heyday of the forest of Arden.
Once more "Lavengro" badly belied the expectations of those who were
looking out for another "Eothen"; and finally, apart the author's
objectionable and reactionary prejudices, there were other and obvious
faults about the book (mainly of literary detail, style, and arrangement)
which were abundantly manifest to the strenuous critics of 1851.  What
these gentry did not perceive was the unique character of the book--its
truth, its reality, its open-air quality, its distinctive humour, its
dramatic power, the genius which revealed to Borrow instinctively the
literary form and the picaresque manner which formed the right, nay the
inevitable, setting of the particular story that he had to tell.

Borrow's previous success only served to emphasize the bitterness of his
defeat, for so he regarded the failure of his originality to carry his
darling "Lavengro" through the breakers.  He complained that he had "had
the honour" of being rancorously abused by every unmanly scoundrel, every
sycophantic lackey, and every political and religious renegade in the
kingdom.  His fury was that of an angry bull tormented by gnats.  His
worst passions were aroused, his most violent prejudices confirmed.  But
the abuse did not divert him by a hairbreadth from his preconceived plan.
He proceeded with deliberation to carry on in "The Romany Rye" the story
so abruptly suspended at the close of the hundredth chapter of
"Lavengro."  The first chapters of "The Romany Rye" (which was not
actually published until May, 1857) are quite equal to anything that
Borrow ever wrote.  The book falls off a little towards the close, which
is, if possible, even more abrupt and inconclusive than that of
"Lavengro" itself.  In the appendix, the bigotries, hatreds, and
centrifugal propensities which made up the George Borrow of 1850-57 were
emphasized and underlined for the benefit of the flunkeys, vipers, and
"yahoos" who had dared to asperse his autobiography.  He never carried
his story on from 1825 to 1832 or wrote the once projected "Bible in
Russia"; perhaps he never meant to do so; but, even if he had, we more
than doubt whether they would have approached in value the first 116
chapters of his immortal autobiography.  His remaining work was the
detailed journal of a vacation tour in "Wild Wales," which was in no way
inferior to its predecessors in literary value, though it is considerably
below them in general interest.  Wild people and old word-music, in its
"native wood-notes wild," were a passion with Borrow to the last, and
helped to save him from himself.  He suffered terribly from horror of
death, religious gloom ("the horrors"), solitariness, and disappointment.
He experienced a series of rebuffs, failing in succession to obtain a
Consulship, a seat on the quorum, employment in China, and a
manuscript-hunting mission from the British Museum.  His unrivalled
qualifications as a linguist failed to obtain for him posts for which he
was eminently fitted, but to which he saw inferior men preferred.  If a
roving commission or an administrative post could have been found for him
abroad, by preference in the East as he himself desired, hard work might
have gone far to exorcise his melancholy, and we might have had from his
pen contributions to the study of Eastern life that would have added
lustre to a group of writers already represented in England by Curzon and
Kinglake, Lane and Morier, Palgrave and Burton.  With Burton's love of
roving adventure, of strange tongues, and of anthropology in its widest
sense, the author of "The Bible in Spain" had many points in common.  As
it was, with brief intervals of solitary excursion in the "Celtic fringe"
or the Near East, Borrow remained glooming at home, working himself up
into a state of nervous excitement bordering upon dementia about a
neighbour's dog or a railway bisecting his wife's land.  The gloom, of
course, was not chronic.  There were days upon which he was himself
again, the old George Borrow.  Generally speaking, his days and years
were passed in a moody inactivity, now at Oulton, then at Yarmouth, next
in London, finally at Oulton again, where he "died, as he had lived,
alone" on July 26, 1881.  It seemed for the time as if he had outlived
his reputation.  Appearances are proverbially deceptive.

George Borrow's life and works are one and the same thing.  Few great
writers have been more persistently autobiographical than Borrow was.
Boswell, said Johnson once, had only two subjects, Dr. Johnson and James
Boswell, and he, the Doctor, was heartily sick of both; but Borrow had
only one subject--himself, from which he practically never wandered.  The
merry gests and marvellous exploits of the incomparable George
Borrow--these form the unique theme of our Gitano Crusoe.  But it is not
enough to say that Borrow's autobiographical methods are unique.  His
life is presented to us in four panels, each as unlike the others as it
is possible to be in size, shape, texture, and surface.  The scale varies
as much as that of an ordnance map, sometimes 25 inches to the mile, at
others five miles to the inch.  The colours upon the palette are artfully
changed, details are sometimes obtruded, at others significantly hidden.
A casual glance obscures rather than reveals the fact that, whether he is
writing of his early life and struggles ("Lavengro," i.-lviii.), of one
vivid Bohemian episode of his early manhood ("Lavengro"--"Romany Rye"),
of the crowning triumph of his maturity ("Bible in Spain"), or of a
vacation tour during the autumn of a disappointed life ("Wild Wales"),
Borrow was always working upon the same model, with the same desperate
and conscientious zeal, with the same extraordinary gust and vigour, with
the same genius, the same bias, the same limitations.

As a man of letters he must be judged primarily as a biographer, and, if
this be done, it will be found that Borrow has achieved the great object
of biography; he has transmitted a great personality.  The blemishes in
his work are not particularly hard to find.  Inadvertently we may have
been betrayed into indicating one or two of them.  But it is not by any
means safe ground.  With the exception of Jane Austen (and temporarily
speaking, perhaps Charles Dickens) there is hardly any literary character
whom it is so dangerous to approach without passports and periphrases
(securing retreat, if necessary) and plentiful kow-tows as George Borrow.
Among all literary clansmen you shall hardly find one more implacable,
more fierce, or more blindly fanatical than your Borrovian.  Charles Lamb
is almost the only author we can think of (out of Scotland) who is
worshipped by his admirers with quite the same canine sort of affection.
But the cult of Lamb is restricted largely to briefless Templars, to
University men and "Oxford M.A.'s"; the Borrovian is drawn from a lower
social stratum, from printers, librarians, booksellers, and others who
seldom read books, from indexers, dictionary makers, and such harmless
drudges of literature.  To men of such close and restricted horizons the
breath of the Romany Rye is as that of "the wind on the heath, brother."
Hence the stern and unbending jealousy of their cult.  Real literary
enthusiasts of advanced years are almost as rare in our streets as
elderly naval men of the peculiar type discovered by Mr. Gilbert.  Yet a
chance word in a London thoroughfare has before now elicited this
ingenuous confession of faith: "I'd walk any distance to see anything
belonging to George Borrow or to read anything fresh of his.  Lord bless
you, I almost worship that man!"




Footnotes:


{213a}  It was not the policy of the Times Literary Supplement to give
the name of the author.  For completeness the author is Thomas Seccombe,
and the editor of the TLS. at the time was James Thursfield.--DP.

{213b}  Two brothers.  See "Gypsies in Spain," Preface to Second Edition.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEORGE BORROW***


******* This file should be named 30887.txt or 30887.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/0/8/8/30887



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

