Project Gutenberg's The Educated Negro and His Mission, by W. S. Scarborough

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Educated Negro and His Mission
       The American Negro Academy. Occasional Papers No. 8

Author: W. S. Scarborough

Release Date: February 11, 2010 [EBook #31255]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EDUCATED NEGRO AND HIS MISSION ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Stephanie Eason, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.









  The American Negro Academy.

  OCCASIONAL PAPERS NO. 8.


  The Educated Negro
  and His Mission.

  BY W. S. SCARBOROUGH.


  PRICE FIFTEEN CENTS.

  WASHINGTON, D. C.:
  Published by the Academy,
  1903




The Educated Negro and His Mission.


Human thought is like a pendulum. It sways from belief to belief, from
theory to theory, from plan to plan, and the length of its vibrations is
governed by a multitude of contending forces operating from both within
and without. Two of these influences, in the present age, are all
potential. One is the ardent desire to find the best ways and means by
which the human race may hasten on its varied development, and the other
is the strenuous determination to discover what may be styled the
"Northwest" passage to that coveted result.

The consequence is that, in this determined reach for all that humanity
craves for itself and for its civilization, the oscillations of thought
and endeavor are oftimes marked by notable extremes. Especially has this
been true in lines of education. Again and again has it been sought to
wheel the educational car upon new tracks where exaggerated views,
revolutionary ideas, radical methods have caused the eyes of the world
to be focused upon the attempt, and no movement within the arc that the
world's opinions have traversed has been unnoticed.

These changing sentiments in regard to education have been most
noticeable in their bearing upon the Negro race. It is conceded that
material tendencies are characteristic of the present age. Romance,
sentiment, idealism in life and letters, struggle as they may, are swept
aside by the vigorous commercialism that has taken possession of the
nation at large. Meat has become more than life and raiment more than
body. One question is being intensely pressed forward--_how to learn a
living?_ and the swing of the pendulum concerning the Negro's education
has swept a degree beyond any heretofore measured.

That manual training is needful no one will deny for a moment; that some
of all races must inevitably be sons of toil is readily admitted; and
that such education has its share in the development of every race there
is no contention. We all know that Learning and Labor traveled hand in
hand, with the emphasis upon the former, when the Anglo Saxon first
wrestled with the wilderness of America. We know too that when the
desert wastes were changed to smiling plains the ways of the two drifted
apart, and learning took the path for culture and high scholarship,
untrammeled, while labor plodded on, gaining slowly comparative ease in
its varied lines. It is only when limitation is placed upon a race that
objection comes--when one race is selected for more than a fair share of
experimentation in the exploitation of a theory. Then danger seems
imminent. In this case the danger lies in the tendency to lose sight of
Negro scholarship--of Negro higher learning. There are other questions
of equal importance to that of how to earn a living, and that college
president who expressed it in these words "How to live on what one
earns--how to live higher lives," understood well their relative worth
when pre-eminence was claimed for the latter, and pointed to a fact too
largely ignored--that the lessons which teach these last mentioned come
from a different training from that represented by industrial training
alone.

We repeat that the suggestions bearing upon the education of the Negro
race have caused too decided a swing of the pendulum in many quarters
and higher education is in danger of being swallowed up, if not to a
great extent abandoned, in the extreme importance attached to that other
education we denominate as Industrial.

The error arises in confounding race with the individual, which is not
only radically unphilosophic, but morally wrong. The recognition of
individual limitation is right and proper, and it is the individual that
must be considered. As Dr. Ward has pertinently observed, "To the man
who wants to lift a mass of people out of lower into higher conditions
they are people, individual people, not races," and he adds further with
just emphasis, "When it comes to nurture and education they are to be
considered as individuals, each to be lifted up and their children
surrounded by a superior environment." Now, this cannot be done if
limitations are set which must by the very nature of things press
heavily upon the individual. The race must be left free as air to take
in higher learning.

Still, it is true that with a general change in ideas as to
education--its use and end--higher education, pure scholarship, has
everywhere been placed upon the defensive. President Hadley has felt
compelled to say that it must be prepared to prove its usefulness. This
being true, so much the more must Negro scholarship be prepared to prove
its right to continuance, to support and to freedom of choice.

The educated Negro is an absolute fact. The day is past when his ability
to learn is scoffed at. But on the other hand is born that fear that he
may go too far--excel or equal the Anglo-Saxon,--and that fear is a
prime motive in the minds of many who seek to hedge the onward path of
the race. But this path will not be hedged. This educated class, though
few in number, has been keeping for years the torch aloft for the race.
It must be with us for the future. It has a mission in the world and it
is working in a brave endeavor to fulfill that mission. For the good of
the whole country this class must multiply, not decrease in number.

There are no two definitions of a scholar to be applied to different
races. The Negro scholar must be the same as any other--endowed as
Milton would have him "with that complete and generous education, that
which fits a man to perform justly, skilfully and magnanimously all the
offices, both private and public, of peace and war." And he should have,
in order to meet this requirement, what Emerson has emphasised as
necessary--"the knowledge that comes from three great fields--from
nature, from books and from action."

The Negro like any other scholar is not the man who has simply been
through college, but the one "through whom the college has been"--the
one who has not only gathered from contact with college life varied
stores of knowledge, but who has grown in strength of character and
breadth of culture; one who has become imbued with the spirit of high
ideals; one who does not scorn the old-fashioned virtues of truth,
honesty and virtue; one who has views crystalized into definite aims;
one who has a settled purpose in life; one who is strenuously determined
to realize a worthy ambition; one who has both microscopic and
telescopic capacity, able to look into the minutest details and sweep a
broad range with clear vision; and one (slightly changing a potent
phrase) whose "reach upward is ever exceeding his grasp." Added to this
the Negro scholar above all must be one who makes himself a reforming
force for the world's betterment. Here is the Negro's opportunity--to
combine in himself those characteristics Mr. Austin mentioned not long
ago--the purely scholarly qualities of the German, the statesmanlike
qualities of the English and then to be a _propagandist_.

The Negro who is an educated man must be a practical man, and zealous in
getting to work to show that thinking and doing go together. If the
world needs such men from the white race, so much the more are educated
Negroes needed. Educated men are the ones to take a place in affairs,
national and municipal, aiding to solve great problems, cure great evils
and guide the destinies of a people. What else can it mean when we see
such a scholar as President Seth Low step from the administration of
college affairs to the administration of the affairs of a great city in
a righteous endeavor to help cleanse a corrupt government? Again,
President Roosevelt takes up the reins for the entire nation after
active service in literature, in camp, on field and in the executive
chair of a great state. Still again we instance Dr. Gladden who has
shown in the west what a scholar's service may and should be to his
city, when he chose to sit in its council. These examples can be
multiplied many times to show that the educated man has taken for his
motto that highest one--"Ich dien"--I serve--a service by leading and
made both necessary and fitting by attainments and worth.

This idea of service to the race is peculiarly the mission of the
educated Negro. In no other way can higher education be justified for
the race; and Dr. Mayo has well denominated the field before him as a
"high plateau of opportunity."

It is a part of his mission to take up the leadership of the race. The
day for ignorant Negro leaders is rapidly passing. One of the first
services to be rendered along this line is to insist that _seeming_
shall no longer be allowed to pass for _being_. No matter where it
strikes or whom it strikes, he must help strip away pretense from the
vain and shallow, unveil those who masquerade under borrowed, empty,
high-sounding titles--those whose vociferous tones, glib tongues and
unlimited audacity seek to pose their owners as learned ones under the
thinnest veneer. This uncovering of shams, exposure of frauds will save
the race many a gibe and sneer.

When there is more of genuine scholarship among members of the race
there will be a different attitude assumed towards it. But as long as
the Negro prefers to construe owlish looks as wisdom, to bow down to
clam like silence as profound philosophy, to stand agape over blatant
mouthings as eloquence, and to measure mental calibre by bodily
avoirdupois, he not only gives evidence of weakness in a lack of sound
discrimination, but he subjects the entire race to consequent criticism
and contempt.

It is to our shame, however, that we are forced to admit that just such
shams are so often on "dress parade" before the world that by them the
race is too frequently largely judged, and to its detriment. The day has
come when the brain of the race must both direct its brawn and expose
its brass. Ignorance and charlatanism will seek enlightenment or retreat
only when intelligence and learning make a masterly array for
leadership.

This mission of leadership has many phases. The educated Negro leads by
making himself felt, unconsciously, in many ways. Dr. Angell of Michigan
University has truly declared that a man who has any claims to
scholarship or learning cannot hoard its blessings as a miser hoards
gold, that he can hardly enjoy it without in some degree sharing its
blessings with others, that its very nature is to be outgoing and
effusive. Because of this truth the Negro scholar is an inspiration to
his own people who need just such an object lesson as himself. The race
gains self-respect as it sees one of its own on higher planes. It
gathers higher aims by the respect it instinctively accords him and its
pride is stimulated along higher levels. It is thus that colored men of
learning--men of high ideals--are far more influential through the
simple contact of their presence than are those of another race.

It is admitted that the race is cursed with not only pretenders but with
idlers. So is every other race, but the Negro can least afford it just
now. It may be true that some of these hold diplomas indicating
completion of courses of higher studies, but they are not really the
educated ones, and the fact of their existence does not prove the
uselessness of the educated Negro or the failure of higher education for
the race. It is to our credit that comparatively few, who have struggled
through the long years that lead to culture and scholarship, can be
found to give enemies of the race an opportunity for assault from that
quarter. Figures will not lie, though they sometimes may stagger one;
and statistics show us that the college-bred Negro is far from giving a
record for uselessness.

I have said that the educated Negro (and I include both sexes) leads by
the inspiration that is radiated. Much as we regret it we cannot refuse
to face the fact that grows upon us daily--the fact that there are too
many Negro youths to-day, who seem lacking in ambition, in aspiration,
in either fixedness or firmness of purpose. We have too many dudes whose
ideal does not rise above the possession of a new suit, a cane, a silk
hat, patent leather shoes, a cigarette and a good time--too many in
every sense the "sport of the gods." It is the mission of the educated
Negro to help change this--to see that thoughtlessness gives place to
seriousness. Ruskin spoke a basic truth when he said that youth is no
time for thoughtlessness; and it is especially applicable to the youth
of a race that has its future to make. The Negro who stands on the
higher rounds of the ladder of education is pre-eminently fitted for
this work of inspiration--helping to mold and refine, "working out the
beast" and seeing that the "ape and tiger die," rescuing from vice and
all that the term implies.

He will help to form classes of society where culture and refinement,
high thinking and high living, in its proper sense, draw the
line--classes made up of what one denominates an "aristocracy of
intelligence and character that protects the masses from their foes
without and from their own folly and unrighteousness."

This same influence is to be exercised over those young men and women
fresh from college who have two things to learn--that the knowledge they
possess is neither altogether new, nor is it patented by them, and
further, that one great danger lies ever before those of any race who
have won great distinction in college halls--that of total extinction
out in the world.

Nothing but true scholarship can lead these young people to take proper
measure of self and estimate the things about them at their true value
as they stand at that precarious place, the beginning of a career. There
they need the warning of Omar emphasized to "waste not their hour."
There is plenty of active leadership for this Afro-American scholar as a
part of his mission. There are books to be written; experiments to be
made; conditions to be analyzed; ways and means invented to reach ends;
and we need Negro specialists in all these fields. Great economic
results will never come to us, nor will a truly great standing be ours
as long as we are content to leave our affairs to the sole direction,
however wise or kindly intended, of another race.

So scientists, historians, linguists, sociologists, professional men in
all lines are needed, not only that the life and history of the race may
be properly presented to the world, but in order that another mission
may be fulfilled--that of keeping before the world the fact that the
Negro possesses intellect; that he is both able and capable, and that
through this possession and training the race purposes to develop its
civilization.

The Negro scholar must not be so wrapped up in his own achievements that
he cannot see the possibilities in those about him. In this way also he
is to help keep the victories of the race at the fore. As a teacher he
has a fine opportunity to note and encourage talent, as a writer or
journalist he can give credit where credit is due. Petty jealousy is out
of place and fear of rivalry is but an evidence of mediocrity. As a
specialist in any line he will be able to stand where he can call this
talent to his aid and foster its growth.

There are other fields of activity that need the presence and kindly
penetrative interest of the educated ones of the race. The slums call
for this influence. The growing problems in our northern cities
especially call for work at the hands of the intelligent, scholarly men
and women. Vice must be checked in the race, and a transformation be
effected in the manner of life in the dark portions of the cities. Here
we have a problem of our own--to separate poverty from viciousness and
encourage the people to better morals and industrious, clean lives. No
one knows better than the thoughtful members of the race the
difficulties to be faced here where a people is segregated in certain
portions--where the good and the bad must perforce live elbow to elbow,
in constant contact and often consequent contamination. It needs
settlement work of the most earnest kind, and only those who have
standing and education will be able to do the desired good.

It is so often said to-day that the Negro should let politics alone that
many have come to the conclusion that this is a field to be entirely
abandoned. But the Negro has his public duties as a citizen to perform
unless he proposes to drop out of sight, and in this field he has a
duty. Here the man of education should do as it has seemed good for some
of the Anglo-Saxon race--lend his help toward purifying the corrupt
atmosphere, standing for what is upright and just. It is an
incontrovertible fact that the standing one gains demonstrates the
capabilities and worth of the race. To be clean-handed in all political
dealings, to guard both honor and responsibility in matters of
business--in short to quit oneself like a man in all things--must be
preached daily as of the utmost advantage to the race. The present
attitude of the outside world places the Negro scholar in a most
responsible position, for every movement on his part is noticed,
criticized, and if he falters or fails higher education receives another
blow. Not for one second can the educated Negro men and women afford to
be indifferent to an iota of their action or conduct.

With all these spheres calling especially for education and culture
there is still another of the most importance, for it holds so much for
the future of the race. This is the improvement of domestic life. We
want no upper classes where evils are glossed over because there are
money and position to be respected. We must work for the ideal family
life. Home is the social center for a race, the real center of race
improvement, and we want better homes. For this we must have better
fathers, better mothers, better husbands, better wives, better sons and
daughters. Industry alone does not make for morality. As one has said,
"A strict labor diet does not strengthen morals, it only suppresses
passions." In the home and for home building is needed that ethical,
philosophical, and esthetical training that belongs to the higher
education. This training is the great instrument for the present
upbuilding of the race which is to do so much in laying foundations for
the fine heredity every race covets. I repeat that the seeds of culture
are to be sown by the educated Negro and in the home they are never
wholly without fruit.

The artisan, the laborer have their niches, but they must work with and
not against the educated classes. That the strong working brain must be
the guide of the strong working hand, I have ever contended. The masses
must move, but it must be the classes that move them if progress upward
is to be the order. We must build up an honest, thrifty yeomanry, but we
must multiply rapidly our educated men to lead and work and influence in
these various fields.

The fact that the Negro scholar is needed for this work shows the
demand. We have not enough of them to-day. If Dr. Angell of Michigan
University does not consider, when speaking of the Anglo-Saxon, that one
college bred person in a thousand in his state "is unwise or
inexpedient," why should friend or foe of the Negro consider less than
3000 college bred men and women out of an entire population of nearly
10,000,000, "unwise or inexpedient?" It would be laughable if it were
not so pitiful to think of the hue and cry about too much learning for
the Negro. The trouble with the race is not too much learning but not
enough. A little learning is surely a dangerous thing. Short cuts are
too many and do not really educate. They utterly fail to give drill and
discipline absolutely necessary to that culture, which comes only after
hard labor of years. All honor to Dr. Curry when he so bravely declared
that the talk of the hopelessness of education or of too much education,
or of the inappropriateness of academic education is vain, adding
emphatically, "The Negro wants all he can get, and all he gets he
profits by."

No; the race is in no danger of going "college mad." Although the early
schools for it were generally established upon the broad university
plan, yet their work has been largely basic; and they have done far more
in laying foundations than in producing a surplus of graduates from
higher courses. It is an absurdity to claim there can be too many of the
race with learning enough and discipline enough to make themselves
useful leaders.

There is room for all kinds of work. There is need of the practical, the
industrial, and it is honorable to work with the hands. It will help in
weeding out idleness. But at the same time it is easy to ignore and
crush higher aspirations. The quiet shaft of ridicule oft-times does
more than argument, and many things that are very desirable and
necessary are often overshadowed by the skilful juxtaposition that
shifts them where they are but dimly seen, while other things stand
forth in a strong light and are thus looked upon as all important. So
the merry quip and jest at the Latin and Greek studied by the Negro
bring far more than a passing laugh--they _really bring discredit upon
the whole higher training where none is actually intended_. It causes
the old friends of higher learning to pause, and take it far too
literally, and then determine that it is after all better to abandon the
support of institutions for higher education. The pity of it all is that
it is next to impossible to undo the wrong. Like the sped arrow and the
lost opportunity such words and their effect cannot be recalled. Even
assurance that it is largely jest comes too late. The jest has been all
too convincing and the converts have at once arrayed their philanthropy
against forwarding the efforts of those who seek the higher courses.

Dr. VanDyke has said that true manhood and womanhood cannot exist
without an ideal side; that these are the finer feelings which have no
market value but which must be kept alive. Why should we endeavor to
keep them alive? Simply because the world at large recognizes that this
means development in the highest sense, and we claim that this is an
especial need of the Negro race. Then we ask, How are these finer
feelings kept alive? and the answer comes that this stimulation must
proceed from culture and scholarship.

With our needs pressing upon us we see as no other people the importance
of all this to bring about a change in the environment of the race. It
has a bearing upon this desired change that the virtues resulting from
manual labor alone cannot exert. Industrial training is needed too to
teach how to earn a living, but, as intimated in this paper, something
else--the higher education--must be counted upon to teach _how to live
better lives, how to get the most and best out of life_.

There is much involved in the attempt of the educated Negro to fulfil
his mission. The fact that there is such a swing of the pendulum away
from higher training for the race, makes it more difficult for those who
possess it to-day to carry out the mission. The Negro scholar who sets
out to pursue the paths pointed out does it at a great amount of
self-sacrifice. He must expect to meet rebuff, discouragement,
misinterpretation, lack of recognition, hardships, and these do not by
any means come alone from the Anglo-Saxon. The foes are often of his own
race. It will take all the philosophy he can summon to contend with the
opposition that comes from ignorance, from coarseness, from the
unthinking and the malicious. It will need all his self-control and
forbearance to move along under grasping, bullying ignorance that seeks
to ride rough shod over superior knowledge and breeding; it will demand
all his logic to meet the arguments from without that the Negro has no
time now for scholarship--that he must get money and get land first;
that learning possesses little mercantile value now; that the way to
advancement along scholarly lines is barred; that the cook, the
carpenter, the shoemaker, are all better paid than the scholar for the
use of the sum of their knowledge which costs far less than his. He must
face the facts no matter how unjust or inconsistent such things are and
meet the final question--_Is it worth striving for?--Is it worth while
to put ambitions and longings on the altar, to work unceasingly,
uncomplainingly amidst stolid indifference, absolute contempt and often
open hostility?_

We are face to face here with the question whether scholarship pays,
whether the educated Negro is to be encouraged to multiply and push
forward determinedly on his mission. If there was but the present moment
to contemplate, the race might be excused for pausing, for acquiescing
in the limitations set for its education, and for saying the game is not
worth the candle. But to-day does not end all. There is a _future_ and
that Negro is lacking in proper manhood who does not determine to help
on that future. The future is always bound up in the present and if this
future is to make men and women out of the race in coming generations
the question is answered. Negro scholarship is worth striving for,
because the educated Negro is to lead for that future. Education,
learning, scholarship will make the undying lustre of a people--will
prove their greatest glory. Thinkers will give an immortality to a
people that neither wealth, nor industry, nor strength of arm, nor even
virtue can procure for it.

So the educated Negro must keep this in view, must see his mission
clearly and stand courageously ready to undertake it--

  "Cleansed of servile panic,
    Slow to dread or despise,
  Humble because of knowledge,
    Mighty by sacrifice."

But there must be united effort among the leaders of the race along all
lines to this end. Advocates of higher learning and of industrial
education must accord respect to each other's opinions and work
unitedly, in order that neither may fall a sacrifice to the "Nemesis of
Neglect." And the race must sustain its leaders of thought and action.
There is no time to lose, none to waste in eternal strife. The field is
large enough for all to glean and work in. The race must make a common
cause, meet a common enemy and win common friends.

W. S. SCARBOROUGH.

_Wilberforce, Ohio._




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "possesion" corrected to "possession" (page 3)
  "ont" corrected to "out" (page 9)
  "nuch" corrected to "much" (page 10)

Printer's inconsistencies in hyphenation usage have been retained.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Educated Negro and His Mission, by 
W. S. Scarborough

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EDUCATED NEGRO AND HIS MISSION ***

***** This file should be named 31255.txt or 31255.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/2/5/31255/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Stephanie Eason, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
