Project Gutenberg's Bark Kathleen Sunk By A Whale, by Thomas H. Jenkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Bark Kathleen Sunk By A Whale

Author: Thomas H. Jenkins

Release Date: February 12, 2010 [EBook #31263]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BARK KATHLEEN SUNK BY A WHALE ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






[Illustration: ABANDONING BARK KATHLEEN IN MID-OCEAN]




BARK KATHLEEN SUNK

BY A WHALE



AS RELATED BY THE CAPTAIN,

THOMAS H. JENKINS



To which is added an account of two like occurrences,
the loss of
SHIPS ANN ALEXANDER AND ESSEX



Published by
H. S. HUTCHINSON & CO.
New Bedford,
Massachusetts

Copyrighted 1902
H. S. HUTCHINSON & CO.
New Bedford, Mass.




BARK KATHLEEN

Rammed and Sunk by an Infuriated Bull Whale.


(New York Journal.)

    The most thrilling episode ever known in the history of the
    American Whale Fisheries has just occurred.

    It is full of the mystery and thrill and terror of the deep sea. It
    is even more wonderful than any of the stories told by Mr. Frank T.
    Bullen, author of the famous "Cruise of the Cachalot."




CREW LIST


Of Bark Kathleen when she sailed from New Bedford, Mass., October 22,
1901, for a whaling voyage in the South Atlantic:

    Thomas H Jenkins, South Dartmouth, master; J. W. Nichols, first
    mate; Paul Gomes, second mate; Manuel Viera and Morris Murray,
    boat-headers; Phillipe J. Viera, George Williams, Herbert R.
    Reynolds, Cecelia Manuel Delgardo, boatsteerers; J. A. Jensen,
    cooper, carpenter, and blacksmith; Alfred W. Ellis, steward;
    Benjamin J. Taber, cook; Julio Alves, Jocking Barrows, Manuel
    Fernandez, Manuel Fonseca, Charles H. Lutz, ordinary seamen; Manuel
    Teceira, preventer boatsteerer; Pedro Manuel Silva, seaman; Aurilla
    Lopez, seaman and preventer boatsteerer; Frank A. Bragg, green hand
    and carpenter; Antone Monterio, Arthur P. McPherson, Louis Sharp,
    J. A. H. Nickerson, Clarence W. Thwing, Rodney Morrison, William
    Glass, William H. Carr, green hands. Mrs. Jenkins accompanied her
    husband on the cruise.

[Illustration: READY TO SAIL]




INTRODUCTION


The Kathleen was about 195 tons and with outfits was valued at $20,000,
being partially insured by her several owners. She also had on board at
the time of the accident a small quantity of oil taken since leaving
port.

The Kathleen had always been called a "lucky ship" and had made many
good voyages.

She was built for the merchant service at Philadelphia in 1844, and
after a year in the trade, was purchased by Captain James Slocum and
fitted as a whaler. Her first master in the whaling industry was
Captain William Allen, and she had in her day made many a good voyage.
Among her masters have been Captain Charles Childs, Captain Daniel W.
Gifford and Captain Samuel R. Howland. She had been almost entirely
built over only a few years ago, and just before being fitted for a
cruise to St. Helena in 1899, where she loaded oil, was thoroughly
overhauled.

Last year, it will be remembered, the Kathleen arrived in port in a
disabled condition. This was on Sept. 28th, 1901, when she was
commanded by Captain Fred H. Smith. For three days that month on the
6th, 7th and 8th, while southeast of Barbados, she was on her beam ends
and at the mercy of the sea. The crew lived on the quarter deck at the
time, not daring to go below. In fitting her up for the last cruise she
was newly sparred.

[Illustration: BARK KATHLEEN AT DOCK]




STORY OF THE LOSS OF BARK KATHLEEN

Told by the Captain,

THOMAS H. JENKINS


Having been requested to give an account of the sinking of the Bark
Kathleen by a whale I will do the best I can, though I think that those
who have read the papers know as much or more about it than I do.

We sailed from New Bedford the 22d October, 1901, and with the
exception of three weeks of the worst weather I have ever had on
leaving home, everything went fairly well till we arrived out on the
12-40 ground.[1]

      [1] What is known by the whalers as the "12-40 Ground" is located
      in the Atlantic Ocean about 12 deg. Latitude N., 40 deg. Longitude W.,
      approximately 1,000 miles off the coast of
      Brazil.--(ED.)

The day we arrived there we raised a large whale and chased him most
all day but could not seem to get any aim of him. We lost the run of
him at last in a rain squall.

A few days after, the 17th of March, 1902, was one of the finest
whaling days I have ever seen, smooth water and a clear sky. When they
were going up to mast head I told them to look sharp for some one was
going to raise a whale before night.

We steered different courses during the fore-noon and at 1 p.m. the man
aloft raised a white water which proved to be sperm whales, and there
was a lot of them, some heading one way, some another.

When we got within a mile of them we lowered four boats, and soon after
Mr. Nichols, the first mate, struck a whale, the other whales went to
leeward and I followed them with the ship till I was sure the boats saw
them.

Mr. Nichols then had his whale dead about one mile to windward, so I
came to wind on the port tack, but it took us some time to get up to
the mate, as we could not carry any foretopsail or flying jibs as the
topmast had given out.

[Illustration: SPERM WHALING--THE CHASE]

I stood on the port tack a while and then tacked. When we got braced up
the dead whale was one point off the lee bow. I saw we were going to
fetch him all right. Mr. Nichols had wafted his whale and was chasing
some more. By that time, about 3 p.m., the lookout called out that the
three boats to leeward were all fast. Of course we were all glad to
hear that. I ran the ship alongside of the dead whale and after darting
at him two or three times managed to get fast and get him alongside.
Just then it was reported that the boats to leeward were out of sight.
That worried me some so I told the cooper to get the fluke chain on the
whale and I would go aloft and see if I could see the boats.

At this time Mr. Nichols had given up chasing and was coming on board.
I got up to the topmast crosstrees and sat down. I then heard a whale
spout off the weather beam and glancing that way, saw sure enough a
large whale not more than five hundred feet from us, coming directly
for the ship.

Mr. Nichols was then alongside, just going to hoist his boat. I told
him there was a whale, a big fellow, trying to get alongside and to go
and help him along and he did help him along. He took him head and head
and did not get fast. I don't know why. He certainly was near enough,
the boatsteerer said too near, and did not have a chance to swing his
iron.

Instead of that whale going down or going to windward as they most
always do, he kept coming directly for the ship, only much faster than
he was coming before he was darted at. When he got within thirty feet
of the ship he saw or heard something and tried to go under the ship
but he was so near and was coming so fast he did not have room enough
to get clear of her.

He struck the ship forward of the mizzen rigging and about five or six
feet under water. It shook the ship considerably when he struck her,
then he tried to come up and he raised the stern up some two or three
feet so when she came down her counters made a big splash. The whale
came up on the other side of the ship and laid there and rolled, did
not seem to know what to do. I asked the cooper if he thought the whale
had hurt the ship any and he said he did not think so for he had not
heard anything crack.

[Illustration: SPERM WHALING--THE CAPTURE]

Mr. Nichols was still trying to get to the whale when I thought we had
no business fooling with that whale any more that day as the other
three boats were out of sight and fast to whales and night coming on,
so I told him to come alongside. "What for?" asked Mr. Nichols, "the
whale is laying there." I said, "Never mind the whale but come
alongside and hoist the boat up as soon as you can." He did so and I
told him to get his glasses and come up to masthead and see if he could
see the boats. His eyes were younger than mine and he soon raised them.
Just at this time one of the men went to the forecastle to get some dry
clothes and he found the floor covered with water. He cried out and
then I knew the ship must have quite a hole in her. I immediately
ordered flags set at all three mastheads, a signal for all boats to
come on board under any and all circumstances.

Mr. Viera was then not more than a mile and a half from the ship and I
knew he could not but help seeing the flags, but it was no use, he
would not let go that whale he was fast to. If he had only come to the
ship they could have got some more water and bread. I set two gangs at
work right away, one getting water and the other getting bread. The
cask of bread was between decks and three men staid with that cask till
the water came in and floated the cask away from them.

I then went to the cabin and found Mrs. Jenkins reading. She did not
know that there was anything the matter with the ship. I told her the
ship was sinking and to get some warm clothing as soon as she could but
not to try to save anything else. Well, the first thing she did was to
go for the parrot and take him on deck. Then she got a jacket and an
old shawl.

By that time it was time to take to the boat, which we did without any
confusion whatever.

There were twenty-one of us in the boat and with the water and bread
and some old clothes she was pretty near the water, so deep that the
water came over the centre board, so that some of us had to keep
bailing all the time, while the rest were paddling down to the boat
that was still laying by the whale.

[Illustration: DECK OF KATHLEEN, LOOKING AFT]

The ship rolled over to windward five minutes after we got clear of
her. Well, we got to Mr. Viera at last and divided the men and give him
his share of bread and water. Then it was dark and very necessary that
we should find the other boats, for I knew they did not see the ship
capsize and they would be looking for her for a day or so with no water
to drink. Well, we set our sails and steered as near as we could where
we thought the boats ought to be and about nine o'clock we raised them.

They were very much surprised to hear that the Kathleen was gone. I
gave them some bread and water and divided the men up again, so three
boats had ten men each and one boat nine men. I told them all to keep
in sight of me and that I would keep a lantern burning all night. We
then started for the island of Barbados, distant 1,060 miles. It was a
beautiful moonlight night with a smooth sea. When morning came there
was not a boat to be seen so I came to the wind and laid with the sheet
slacked off over an hour and raised a boat to windward steering for us.
It was the third mate and he wanted some water. The water we gave him
the night before was all salt. Well, we divided with him again and
again started on our journey with five gallons of water. I told the
third mate to keep up with me if he could but I should not stop for him
or any one else again. About nine o'clock a.m. some one said he saw
something off the port bow. We all looked and made it out to be smoke
from a steamer and soon saw she was coming right for us, so we knew we
were saved.

When she got near we saw she had a whale boat on her davits. They had
picked up our second mate an hour before and he had told the captain
that there were three other boats adrift and one of them had the
captain and wife on board, so he was steaming around with two men at
the masthead with glasses looking for us. We got alongside and she was
way out of water. I asked Mrs. Jenkins if she could get up on a rope
ladder they had put over the side and she said yes, she could get up if
it was twice as high and she was not long in getting on deck.

[Illustration: DECK OF KATHLEEN, LOOKING FOR'ARD]

Captain Dalton met us and welcomed us on board of the Borderer of
Glasgow. He was very kind to us and did everything possible for us for
the nine days we were on board his steamer, gave up his room to Mrs.
Jenkins and myself even.

In nine days we were landed at Pernambuco and from there we came to
Philadelphia on steamer Pydna, Captain Crossley.

We found friends everywhere we went; even in Philadelphia I had
telegrams asking me to telegraph them if I needed any assistance. We
arrived at New Bedford in due time and even Mr. Wing, (the agent of the
Bark Kathleen), met me smilingly and seemed glad to see me. Everything
seemed to work our way after the accident. When we were leaving the
Borderer Capt. Dalton gave me thirty dollars in American bills, all he
had with him.

He told me to take it and if I felt able when I got home to send the
amount to his wife in England. It seems that Capt. Dalton had been
running down this way for some years and having met head currents
decided _this_ trip to make a passage three or four degrees to the
eastward to see if he couldn't get out of it.

Owing to this fact we were picked up as we were.

As we had not seen a sail of any description for some time we might
have been days in our boat before seeing any vessel.

The other boat containing one of the mates and 9 seamen landed safely
at the Barbados after being in the boat 9 days with but 5 gallons of
water and a little ship bread.

[Illustration: TWO FAMOUS OLD WHALERS, BARKS ROUSSEAU AND DESDEMONA]




LOSS OF THE SHIPS ANN ALEXANDER AND ESSEX.


Cases of whales rushing head on are very rare. One instance which will
be remembered by some of the older residents of the city was in 1851,
when the ship Ann Alexander was sunk in the Pacific ocean by a maddened
whale.

In the Whaleman's Shipping List of Nov. 4, 1851, is a very full account
of that occurrence. The story, which is substantially as follows, first
appeared in the Panama Herald, as told by Captain John S. Deblois,
follows:

The ship Ann Alexander sailed from New Bedford, June 1st, 1850, for a
cruise in the South Pacific. Having taken 500 barrels of sperm oil in
the Atlantic, Captain Deblois proceeded on the voyage to the Pacific.

On the 20th of August, 1851, while cruising on the "Off Shore grounds,"
at 9 o'clock in the morning, whales were discovered, and at noon of the
same day succeeded in making fast to one.

The mate's boat made fast to the whale, which ran with the boat for
some time, and then suddenly turning about rushed at the boat with open
jaws, crushing the little craft into splinters. Captain Deblois rescued
the boat's crew.

Later the waist boat was lowered from the ship and another attack made
upon the leviathan. The mate again in charge of the attacking boat
experienced another smashup, for in the battle the whale again turned
on the boat's crew and crushed the second boat. The crew was saved and
all hands returned to the ship, which proceeded after the whale.

The ship passed on by him, and immediately after it was discovered that
the whale was making for the ship. As he came up near her they hauled
on the wind and suffered the monster to pass her.

After he had fairly passed they kept off to overtake and attack him
again. When the ship had reached within about 50 rods of him the crew
discovered that the whale had settled down deep below the surface of
the water, and as it was near sundown, it was decided to give up the
pursuit.

The ship was moving about five knots, and while Captain Deblois stood
at the rail he suddenly saw the whale rushing at the ship at the rate
of 15 knots. In an instant the monster struck the ship with tremendous
violence, shaking her from stem to stern. She quivered under the
violence of the shock as if she had struck upon a rock.

The whale struck the ship about two feet from the keel, abreast the
foremast, knocking a great hole entirely through her bottom, through
which the water roared and rushed in impetuously. The anchors and
cables were thrown overboard, as she had a large quantity of pig iron
aboard. The ship sank rapidly, all effort to keep her afloat proving
futile.

Captain Deblois ordered all hands to take to the boats and was the last
to leave the ship, doing so by jumping from the vessel into the sea and
swimming to the nearest boat. The ship was on her beam end, her
topgallant yards under water.

They hung around in the vicinity of the Ann Alexander all that night,
and the next day the captain boarded his vessel and cutting away the
masts she righted, when they succeeded in getting stores from her hold,
with which to supply their boats, should it become necessary to make a
boat voyage to land.

On August 22 ship Nantucket, Captain Gibbs, cruising in that vicinity,
discovered the imperiled sailors and taking them in charge landed them
at Paita, September 15th. The Ann Alexander was hopelessly wrecked and
left to her fate on August 23.

Five months after this disaster this pugnacious whale was captured by
the Rebecca Simms of this port. Two of the Ann Alexander's harpoons
were found in him and his head had sustained serious injuries, pieces
of the ship's timbers being imbedded in it. The whale yielded 70 to 80
barrels of oil.

[Illustration: WHALERS FITTING OUT]

The only other known case of a like nature occurred to the ship Essex
of Nantucket, commanded by Captain George Pollard, Jr.

She sailed from Nantucket, August 12, 1819, for a cruise in the Pacific
ocean. On the morning of November 20, 1819, latitude 0.40 south and
longitude 119 west, whales were discovered and all three boats lowered
in pursuit.

The mate's boat soon struck a whale, but a blow of the animal's tail
opening a bad hole in the boat, the crew was obliged to cut from him.

In the meantime, the captain's and second mate's boats had fastened to
another whale, and the mate, heading the ship for the other boats, set
about overhauling his boat preparatory to lowering again.

While doing this he saw a large sperm whale break water about 20 rods
from the ship. The whale disappeared, but immediately came up again
about a ship's length off, and made directly for the vessel, going at a
velocity of about three miles an hour, and the Essex was advancing at
about the same rate of speed.

Scarcely had the mate ordered the boy at the helm to put it hard up,
when the whale, with greatly accelerated speed, struck the ship with
his head just forward of the forechains.

The ship brought up suddenly and violently and trembled like a leaf.
The whale passed under the vessel, scraping her keel as he went, came
up on the leeward side, and lay apparently stunned for a moment.

The vessel began to settle at the head with the whale 100 yards off
thrashing the water violently with his tail and opening and closing his
jaws with great fury.

While the mate was thinking of getting the two extra boats clear, as
the vessel had begun to settle rapidly, the cry was started by a
sailor: "Here he is; he is making for us again!"

The whale came down for the ship with twice his ordinary speed and a
line of foam about a rod in width, made with his tail, which he
continually thrashed from side to side, marked his coming.

The whale crashed into the bows of the Essex, staving them completely
in directly under the cathead. The whale after the second assault
passed under the ship and out of sight to the leeward.

The crew were in a fix, in mid-ocean, a thousand miles from the nearest
land and nothing but the frail whaleboat to save them.

The lashings of the spare boat were cut and she was launched with the
ship falling on her beam ends. The ship hung together for three days.
Provisions were taken from her and the whaleboats strengthened.

The boats started for the coast of Chile or Peru and after a hard time
they landed at Ducies island. Unable to find subsistence there they
again started, Dec. 27th, after leaving three of their number, of their
own desire, and commenced to make the perilous voyage to the island of
Juan Fernandez.

Many of the boats' crew died and the recital states that the flesh of a
dead comrade was eaten by members of the mate's boat.

On Feb. 17th the surviving crew of the mate's boat were picked up by
brig Indian. Captain Pollard and Charles Ramsdale, the sole survivors
of the captain's boat, were picked up Feb. 23d by a Nantucket whaler,
and the third boat was never heard from.

    (_New Bedford Evening Standard_).




APPENDIX.


Through the efforts of the New Bedford Board of Trade Captain Dalton
has been presented by the U.S. Government a gold watch suitably
inscribed in addition to the set of resolutions and pair of marine
glasses presented him by that Board in recognition of his services in
rescuing the Captain and crew of the Kathleen.




DRIFTWOOD

FOR OPEN FIREPLACES


Driftwood consists of the sheathing and planking torn from old whaling
ships, forming the only satisfactory and reliable form for Driftwood,
as each piece of it being completely impregnated with copper through
the action of the salt water will, while burning, delight the eye with
brilliant changing colors.

It should be used in the fireplace, not to kindle the fire, nor when
the wood or coal is blazing freely, but after a glowing bed of coals is
formed, as the crowning touch of beauty, lay on one, two, or three
pieces of this magic wood.

Then with more than sunset splendor, it will flame and glow and die
away and glow again, giving up itself in a glory of color that breathes
out beauty, witchery, mystery, all in one.

Packed in barrels and shipped to any address by

H. S. HUTCHINSON & CO.,
New Bedford, Mass.


[Illustration: BREAKING UP OLD WHALERS FOR DRIFTWOOD]




Pictures of Whaling Scenes.


Sperm Whaling and Its Varieties.

Right Whaling in Behring Sea.
              From Paintings by Benj. Russell.

Right Whaling, Cutting In.

Sperm Whaling, The Chase.

Sperm Whaling, The Capture.


EITHER FRAMED OR UNFRAMED.


SOUVENIRS OF WHALING DAYS.

Figure Heads,
      Whale's Teeth,
            Old Log Books,
                  Harpoons,
                        Photographs, Etc.


H. S. HUTCHINSON & CO.,
New Bedford, Mass.





End of Project Gutenberg's Bark Kathleen Sunk By A Whale, by Thomas H. Jenkins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BARK KATHLEEN SUNK BY A WHALE ***

***** This file should be named 31263.txt or 31263.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/2/6/31263/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
