The Project Gutenberg eBook, Anthropology, by Daniel Garrison Brinton


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Anthropology
       As a Science and as a Branch of University Education in the United States


Author: Daniel Garrison Brinton



Release Date: February 22, 2010  [eBook #31360]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANTHROPOLOGY***


E-text prepared by Julia Miller and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/anthropologyassc00brinrich


Transcriber's Note

   Two typographical errors were identified but not corrected
   in this e-book. They are marked with [TN-1] and [TN-2],
   which refer to notes at the end of the text.





ANTHROPOLOGY:

As a Science and As a Branch of University Education
in the United States.

by

DANIEL G. BRINTON, A.M., M.D., LL.D.,

Professor of American Archaeology and Linguistics in the University
of Pennsylvania, and of General Ethnology at the Academy of Natural
Sciences, Philadelphia; Corresponding Member of the Anthropological
Societies of Washington, New York, Paris, Berlin, St. Petersburg,
Vienna, Munich, Florence, Etc.







Philadelphia:
1892.




PREFATORY NOTE.


This very brief presentation of the claims of Anthropology for a
recognized place in institutions of the higher education in the United
States will, I hope, receive the thoughtful consideration of the
officers and patrons of our Universities and Post-Graduate Departments.

The need of such a presentation was urged upon me not long since by the
distinguished president of a New England University. Impressed with the
force of his words, I make an earnest appeal to our seats of advanced
learning to establish a branch of Anthropology on the broad lines herein
suggested. It may be but one chair in their Faculties of Philosophy; but
the rightful claims of this science will be recognized only when it is
organized as a department by itself, with a competent corps of
professors and docents, with well-appointed laboratories and museums,
and with fellowships for deserving students.

Who is the enlightened and liberal citizen ready to found such a
department, and endow it with the means necessary to carry out both
instruction and original research?

I do not plead for any one institution, or locality, or individual; but
simply for the creation in the United States of the opportunity of
studying this highest of the sciences in a manner befitting its
importance.




  ANTHROPOLOGY,
  AS A SCIENCE,
  AND
  As a Branch of University Education.


_What Anthropology Is._

Man himself is the only final measure of his own activities. To his own
force and faculties all other tests are in the end referred. All
sciences and arts, all pleasures and pursuits, are assigned their
respective rank in his interest by reference to those physical powers
and mental processes which are peculiarly the property of his own
species.

Hence, the Study of Man, pursued under the guidance of accurate
observation and experimental research, embracing all his nature and all
the manifestations of his activity, in the past as well as in the
present, the whole co-ordinated in accordance with the inductive methods
of the natural sciences--this study must in the future unfailingly come
to be regarded as the crown and completion of all others--and this is
_Anthropology_.


_The Value of Anthropology._

The value of the applications of this science can scarcely be
overestimated.

In government and law, in education and religion, men have hitherto been
dealt with according to traditional beliefs or _a priori_ theories of
what they may or ought to be. When we learn through scientific research
what they really are, we shall then, and then only, have a solid
foundation on which to build the social, ethical and political
structures of the future. It is the appreciation of this which has given
the extraordinary impetus to the study of Sociology--a branch of
Anthropology--within the last decade.

Anthropology alone furnishes the key and clue to History. This also is
meeting recognition. No longer are the best histories mainly chronicles
of kings and wars, but records of the development and the decline of
peoples; and what constitutes a "people," and shapes its destiny, is the
very business of Ethnology to explain.

So likewise in hygiene and medicine, in ethics and religion, in language
and arts, in painting, architecture, sculpture and music, the full
import and often unconscious intention of human activity can only be
understood, and directed in the most productive channels, by such a
careful historical and physical analysis as Anthropology aims to
present.


_Societies and Schools for the Study of Anthropology._

The world of science has been recognizing more fully, year by year, the
paramount importance of the systematic study of Anthropology to the
aspirations of modern civilization.

The first Anthropological Society--that of Paris--was founded by Paul
Broca, in May, 1859. It has been rapidly followed by the organization of
similar societies in London, Berlin, St. Petersburg, Vienna, Brussels,
Munich, Madrid, Florence, Washington, New York, and many other centres
of enlightened thought. In 1882 the American Association for the
Advancement of Science organized its Section of Anthropology; and in
1884 the British Association for the Advancement of Science followed
this example. It is a well known fact that these sections are more
attractive to the general public, and are better supplied with material
than any other sections in the Associations. This augurs well for the
zeal with which students would welcome the creation of special
departments for instruction in all branches of the science.

The first School of Anthropology was founded also by Broca, at Paris,
in the year 1876. It began with a corps of five professors, a number
which it has now doubled, the demand for more extended instruction
having steadily increased. The courses have been as well attended as any
others, either at the College de France, or at the Sorbonne. A second
school is organized in connection with the Museum of Natural History at
the Jardin des Plantes. It has counted among its instructors various
illustrious names, and its courses have also been highly popular.

Several of the German universities have organized a department of
Anthropology. In those of Munich, Berlin, Marburg, and Buda Pesth the
chairs are filled respectively by Ranke, Bastian, Von den Steinen, and
Von Torok. In the University of Leipzig, Dr. E. Schmidt is _docent_ in
Anthropology; and the same position is held in Berlin by Dr. Von
Luschan. In a number of other institutions, lectures on the branch are
given. The first degree in Anthropology was conferred by the University
of Munich three years ago. The University of Brussels has established a
full chair of Anthropology, occupied by Professor Houze; and a similar
position is filled in the Musee Polytechnique, at Moscow, by Professor
Dimitri Anoutchine.

In the United States, regular courses on Physical Anthropology and
Ethnology have been given by me for the last six years, at the Academy
of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia. But the only educational institutions
which have distinctly recognized the branch are Clark University,
Worcester, Mass., where Dr. Franz Boas is _docent_ in Anthropology, and
which, in March of this year, conferred the first degree in Anthropology
given in America; and the University of Chicago, in which Dr. Frederick
Starr is Assistant Professor of Anthropology. I cannot learn that any
full professorship of the science has been established in this country.

Considerable attention has been paid to the subject by the scientists
connected with the National Museum, the Smithsonian Institution, the
Army Medical Museum, and especially the Bureau of Ethnology at
Washington. The last mentioned, under the efficient administration of
Major J. W. Powell, has enriched the literature of Anthropology with a
series of publications not exceeded in value by those of any other
government.


_Subdivisions of Anthropology._

The Study of Man in accordance with the laws of inductive research is,
therefore, the aim and meaning of Anthropology. The subject is a broad
one,--in space, as wide as the world; in time, longer than all history;
in depth, reaching to the innermost consciousness. A man may be regarded
merely as a specimen of a certain species of vertebrates; or, in his
multifarious relations as a member of a social organization. We may
study him as a living being; or seek to trace his actions and origin in
ages long before history begins. Hence, Anthropology is divided into
several associated departments devoted to the exploration of its varied
realms of research. They may conveniently be divided into four, of
nearly equal importance. An acquaintance with all of them is essential
to the equipment of a sound anthropologist.

The first is the study of the physical nature of man, his anatomy,
physiology and biology, so far as these bear on the distinctions of
races, peoples, and nations. Psychology, so far as it is an experimental
and inductive science, belongs in this department. This general division
has been called by French writers "special Anthropology", and by the
Germans "somatic Anthropology"; but we need for it a single term, and
none better could be found than that suggested by the German expression.
I call it, therefore, _Somatology_, a word long since,[TN-1]
domesticated in the vocabulary of English and American medical science,
and explained in the dictionaries as "a discourse or discussion on the
human body".

The second division is _Ethnology_. This is, in its methods, historic
and analytic. It contemplates man as a social creature. It is more
concerned with the mental, the psychical part of man, than with his
physical nature, and seeks to trace the intellectual development of
communities by studying the growth of government, laws, arts, languages,
religions, and society.

The third division, _Ethnography_, is geographic and descriptive in its
plans of research. It studies the subdivision and migrations of races,
local traits, peculiarities and customs, and confines itself to matters
of present observation.

Finally, _Archaeology_ comes in to supply the material which neither
history nor present observation can furnish. It pries into the obscurity
of the remotest periods of man's life on earth, and gathers thousands of
facts forgotten by historians and overlooked by contemporaries. Often
these unconsidered trifles prove of priceless value, and furnish the key
to the real life of ancient nations.


_Means of Practical Instruction._

Anthropology is not a theoretical science. It is essentially
experimental and practical, a science of observation and operative
procedures. It cannot be learned by merely reading books and attending
lectures. The student must literally put his hand to the work.

For that reason every institution for teaching Anthropology must have a
Laboratory attached to it; and in that Laboratory the best part of the
work will be done.

Such a Laboratory will naturally be divided into two departments; one
devoted to the study of the physical characteristics of man, the other
to the investigation of the products of his industry. The former will be
more especially related to the branch of Somatology; the latter, to
those of Ethnology, Ethnography, and Archaeology. The efforts of the
Laboratory instructors will be directed to training the perceptions of
the students in the requirements of this science and to giving them the
practical knowledge and manual dexterity necessary to employ its tests.

Connected with the Laboratory, and really forming part of it, will be a
Museum, of such extent as circumstances permit. It will include crania
and osteological specimens; art-products, arranged both ethnologically,
that is, in series showing their evolution, and ethnographically, that
is, illustrating the geographical provinces and ethnic areas from which
they are derived; and archaeological specimens typical of prehistoric and
proto-historic culture.

Hand in hand with the Laboratory work should proceed Library Labor.
There is a strong tendency in students of sciences of observation to
read only for immediate purposes and on current topics. Few acquaint
themselves with the history even of their own special branches; an
ignorance which often results injuriously on the effectiveness of their
work. To correct this, a series of tasks in the literature of the
science should regularly be assigned.

Finally, all that has been proposed must be supplemented by a course of
Field-work, in which the student must be trained to apply his
acquirements in really adding to the stores of knowledge by independent
and unaided exertion.

I do not rest satisfied with presenting these general statements. More
detail will very properly be demanded by any one seriously considering
the foundation of a chair or department in this branch.

I have drawn up, therefore, and append, a scheme for a course or courses
of lectures; a plan for laboratory instruction; another for library
work; a sketch of what should be done in the field; and finally, I name
a few of the best text-books on the various subdivisions of the general
science.

I would ask the particular attention of those interested in this science
to the classification and nomenclature which I here present. It is the
result of a careful collation of all the leading European writers on the
subject and of consultation with several of the most thoughtful in this
country.

There is, unfortunately, considerable diversity in the arrangements and
terms adopted by different authors, and it is most desirable that a
uniform phraseology be adopted in all countries. That which I offer aims
to be exhaustive of the science and to adopt, wherever practicable, the
expressions sanctioned by the greater number of distinguished living
authorities in its literature.




General Scheme for Instruction in Anthropology.


SYNOPSIS OF LECTURE COURSE.

PRINCIPAL SUBDIVISIONS.

    I. _Somatology._--Physical and Experimental Anthropology.

   II. _Ethnology._--Historic and Analytic Anthropology.

  III. _Ethnography._--Geographic and Descriptive Anthropology.

   IV. _Archaeology._--Prehistoric and Reconstructive Anthropology.


I.--_Somatology._

A. Internal Somatology.

    _a._ Osteology.--Bones of the skeleton, names, forms, measures,
        proportions, peculiarities, such as flattened tibia, perforated
        humerus, form of pelvis, os calcis, etc. Craniology;
        measurements of skull and face, sutures, angles, nasal and
        orbital indices, dentition, artificial deformations.

    _b._ Myology and Splanchnology.--The muscular system and viscera so
        far as they concern racial peculiarities, as deficient calves,
        proportions of liver and lungs, etc. Steatopygy.

B. External Somatology.

    Stature and Proportion. Anthropomometry. Tests for strength and
        endurance. Color of skin, hair, and eyes. Color scales. Shape
        and growth of hairs. Canons of proportion. Physical beauty.

C. Psychology.

    Application of experimental psychology to races. Comparative rates
        of nervous impulse, sensation, muscular movements, and mental
        processes. Right- and left-handedness. Anomalous brain actions.

D. Developmental and Comparative Somatology.

    Embryology of man. Doctrines of heredity and congenital
        transmission. Teratology, or the production of varieties and
        monstrosities. Ethnic and racial anatomy. Evolution of man.
        Comparative anatomy of man and anthropoids. Simian and lemurian
        analogies. Fossil remains of man.

    Biology of man. Changes produced by nutrition (food supply),
        climate, humidity, altitude, etc. Comparative physiology and
        pathology. Medical geography. Comparative nosology of different
        races. Criminal anthropology. Pathology of races. Fertility and
        sterility of races. Reproduction and stirpiculture. Comparative
        longevity. Immunity from disease. Vital statistics. Anatomical
        classifications of races. (Historical review; present opinions.)


II.--_Ethnology._

A. Definitions and Methods.

    Meaning of Race, People (_ethnos_, folk), Nation, Tribe. Culture and
        civilization. Measures and stages of culture. Causes and
        conditions of ethnic progress. Ethnic aptitudes for special
        lines of progress. Ethnic psychology (Voelkerpsychologie).

B. Sociology.

    _a._ Government.--Primitive forms. The gens; the tribe; the
        confederacy; chieftainship; monarchy; theocracy; democracy, etc.

    _b._ Marriage.--Theories of primitive marriage; promiscuity;
        polygamy; polyandry; monogamy. Limitations of marriage. Forms
        and rites of marriage. Laws of descent and consanguinity. Social
        position of woman. Gynocracy.

    _c._ Laws.--Origin of laws. Primitive ethics. Dualism of ethics.
        Evolution of the moral sense. The Taboo. Blood revenge. Tenures
        of land. Classes above law. Castes. Privileged classes. Codified
        laws. International laws.

C. Technology.

    _a._ The Utilitarian Arts.--Manufacture of tools, utensils, weapons,
        and agricultural, etc., implements. Architecture and building.
        Clothing and fashions. Means of transportation by land and
        water. Agriculture. Domestication of plants and animals.
        Weights, measures, and instruments of precision. Media of
        exchange, currency, money, articles of barter and commerce.

    _b._ The Esthetic Arts.--Theory of the sense of the beautiful.
        Decorative designs in line and color. Skin-painting. Tattooing.
        Sculpture and modeling. Music and musical instruments. Scents
        and flowers. Games and festivals.

D. Religion.

    _a._ Psychological Origin of Religions.--Principles and method of
        the science of religion. Personal, family, and tribal religions.
        Ancestral worship. Doctrines of animism; fetichism; polytheism;
        henotheism; monotheism; universal religions.

    _b._ Mythology.--Definition and growth of myths. Solar light and
        storm myths. Creation and deluge myths. Relation of myths to
        language.

    _c._ Symbolism and Religious Art.--Relation of symbolism to
        fetichism. Primitive idols. Charms and amulets. Tokens. Tombs,
        temples, altars. Sacrifice. Symbolism of colors and numbers.
        Special symbols; the bird; the serpent; trees; the cross; the
        svastika; the circle, etc.

    _d._ Religious Teachers and Doctrines.--The priestly class.
        Shamanism. Theocracies. Secret orders. Initiations. Diviners.
        Augurs and prophets. Doctrines of soul. Fatalism.

    _e._ Analysis of Special Religions.--Egyptian religion; Buddhism;
        Judaism; Christianity; Mohammedanism, etc.

E. Linguistics.

    _a._ Gesture and Sign Language.--Examples. Plan of thought in
        relation to picture writing.

    _b._ Spoken Language.--Articulate and inarticulate speech. Imitative
        sounds. The phonology of languages. Universal alphabets. Logical
        relations of the parts of speech. The vocabulary and the grammar
        of languages. Distinctions between languages and dialects. Mixed
        languages and jargons. Relations of language to ethnography.
        Polyglottic and monoglottic peoples. Causes of changes in
        language. Extent and nature of such changes. Examples.
        Classifications of languages. Relative excellence of languages.
        Criteria of superiority. Rules for the scientific comparison of
        languages.

    _c._ Recorded Language.--Systems of recording ideas.
        Thought-writing. Pictography. Symbolic and ideographic writing.
        Examples. Sound-writing. Evolution of the phonetic alphabets.
        Egyptian, Cuneiform, Chinese, Aztec, and other phonetic systems.

    _d._ Forms of Expression.--Rhythmical. Origin of meter. Poetry of
        primitive peoples. Rhythm and rhyme. Characters of prose.
        Relation of prose and poetry to national language and character.
        Dramatic. The primitive drama and its development.

F. Folk-lore.

    Definition, nature, and value of folk-lore. Methods of its study.
        Relations to history and character of a people. Traditional
        customs. Traditional narratives. Folk-sayings. Superstitious
        beliefs and practices.


III.--_Ethnography._

A. The Origin and Subdivisions of Races.

    Theories of monogenism and polygenism. Doctrine of "geographical
        provinces" or "areas of characterization." The continental areas
        at the date of man's appearance on the earth. Eurafrica,
        Austafrica, Asia, America, Oceanica. Causes and consequences of
        the migrations of races and nations.

    _a._ The Eurafrican Race.--Types of the white race. Its first home.
        Early migrations. The South Mediterranean branch (Hamitic and
        Semitic stocks). The North Mediterranean branch (Euskaric,
        Aryan, and Caucasic stocks).

    _b._ The Austafrican Race.--Former geography of Africa. The
        Negrillos or Pigmies. The true Negroes. The Negroids. The race
        in other continents. Negro slavery.

    _c._ The Asian Race.--The Sinitic branch (Chinese, Thibetans,
        Indo-Chinese). The Sibiric branch (the Tungusic, Mongolic,
        Tataric, Finnic, Arctic, and Japanese groups).

    _d._ The American Race.--Peopling of America. Groups of North and
        South American tribes.

    _e._ Insular and Litoral Peoples.--The Negritic stock (Negritos,
        Papuans, Melanesians). The Malayic stock (Western Malayans,
        Eastern, or Polynesians). The Australic stock (Australian
        tribes; Dravidians and Kols, of India).


IV.--_Archaeology._

A. General Archaeology.

    _a._ Geology of the epoch of man. Late tertiary and quaternary
        periods. Glacial phenomena. River drift. Diluvial and alluvial
        deposits. Physical geography of the quaternary. Prehistoric
        botany and zoology.

    _b._ Prehistoric Ages.--The Age of Stone (chipped stone, or
        palaeolithic period; polished stone, or neolithic period). The
        Age of Bronze. The Age of Iron. Epochs, stations, and examples.
        Methods of study of stone and bone implements, pottery, and
        other ancient remains. Indications of prehistoric commerce.
        Palethnology. Proto-historic epoch.

B. Special Archaeology.

    Egyptian, Assyrian, Phenician, Classical, and Medieval Archaeology.

    Archaeology of the various areas in America. Art in stone, bone,
        shell, wood, clay, paper, etc., in these areas.


LABORATORY WORK.

A. Physical Laboratory.

    Comparing and identifying bones. Measuring skulls. Dissections of
        anthropoids and human subjects. Examination of brains. Study of
        embryology and teratology. Practical study of the hair, skin,
        nails, etc., of different races. Use of color scales, etc.
        Practice in anthropomometry, with the necessary instruments.
        Testing for sense perceptions.

B. Technological Laboratory.

    Study of stone implements; simple and compound; rough and polished;
        primary and secondary chipping; cleavage; firing; bulb of
        percussion; mineralogy of implements; patine, etc. Bone
        implements.

    Study of metal implements. Hammering, smelting, casting. Results of
        exposure. Analysis of alloys. Coins, etc. Study of pottery.
        Pastes; burning; glazing; forms; decorative designs; painting
        and coloring.

    Textile materials; ancient cloth and basket work; feather work.

    Methods of making casts and models; taking squeezes, rubbings,
        copies, and photographs. Drawing, shading, and coloring
        ethnographic charts.

    Practice in preserving, mounting, arranging, and classifying
        specimens. Tests for the detection of frauds. Incrustations,
        dendrites, etc. Practice in reducing unknown tongues to writing,
        by the ear. Practice in the repetition of unfamiliar phonetic
        elements. Study of the actions of the lingual muscles in the
        production of sounds.


LIBRARY WORK.

Researches in the history of anthropology.

Making lists of works and articles on special subjects, with brief
abstracts.

Notes of the proceedings of anthropological societies and the contents
of journals.

Presentation of the theories of particular writers on the science.

Familiarize the student with the past and present literature of his
branch.


FIELD WORK.

Methods of surveying, photographing, and plotting ancient remains.

Plans for taking field-notes.

Instruction in the proper methods of opening mounds, shell heaps, etc.,
and in excavating rock-shelters and caverns. The preserving and packing
of specimens.

Study of quaternary geology; alluvial deposits; river terraces; glacial
scratches; moraines; river drift; loess; elevation and subsidence.

The collection of languages and dialects; of folk-lore, and local
peculiarities.


TEXT-BOOKS.

As the plan of study here proposed is largely that which I have pursued
and developed in my own lectures and published works on the subject, I
may be permitted to insert the following list of these:--

     _Anthropology and Ethnology._ 4to, pp. 184. In Vol. I of the
     Iconographic Encyclopaedia (Philadelphia, 1886).

     _Prehistoric Archaeology._ 4to, pp. 116. In Vol. II of the
     Iconographic Encyclopaedia (Philadelphia, 1886).

     _Races and Peoples; Lectures on the Science of Ethnography._ 8vo,
     pp. 313 (N. D. C. Hodges, New York, 1890).

     _The American Race; a Linguistic Classification and Ethnographic
     Description of the Native Tribes of North and South America._ 8vo,
     pp. 392 (N. D. C. Hodges, New York, 1891).

In addition to these I would name the following as among the best works
for the student of this branch:--

     _Anthropologische Methoden._ By Dr. Emil Schmidt (Leipzig, 1888).

     _Elements d'Anthropologie Generale._ By Dr. Paul Topinard (Paris).
     Also L'Homme dans la Nature (Paris, 1891), by the same author.

     _Precis d'Anthropologie._ By Hovelacque and Herve (Paris).

     _Allgemeine Ethnographie._ By Friederich Mueller.

     _Die Urgeschichte des Menschen._ By Moritz Hoernes (Leipzig, 1891).

     _La Prehistorique Antiquite de l'Homme._ By G. de Mortillet
     (Paris).

     _Anthropology._ By Dr. Tylor (New York).

     _Elements[TN-2] de Sociologie._ By Ch. Letourneau (Paris).

To this list I add the names of some others of the distinguished foreign
living writers on various departments of Anthropology:--

     In France: Bertrand, Collignon, Letourneau, de Nadaillac. In
     England: Buckland, Flower, Gallon, M. Mueller. In Germany: Andree,
     Bastian, Meyer, F. Mueller, Ranke, Schaafhausen, Steinthal, Virchow,
     Ratzel, Gerland. In Italy: Giglioli, Mantegazza.

It is highly likely that many modifications and improvements on this
scheme will suggest themselves to instructors; but I may say for it that
it is the carefully considered result of a comparison of the methods
employed in the European schools, combined with a personal experience of
some years in the presentation of the topics to classes.

Of course, the amount of attention which will be given to the separate
divisions of the subject will depend on the position which the branch
occupies in the student's plan of studies--whether a major or a minor.
If the latter, he should attend a course of thirty or forty lectures
about equally divided between the four headings under which the science
is here presented, and should give double as many hours to laboratory
work.

This is the minimum which would give him any adequate notion of the
science. If, on the other hand, it be taken as a major, or principal
subject, the greater part of his time for two or three years will be
fully occupied in preparing himself for independent work, or for the
instruction of others.





      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

The following misspelling and typographical error were not
corrected:

       Page   Error
  TN-1   6    since, should read since
  TN-2  14    Elements should read Elements



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANTHROPOLOGY***


******* This file should be named 31360.txt or 31360.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/1/3/6/31360



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

