The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Inhabited, by Richard Wilson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Inhabited

Author: Richard Wilson

Illustrator: Ashman

Release Date: February 25, 2010 [EBook #31392]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INHABITED ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

     This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction January 1953.
     Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
     copyright on this publication was renewed.


    [Illustration: _Containing a foe is sound military thinking--unless
                    it's carried out so literally that everybody becomes
                    an innocent Trojan Horse!_]


                            The Inhabited


                                  By


                            RICHARD WILSON


                        Illustrated by ASHMAN

       *       *       *       *       *




Two slitted green eyes loomed up directly in front of him. He plunged
into them immediately.

He had just made the voyage, naked through the dimension stratum, and
he scurried into the first available refuge, to hover there, gasping.

The word "he" does not strictly apply to the creature, for it had no
sex, nor are the words "naked," "scurried," "hover" and "gasping"
accurate at all. But there are no English words to describe properly
what it was and how it moved, except in very general terms. There are
no Asiatic, African or European words, though perhaps there are
mathematical symbols. But, because this is not a technical paper, the
symbols have no place in it.

He was a sort of spy, a sort of fifth-columnist. He had some of the
characteristics of a kamikaze pilot, too, because there was no telling
if he'd get back from his mission.

Hovering in his refuge and gasping for breath, so to speak, he tried
to compose his thoughts after the terrifying journey and adjust
himself to his new environment, so he could get to work. His job, as
first traveler to this new world, the Earth, was to learn if it were
suitable for habitation by his fellow beings back home. Their world
was about ended and they had to move or die.

He was being discomfited, however, in his initial adjustment. His
first stop in the new world--unfortunately, not only for his dignity,
but for his equilibrium--had been in the mind of a cat.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was his own fault, really. He and the others had decided that his
first in a series of temporary habitations should be in one of the
lower order of animals. It was a matter of precaution--the mind would
be easy to control, if it came to a contest. Also, there would be less
chance of running into a mind-screen and being trapped or destroyed.

The cat had no mind-screen, of course; some might even have argued
that she didn't have a mind, especially the human couple she lived
with. But whatever she did have was actively at work, feeling the
solid tree-branch under her claws and the leaves against which her
tail switched and seeing the half-grown chickens below.

The chickens were scratching in the forbidden vegetable garden. The
cat, the runt of her litter and thus named Midge, often had been
chased out of the garden herself, but it was no sense of justice which
now set her little gray behind to wriggling in preparation for her
leap. It was mischief, pure and simple, which motivated her.

Midge leaped, and the visitor, who had made the journey between
dimensions without losing consciousness, blacked out.

When he revived, he was being rocketed along in an up-and-down and at
the same time side-ward series of motions which got him all giddy.
With an effort he oriented himself so that the cat's vision became
his, and he watched in distaste as the chickens scurried, scrawny
wings lifted and beaks achirp, this way and that to escape the
monstrous cat.

The cat never touched the chickens; she was content to chase them.
When she had divided the flock in half, six in the pea patch and six
under the porch, she lay down in the shade of the front steps and
reflectively licked a paw.

The spy got the impression of reflection, but he was baffledly unable
to figure out what the cat was reflecting on. Midge in turn licked a
paw, rolled in the dust, arched her back against the warm stone of the
steps and snapped cautiously at a low-flying wasp. She was a contented
cat. The impression of contentment came through very well.

The dimension traveler got only one other impression at the
moment--one of languor.

The cat, after a prodigious pink yawn, went to sleep. The traveler,
although he had never known the experience of voluntary
unconsciousness, was tempted to do the same. But he fought against the
influence of his host and, robbed of vision with the closing of the
cat's eyes, he meditated.

He had been on Earth less than ten minutes, but his meditation
consisted of saying to himself in his own way that if he was ever
going to get anything done, he'd better escape from this cat's mind.

He accomplished that a few minutes later, when there was a crunching
of gravel in the driveway and a battered Plymouth stopped and a man
stepped out. Midge opened her eyes, crept up behind a row of stones
bordering the path to the driveway and jumped delicately out at the
man, who tried unsuccessfully to gather her into his arms.

Through the cat's eyes from behind the porch steps, where Midge had
fled, the traveler took stock of the human being it was about to
inhabit:

Five-feet-elevenish, thirtyish, blond-brown-haired,
blue-summer-suited.

And no mind-screen.

The traveler traveled and in an instant he was looking down from his
new height at the gray undersized cat. Then the screen door of the
porch opened and a female human being appeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the male human impressions now his, the traveler experienced some
interesting sensations. There was a body-to-body togetherness
apparently called "gimmea hug" and a face-to-face-touching ceremony,
"kiss."

"Hmm," thought the traveler, in his own way. "Hmm."

The greeting ceremony was followed by one that had this catechism:

"Suppareddi?"

"Onnatable."

Then came the "eating."

This eating, something he had never done, was all right, he decided.
He wondered if cats ate, too. Yes, Midge was under the gas stove,
chewing delicately at a different kind of preparation.

There was a great deal of eating. The traveler knew from the
inspection of the mind he was inhabiting that the man was enormously
hungry and tired almost to exhaustion.

"The damn job had to go out today," was what had happened. "We worked
till almost eight o'clock. I think I'll take a nap after supper while
you do the dishes."

The traveler understood perfectly, for he was a very sympathetic type.
That was one reason they had chosen him for the transdimensional
exploration. They had figured the best applicant for the job would be
one with an intellect highly attuned to the vibrations of these
others, known dimly through the warp-view, one extremely sensitive and
with a great capacity for appreciation. Shrewd, too, of course.

The traveler tried to exercise control. Just a trace of it at first.
He attempted to dissuade the man from having his nap. But his effort
was ignored.

The man went to sleep as soon as he lay down on the couch in the
living room. Once again, as the eyes closed, the traveler was
imprisoned. He hadn't realized it until now, but he evidently couldn't
transfer from one mind to another except through the eyes, once he was
inside. He had planned to explore the woman's mind, but now he was
trapped, at least temporarily.

Oh, well. He composed himself as best he could to await the awakening.
This sleeping business was a waste of time.

There were footsteps and a whistling noise outside. The inhabited man
heard the sounds and woke up, irritated. He opened his eyes a slit as
his wife told the neighbor that Charlie was taking a nap, worn out
from a hard day at the office, and the visitor, darting free,
transferred again.

But he miscalculated and there he was in the mind of the neighbor.
Irritated with himself, the traveler was about to jump to the mind of
the woman when he was caught up in the excitement that was consuming
his new host.

"Sorry," said the neighbor. "The new batch of records I ordered came
today and I thought Charlie'd like to hear them. Tell him to come over
tomorrow night, if he wants to hear the solidest combo since Muggsy's
Roseland days."

The wife said all right, George, she'd tell him. But the traveler was
experiencing the excited memories of a dixieland jazz band in his new
host's mind, and he knew he'd be hearing these fantastically wonderful
new sounds at first hand as soon as George got back to his turntable.

They could hardly wait, George and his inhabitant both.

       *       *       *       *       *

His inhabitant had come from a dimension-world of vast, contemplative
silences. There was no talk, no speech vibrations, no noise which
could not be shut out by the turning of a mental switch. Communication
was from mind to mind, not from mouth to ear. It was a world of
peaceful silence, where everything had been done, where the struggle
for physical existence had ended, and where there remained only the
sweet fruits of past labor to be enjoyed.

That had been the state of affairs, at any rate, up until the time of
the Change, which was something the beings of the world could not
stop. It was not a new threat from the lower orders, which they had
met and overcome before, innumerable times. It was not a threat from
outside--no invasion such as they had turned back in the past. Nor was
it a cooling of their world or the danger of imminent collision with
another.

The Change came from within. It was decadence. There was nothing left
for the beings to do. They had solved all their problems and could
find no new ones. They had exhausted the intricate workings of
reflection, academic hypothetica and mind-play; there hadn't been a
new game, for instance, in the lifetime of the oldest inhabitant.

And so they were dying of boredom. This very realization had for a
time halted the creeping menace, because, as they came to accept it
and discuss ways of meeting it, the peril itself subsided. But the
moment they relaxed, the Change started again.

Something had to be done. Mere theorizing about their situation was
not enough. It was then that they sent their spy abroad.

Because they had at one time or another visited each of the planets in
their solar system and had exhausted their possibilities or found them
barren, and because they were not equipped, even at the peak of their
physical development, for intergalactic flight, there remained only
one way to travel--in time.

Not forward or backward, for both had been tried. Travel ahead had
been discouraging--in fact, it had convinced them that their normal
passage through the years had to be stopped. The reason had been made
dramatically clear--they, the master race, did not exist in the
future. They had vanished and the lower forms of life had begun to
take over.

Travel into the past would be even more boring than continued
existence in the present, they realized, because they would be
reliving the experiences they had had and still vividly remembered,
and would be incapable of changing them. It would be both tiresome and
frustrating.

That left only one way to go--sideways in time, across the dimension
line--to a world like their own, but which had developed so
differently through the eons that to visit it and conquer the minds of
its inhabitants would be worth while.

In that way they picked Earth for their victim and sent out their spy.
Just one spy. If he didn't return, they'd send another. There was
enough time. And they had to be sure.

       *       *       *       *       *

George put a record on the phonograph and fixed himself a drink while
the machine warmed up.

The interdimensional invader reacted pleasurably to the taste and
instant warming effect of the liquor on George's mind.

"Ahh!" said George aloud, and his temporary inhabitant agreed with
him.

George lifted the phonograph needle into the groove and went to sit on
the edge of a chair. Jazz poured out of the speaker and the man beat
out the time with his heels and toes.

The visitor in his mind experimented with control. He went at it
subtly, at first, so as not to alarm his host. He tried to quiet the
beating of time with the feet. He suggested that George cross his legs
instead. The beating of time continued. The visitor urged that George
do this little thing he asked; he bent all his powers to the
suggestion, concentrating on the tapping feet. There wasn't even a
glimmer of reaction.

Instead, there was a reverse effect. The pounding of music was
insistent. The visitor relaxed. He rationalized and told himself he
would try another time. Now he would observe this phenomenon. But he
became more than just an observer.

The visitor reeled with sensation. The vibrations gripped him, twisted
him and wrung him out. He was limp, palpitating and thoroughly happy
when the record ended and George got up immediately to put on another.

Hours later, drunk with the jazz and the liquor, the visitor went
blissfully to sleep inside George's mind when his host went to bed.

[Illustration]

He awoke, with George, to the experience of a nagging throb. But in a
few minutes, after a shower, shave and breakfast with steaming
coffee, it was gone, and the visitor looked forward to the coming day.

It was George's day off and he was going fishing. Humming to himself,
he got out his reel and flies and other paraphernalia and contentedly
arranged them in the back of his car. Visions of the fine, quiet time
he was going to have went through George's mind, and his inhabitant
decided he had better leave. He had to get on with his exploration; he
mustn't allow himself to be trapped into just having fun.

But he stayed with George as the fisherman drove his car out of the
garage and along a highway. The day was sunny and warm. There was a
slight wind and the green trees sighed delicately in it. The birds
were pleasantly vocal and the colors were superb.

The visitor found it oddly familiar. Then he realized what it was.

His world was like this, too. It had the trees, the birds, the wind
and the colors. All were there. But its people had long since ceased
to appreciate them. Their existence had turned inward and the external
things no longer were of interest. Yet the visitor, through George's
eyes, found this world delightful. He reveled in its beauty, its
breathtaking panorama and its balance. And he wondered if he was able
to appreciate it for the first time now because he was being active,
although in a vicarious way, and participating in life, instead of
merely reflecting on it. This would be a clue to have analyzed by the
greater minds to which he would report.

Then, with a wrench, the visitor chided himself. He was allowing
himself to identify too closely with this mortal, with his
appreciation of such diverse pursuits as jazz and fishing. He had to
get on. There was work to be done.

George waved to a boy playing in a field and the boy waved back. With
the contact of their eyes, the visitor was inside the boy's mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

The boy had a dog. It was a great, lumbering mass of affection, a
shaggy, loving, prankish beast. A protector and a playmate, strong and
gentle.

Now that the visitor was in the boy's mind, he adored the animal, and
the dog worshiped him.

He fought to be rational. "Come now," he told himself, "don't get
carried away." He attempted control. A simple thing. He would have the
boy pull the dog's ear, gently. He concentrated, suggested. But all
his efforts were thwarted. The boy leaped at the dog, grabbed it
around the middle. The dog responded, prancing free.

The visitor gave up. He relaxed.

Great waves of mute, suffocating love enveloped him. He swam for a few
minutes in a pool of joy as the boy and dog wrestled, rolled over each
other in the tall grass, charged ferociously with teeth bared and
growls issuing from both throats, finally to subside panting and
laughing on the ground while the clouds swept majestically overhead
across the blue sky.

He could swear the dog was laughing, too.

As they lay there, exhausted for the moment, a young woman came upon
them. The visitor saw her looking down at them, the soft breeze
tugging at her dark hair and skirt. Her hands were thrust into the
pockets of her jacket. She was barefoot and she wriggled her toes so
that blades of grass came up between them.

"Hello, Jimmy," she said. "Hello, Max, you old monster."

The dog thumped the ground with his tail.

"Hello, Mrs. Tanner," the boy said. "How's the baby coming?"

The girl smiled. "Just fine, Jimmy. It's beginning to kick a little
now. It kind of tickles. And you know what?"

"What?" asked Jimmy. The visitor in the boy's mind wanted to know,
too.

"I hope it's a boy, and that he grows up to be just like you."

"Aw." The boy rolled over and hid his face in the grass. Then he
peered around. "Honest?"

"Honest," she said.

"Gee whiz." The boy was so embarrassed that he had to leave. "Me and
Max are going down to the swimmin' hole. You wanta come?"

"No, thanks. You go ahead. I think I'll just sit here in the Sun for a
while and watch my toes curl."

As they said good-by, the visitor traveled to the new mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the girl's eyes, he saw the boy and the dog running across the
meadow and down to the stream at the edge of the woods.

The traveler experienced a sensation of tremendous fondness as he
watched them go.

But he mustn't get carried away, he told himself. He must make another
attempt to take command. This girl might be the one he could
influence. She was doing nothing active; her mind was relaxed.

The visitor bent himself to the task. He would be cleverly simple. He
would have her pick a daisy. They were all around at her feet. He
concentrated. Her gaze traveled back across the meadow to the grassy
knoll on which she was standing. She sat. She stretched out her arms
behind her and leaned back on them. She tossed her hair and gazed into
the sky.

She wasn't even thinking of the daisy.

Irritated, he gathered all his powers into a compact mass and hurled
them at her mind.

But with a swoop and a soar, he was carried up and away, through the
sweet summer air, to a cloud of white softness.

This was not what he had planned, by any means.

A steady, warm breeze enveloped him and there was a tinkle of faraway
music. It frightened him and he struggled to get back into contact
with the girl's mind. But there was no contact. Apparently he had been
cast out, against his will.

The forces of creation buffeted him. His dizzying flight carried him
through the clean air in swift journey from horizon to horizon, then
up, up and out beyond the limits of the atmosphere, only to return him
in a trice to the breast of the rolling meadow. He was conscious now
of the steady growth of slim green leaves as they pressed confidently
through the nurturing Earth, of the other tiny living things in and on
the Earth, and the heartbeat of the Earth itself, assuring him with
its great strength of the continuation of all things.

Then he was back with the girl, watching through her eyes a butterfly
as it fluttered to rest on a flower and perched there, gently waving
its gaudy wings.

He had not been cast out. The young woman herself had gone on that
wild journey to the heavens, not only with her mind, but with her
entire being, attuned to the rest of creation. There was a continuity,
he realized, a oneness between herself, the mother-to-be, and the
Universe. With her, then, he felt the stirrings of new life, and he
was proud and content.

He forgot for the moment that he had been a failure.

       *       *       *       *       *

The soft breeze seemed to turn chill. The Sun was still high and
unclouded, but its warmth was gone. With the girl, he felt a prickling
along the spine. She turned her head slightly and, through her eyes,
he saw, a few yards away in tall grass, a creeping man.

The eyes of the man were fixed on the girl's body and the traveler
felt her thrill of terror. The man lay there for a moment, hands flat
on the ground under his chest. Then he moved forward, inching toward
her.

The girl screamed. Her terror gripped the visitor. He was helpless.
His thoughts whirled into chaos, following hers.

The eyes of the creeping man flicked from side to side, then up. The
visitor quivered and cringed with the girl when she screamed again. As
the torrent of frightened sound poured from her throat, the creeping
man looked into her eyes. Instantly the visitor was sucked into his
mind.

It was a maelstrom. A tremendous conflict was going on in it. One part
of it was urging the body on in its fantastic crawl toward the young
woman frozen in terror against the sky. The visitor was aware of the
other part, submerged and struggling feebly, trying to get through
with a message of reason. But it was handicapped. The visitor sensed
these efforts being nullified by a crushing weight of shame.

The traveler fought against full identification with the deranged part
of the mind. Nevertheless, he sought to understand it, as he had
understood the other minds he'd visited. But there was nothing to
understand. The creeping man had no plan. There was no reason for his
action.

The visitor felt only a compulsion which said, "You must! You must!"

The visitor was frightened. And then he realized that he was less
frightened than the man was. The terror felt by the creeping man was
greater than the fear the visitor had experienced with the girl.

There were shouts and barking. He heard the shrill cry of a boy. "Go
get him, Max!"

There was a squeal of brakes from the road and a pounding of heavy
footsteps coming toward them.

With the man, the visitor rose up, confused, scared. A great shaggy
weight hurled itself and a growling, sharp-toothed mouth sought a
throat.

A voice yelled, "Don't shoot! The dog's got him!"

Then blackness.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mersey." The voice summoned the visitor, huddling in a corner of the
deranged mind, fearing contamination.

The eyes opened, looked up at the ceiling of a barred cell.

"Dr. Cloyd is here to see you," the voice said.

The visitor felt the mind of his host seeking to close out the words
and the world, to return to sheltering darkness.

There was a rattle of keys and the opening of an iron door.

The eyes opened as a hand shook the psychotic Mersey by the shoulder.
The visitor sought escape, but the eyes avoided those of the other.

"Come with me, son," the doctor's voice said. "Don't be frightened.
No one will hurt you. We'll have a talk."

Mersey shook off the hand on his shoulder.

"Drop dead," he muttered.

"That wouldn't help anything," the doctor said. "Come on, man."

Mersey sat up and, through his eyes, the traveler saw the doctor's
legs. Were they legs or were they iron bars? The traveler cringed away
from the mad thought.

A room with a desk, a chair, a couch, and sunlight through a window.
Crawling sunlit snakes. The visitor shuddered. He sought the part of
the mind that was clear, but he sought in vain. Only the whirling
chaos and the distorted images remained now.

There was a pain in the throat and with Mersey he lifted a hand to it.
Bandaged--gleaming teeth and a snarling animal's mouth--fear, despair
and hatred. With the prisoner, he collapsed on the couch.

"Lie down, if you like," said Dr. Cloyd's voice. "Try to relax. Let me
help you."

"Drop dead," Mersey replied automatically. The visitor felt the
tenseness of the man, the unreasoning fear, and the resentment.

But as the man lay there, the traveler sensed a calming of the
turbulence. There was an urgent rational thought. He concentrated and
tried to help the man phrase it.

"The girl--is she all right? Did I...?"

"She's all right." The doctor's voice was soothing. It pushed back the
shadows a little. "She's perfectly all right."

The visitor sensed a dulled relief in Mersey's mind. The shadows still
whirled, but they were less ominous. He suggested a question, exulted
as Mersey attempted to phrase it: "Doctor, am I real bad off? Can...?"

But still the shadows.

"We'll work together," said the doctor's voice. "You've been ill, but
so have others. With your help, we can make you well."

The traveler made a tremendous effort. He urged Mersey to say: "I'll
help, doctor. I want to find peace."

But then Mersey's voice went on: "I must find a new home. We need a
new home. We can't stay where we are."

       *       *       *       *       *

The traveler was shocked at the words. He hadn't intended them to come
out that way. Somehow Mersey had voiced the underlying thoughts of his
people. The traveler sought the doctor's reaction, but Mersey wouldn't
look at him. The man's gaze was fixed on the ceiling above the couch.

"Of course," the doctor said. His words were false, the visitor
realized; he was humoring the madman.

"We had so much, but now there is no future," Mersey said. The visitor
tried to stop him. He would not be stopped. "We can't stay much
longer. We'll die. We must find a new world. Maybe you can help us."

Dr. Cloyd spoke and there was no hint of surprise in his voice.

"I'll help you all I can. Would you care to tell me more about your
world?"

Desperately, the visitor fought to control the flow of Mersey's words.
He had opened the gate to the other world--how, he did not know--and
all of his knowledge and memories now were Mersey's. But the traveler
could not communicate with the disordered mind. He could only
communicate through it, and then involuntarily. If he could escape the
mind ... but he could not escape. Mersey's eyes were fixed on the
ceiling. He would not look at the doctor.

"A dying world," Mersey said. "It will live on after us, but we will
die because we have finished. There's nothing more to do. The Change
is upon us, and we must flee it or die. I have been sent here as a
last hope, as an emissary to learn if this world is the answer. I have
traveled among you and I have found good things. Your world is much
like ours, physically, but it has not grown as fast or as far as ours,
and we would be happy here, among you, if we could control."

       *       *       *       *       *

The words from Mersey's throat had come falteringly at first, but now
they were strong, although the tone was flat and expressionless. The
words went on:

"But we can't control. I've tried and failed. At best we can co-exist,
as observers and vicarious participants, but we must surrender choice.
Is that to be our destiny--to live on, but to be denied all except
contemplation--to live on as guests among you, accepting your ways and
sharing them, but with no power to change them?"

The traveler shouted at Mersey's mind in soundless fury: "Shut up!
Shut up!"

Mersey stopped talking.

"Go on," said the doctor softly. "This is very interesting."

"Shut up!" said the traveler voicelessly, yet with frantic urgency.

The madman was silent. His body was perfectly still, except for his
calm breathing. The visitor gazed through his eyes in the only
possible direction--up at the ceiling. He tried another command. "Look
at the doctor."

With that glance, the visitor told himself, he would flee the crazed
mind and enter the doctor's. There he would learn what the
psychiatrist thought of his patient's strange soliloquy--whether he
believed it, or any part of it.

He prayed that the doctor was evaluating it as the intricate raving of
delusion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly, Mersey turned his head. Through his eyes, the visitor saw the
faded green carpet, the doctor's dull-black shoes, his socks, the legs
of his trousers. Mersey's glance hovered there, around the doctor's
knees. The visitor forced it higher, past the belt around a tidy
waist, along the buttons of the opened vest to the white collar, and
finally to the kindly eyes behind gold-rimmed glasses.

Again he had commanded this human being and had been obeyed. The
traveler braced himself for the leap from the tortured mind to the
sane one.

But his gaze continued to be that of Mersey.

The gray eyes of the doctor were on his patient. Intelligence and
kindness were in those eyes, but the visitor could read nothing else.

He was caught, a prisoner in a demented mind. He felt panic. This must
be the mind-screen he'd been warned about.

"Look down," the visitor commanded Mersey. "Shut your eyes. Don't let
him see me."

But Mersey continued to be held by the doctor's eyes. The visitor
cowered back into the crazed mental tangle.

Gradually, then, his fear ebbed. There was more likelihood that Cloyd
did not believe Mersey's words than that he did. The doctor treated
hundreds of patients and surely many of them had delusions as fanciful
as this one might seem.

The traveler's alarm simmered down until he was capable of
appreciating the irony of the situation.

But at the same time, he thought with pain, "Is it our fate that of
all the millions of creatures on this world, we can establish
communication only through the insane? And even then to have only
imperfect control of the mind and, worse, to have it become a
transmitter for our most secret thoughts?"

It was heartbreaking.

Dr. Cloyd broke the long silence. Pulling at his ear, he spoke calmly
and matter-of-factly:

"Let me see if I understand your problem, Mersey. You believe yourself
to be from another world, from which you have traveled, although not
physically. Your world is not a material one, as far as its people
are concerned. Your civilization is a mental one, which has been
placed in danger. You must resettle your people, but this cannot be
done here, on Earth, except in the minds of the mentally ill--and that
would not be a satisfactory solution. Have I stated the case
correctly?"

"Yes," Mersey's voice said over the traveler's mental protests.
"Except that it is not a 'case,' as you call it. I am not Mersey. He
is merely a vehicle for my thoughts. I am not here to be treated or
cured, as the human being Mersey is. I'm here with a life-or-death
problem affecting an entire race, and I would not be talking to you
except that, at the moment, I'm trapped and confused."

       *       *       *       *       *

The madman was doing it again, the traveler thought
helplessly--spilling out his knowledge, betraying him and his kind.
Was there no way to muffle him?

"I must admit that I'm confused myself," Dr. Cloyd said. "Humor me for
a moment while I think out loud. Let me consider this in my own
framework, first, and then in yours, without labeling either one
absolutely true or false.

"You see," the doctor went on, "this is a world of vitality. My
world--Earth. Its people are strong. Their bodies are developed as
well as their minds. There are some who are not so strong, and some
whose minds have been injured. But for the most part, both the mind
and the body are in balance. Each has its function, and they work
together as a coordinated whole. My understanding of your world, on
the other hand, is that it's in a state of imbalance, where the
physical has deteriorated almost to extinction and the mind has been
nurtured in a hothouse atmosphere. Where, you might say, the mind has
fed on the decay of the body."

"No," said Mersey, voicing the traveler's conviction. "You paint a
highly distorted picture of our world."

"I theorize, of course," Dr. Cloyd agreed. "But it's a valid theory,
based on intimate knowledge of my own world and what you've told me of
yours."

"You make a basic error, I think," Mersey said, speaking for the
unwilling visitor. "You assume that I have been able to make contact
only with this deranged mind. That is wrong. I have shared the
experiences of many of you--a man, a boy, a woman about to bear a
child. Even a cat. And with each of these, my mind has been perfectly
attuned. I was able to share and enjoy their experiences, their
pleasures, to love with them and to fear, although they had no
knowledge of my presence.

[Illustration]

"Only since I came to this poor mind have I failed to achieve true
empathy. I have been shocked by his madness and I've tried to resist
it, to help him overcome it. But I've failed and it apparently has
imprisoned me. Whereas I was able to leave the minds of the others
almost at will, with poor Mersey I'm trapped. I can't transfer to you,
for instance, as I could normally from another. If there's a way out,
I haven't found it. Have you a theory for this?"

In spite of his distress at these revelations, the traveler was
intrigued, now that they had been voiced for him, and he was eager to
hear Dr. Cloyd's interpretation of them.

The psychiatrist took a pipe out of his pocket, filled it, lighted it
and puffed slowly on it until it was drawing well.

"Continuing to accept your postulate that you're not Mersey, but an
alien inhabiting his mind," the doctor said finally, "I can enlarge on
my theory without changing it in any basic way.

"Your world is not superior to ours, much as it may please you to
believe that it is. Nature consists of a balance, and that balance
must hold true whether in Sioux City, or Mars, or in the fourth
dimension, or in your world, wherever that may be. Your world is out
of balance. Evidently it has been going out of balance for some time.

"Your salvation lies not in further evolution in your world--since
your way of evolving proved wrong, and may prove fatal--but in a
change in course, back along the evolutionary path to a society which
developed naturally, with the mind and the body in balance. That
society is the one you have found here, in our world. You found it
pleasant and attractive, you say, but that doesn't mean you're suited
to it.

"Nature's harsh rules may have operated to let you observe a way of
life here that you enjoy, but to exclude you otherwise--except from a
mind that is not well. In nature's balance, it could be that the
refuge on this world most closely resembling your needs is in the mind
of the psychotic. One conclusion could be that your race is mentally
ill--by our standards, if not by yours--and that the type of person
here most closely approximating your way of life is one with a
disordered mind."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Cloyd paused. Mersey had no immediate reply.

The traveler made use of the silence to consider this plausible, but
frightening theory. To accept the theory would be to accept a destiny
of madness here on this world, although the doctor had been kind
enough to draw a distinction between madness in one dimension and a
mere lack of natural balance in another.

Mersey again seized upon the traveler's mind and spoke its thoughts.
But as he spoke, he voiced a conclusion which the traveler had not yet
admitted even to himself.

"Then the answer is inescapable," Mersey said, his tone flat and
unemotional. "It is theoretically possible for all of our people to
migrate to this world and find refuge of a sort. But if we established
ourselves in the minds of your normal people, we'd be without will. As
mere observers, we'd become assimilated in time, and thus extinguished
as a separate race. That, of course, we could not permit. And if we
settled in the minds most suitable to receive us, we would be in the
minds of those who by your standards are insane--whose destiny is
controlled by the others. Here again we could permit no such fate.

"That alone would be enough to send me back to my people to report
failure. But there is something more--something I don't think you will
believe, for all your ability to synthesize acceptance of another
viewpoint."

"And what is that?"

"First I must ask a question. In speaking to me now, do you still
believe yourself to be addressing Mersey, your fellow human being, and
humoring him in a delusion? Or do you think you are speaking through
him to me, the inhabitant of another world who has borrowed his mind?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctor smiled and took time to relight his pipe.

"Let me answer you in this way," he said. "If I were convinced that
Mersey was merely harboring a delusion that he was inhabited by an
alien being, I would accept that situation clinically. I would humor
him, as you put it, in the hope that he'd be encouraged to talk freely
and perhaps give me a clue to his delusion so I could help him lose
it. I would speak to him--or to you, if that were his concept of
himself--just as I am speaking now.

"On the other hand, if I were convinced by the many unusual nuances of
our conversation that the mind I was addressing actually was that of
an alien being--I would still talk to you as I am talking now."

The doctor smiled again. "I trust I have made my answer sufficiently
unsatisfactory."

The visitor's reaction was spoken by Mersey. "On the contrary, you
have unwittingly told me what I want to know. You'd want your answer
to be satisfactory if you were speaking to Mersey, the lunatic. But
because you'd take delight in disconcerting me by scoring a
point--something you wouldn't do with a patient--you reveal acceptance
of the fact that I am not Mersey. Your rules would not permit you to
give him an unsatisfactory answer."

"Not quite," contradicted Dr. Cloyd, still smiling. "To Mersey, my
patient, troubled by his delusion and using all his craft to persuade
both of us of its reality, the unsatisfactory answer would be the
satisfactory one."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mersey's voice laughed. "Dr. Cloyd, I salute you. I will leave your
world with a tremendous respect for you--and completely unsure of
whether you believe in my existence."

"Thank you."

"I am leaving, you know," Mersey's voice replied.

The traveler by now was resigned to letting the patient be his medium
and speak his thoughts. Thus far, he had spoken them all truly, if
somewhat excessively. The traveler thought he knew why, now, and
expected Mersey to voice the reason for him very shortly. He did.

"I'm leaving because I must report failure and advise my people to
look elsewhere for a new home. Part of the reason for that failure I
haven't yet mentioned:

"Although it might appear that I, the visitor, am manipulating Mersey
to speak the thoughts I wished to communicate, the facts are almost
the opposite. My control over either Mersey's body or mind is
practically nil.

"What you have been hearing and what you hear even now are the
thoughts I am thinking--not necessarily the ones I want you to know.
What has happened is this, if I may borrow your theory:

"My mind has invaded Mersey's, but his human vitality is too strong to
permit him to be controlled by it. In fact, the reverse is true. His
vitality is making use of my mind for its own good, and for the good
of your human race. His own mind is damaged badly, but his healthy
body has taken over and made use of my mind. It is using my mind to
make it speak against its will--to speak the thoughts of an alien
without subterfuge, as they actually exist in truth. Thus I am
helplessly telling you all about myself and the intentions of my
people.

"What is in operation in Mersey is the human body's instinct of
self-preservation. It is utilizing my mind to warn you against that
very mind. Do you see? That would be the case, too, if a million of us
invaded a million minds like Mersey's. None of us could plot
successfully against you, if that were our desire--which, of course,
it is--because the babbling tongues we inherited along with the bodies
would give us away."

The doctor no longer smiled. His expression was grave now.

"I don't know," he said. "Now I am not sure any longer. I'm not
certain that I follow you--or whether I want to follow you. I think
I'm a bit frightened."

"You needn't be. I'm going. I'll say good-by, in your custom, and
thank you for the hospitality and pleasures your world has given me.
And I suppose I must thank Mersey for the warning of doom he's
unknowingly given my people, poor man. I hope you can help him."

"I'll try," said Dr. Cloyd, "though I must say you've complicated the
diagnosis considerably."

"Good-by. I won't be back, I promise you."

"I believe you," said the doctor. "Good-by."

Mersey slumped back on the couch. He looked up at the ceiling,
vacantly.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time there was no sound in the room.

Then the doctor said: "Mersey."

There was no answer. The man continued to lie there motionless,
breathing normally, looking at the ceiling.

"Mersey," said the doctor again. "How do you feel?"

The man turned his head. He looked at the doctor with hostility, then
went back to his contemplation of the ceiling.

"Drop dead," he muttered.

                                          --RICHARD WILSON

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Inhabited, by Richard Wilson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INHABITED ***

***** This file should be named 31392.txt or 31392.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/3/9/31392/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
