Project Gutenberg's The Battle and the Ruins of Cintla, by Daniel G. Brinton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Battle and the Ruins of Cintla

Author: Daniel G. Brinton

Release Date: February 27, 2010 [EBook #31418]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BATTLE AND THE RUINS OF CINTLA ***




Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





Transcriber's Note

A number of typographical errors have been maintained in this version of
this book. They have been marked with a [TN-#], which refers to a
description in the complete list found at the end of the text.
Inconsistent spelling, hyphenation, and capitalization have been
maintained. A list of inconsistently spelled words is found at the end
of the text.



  THE
  BATTLE AND THE RUINS
  OF CINTLA


  BY
  DANIEL G. BRINTON, M. D., LL. D., D. Sc.

  PROFESSOR OF
  AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY AND LINGUISTICS IN THE UNIVERSITY
  OF PENNSYLVANIA


  [REPRINTED FROM THE _AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN_, SEPTEMBER, 1896]

  CHICAGO
  1896




THE BATTLE AND THE RUINS OF CINTLA.

BY DANIEL G. BRINTON, M. D.


The first battle on the American continent in which horses were used was
that of Cintla in Tabasco, March, 1519, the European troops being under
the leadership of Hernando Cortes.

This fact attaches something more than an ordinary historic interest to
the engagement, at least enough to make it desirable to ascertain its
precise locality and its proper name. Both of these are in doubt, as
well as the ethnic stock to which the native tribe belonged which
opposed the Spanish soldiery on the occasion. I propose to submit these
questions to a re-examination, and also to describe from unpublished
material the ruins which,--as I believe--, mark the spot of this first
important encounter of the two races on American soil.

The engagement itself has been described by all the historians of
Cortes' famous conquest of Mexico, as it was the first brilliant
incident of that adventure. We have at least four accounts of it from
participants. One prepared under the eye of Cortes himself, one by the
anonymous historian of his expedition, a third by Cortes'
companion-in-arms, the redoubtable Bernal Diaz del Castillo, and a
fourth by Andres de Tapia.[3-1]

The most satisfactory narrative, however, is given by the chaplain of
Cortes, Francisco de Gomara, and I shall briefly rehearse his story,
adding a few points from other contemporary writers.[3-2]

Cortes with his armada cast anchor at the mouth of the River Grijalva in
March, 1519. The current being strong and the bar shallow, he with about
eighty men proceeded in boats up the river for about two miles, when
they descried on the bank a large Indian village. It was surrounded with
a wooden palisade, having turrets and loopholes from which to hurl
stones and darts. The houses within were built of tiles laid in mortar,
or of sun-dried brick (adobes), and were roofed with straw or split
trees. The chief temple had spacious rooms, and its dependences
surrounded a court yard.

The interpreter Aguilar, a Spaniard who had lived with the Mayas in
Yucatan, could readily speak the tongue of the village, which was
therefore a Mayan dialect. The natives told him that the town was named
Potonchan, which Aguilar translated "the place that smells or stinks,"
an etymology probably correct in a general way.

The natives were distrustful, and opposed the landing of the Europeans
rather with words and gestures than with blows. Their warriors
approached Cortes in large boats, called in their tongue _tahucup_, and
refused him permission to land.

After some parleying, Cortes withdrew to an island in the river near by,
and as night drew on, he sent to the ships for reinforcements, and
despatched some of the troops to look for a ford from the island to the
mainland; which they easily found.

The next morning he landed some of his men by the boats, and attacked
the village on the water side, while another detachment crossed the ford
and making a circuit assaulted it in the rear. The Indians were
prepared, having sent their women and children away. They were in number
about four hundred, and made at first a brisk resistance, but being
surprised by the rear assault, soon fled in dismay. No Spaniard was
killed, though many were wounded.

Cortes established himself in the village and landed most of his troops
and ten out of his thirteen horses. When his men were rested and the
injured had had their wounds dressed with fat taken from dead
Indians[4-1] (!) he sent out three detachments on foot to reconnoitre.

After marching a distance which is not stated, but which could not have
been many miles, they came to an extensive plain covered with maize
fields, temples and houses. This was Cintla. There were many warriors
gathered there, and after a sharp skirmish the Spaniards fell back.

Having thus learned the ground, Cortes prepared for a decisive battle,
as also did the natives. The latter gathered at Cintla in five divisions
of eight thousand men each, as the chroniclers aver.

Cortes had about five hundred men including some Cuban Indians. The main
detachment proceeded on foot by the high road, the cavalry along a path
in the woods, and another detachment by a third route. The country was
swampy and cut with canals, offering serious obstacles to the horses. It
was not until the infantry had been for some time closely engaged with
the enemy on the plain of Cintla, and rather severely handled, that the
cavalry reached the spot. Their appearance, together with the noise and
fatal effect of the musketry, soon struck terror to the hearts of the
natives--their ranks broke and they fled. Gomara estimates that there
were about three hundred of them killed, which is likely enough; while
Bishop De las Casas puts the slain at thirty thousand![5-1]

Such was the battle of Cintla. It broke the spirits of the natives, and
soon their chieftain, named Tabasco, from whom the river and the
province were later called, came in, and offered his submission. Cortes
took possession of the land in the name of the King of Spain, and
erected a large cross in the chief temple of Potonchan. He remained
there several days longer before proceeding on his voyage.

_The Name Cintla._--Of the contemporary authorities, only two give the
name of the place at or near which the battle was fought.

One of these is Bernal Diaz, who writes it twice, spelling it both times
_Cintia_.[5-2] The other is Gomara, who gives _Cintla_, the form which I
believe to be correct. Through following some less reliable authorities
a number of writers, among them Prescott and his editor Mr. J. F. Kirk,
Orozco y Berra, etc., and their copyists, have deformed this word into
_Ceutla_.

The most obvious derivation of Cintla is from the Nahuatl language, in
which _Cintla_ means a dried ear of maize; _Cintlan_, a place where
dried ears are, a cornfield. Most of the places in Tabasco became known
to the Spaniards under their Nahuatl appellatives through interpreters
in that tongue, and because most of the territory had been subjected to
the powerful sway of the Montezumas.

Still, Cintla may also be a Mayan word. It may be a nominal form from
the verb _tzen-tah_, and would then have the signification, "a built-up
place," or one well stocked with provisions; or, it may be a patronymic
from the Tzentals, the tribe which occupied this region at the time, as
I shall proceed to show.

_The Native Tribe._--There is no question but that the native tribe
which took part in this combat belonged to the Mayan stock. All the
accounts agree that Aguilar, the Spaniard whom Cortes found in Yucatan
as a captive, and who had learned to speak the Mayan tongue,
communicated with the natives without difficulty. This is conclusive as
to their ethnic position.

Further evidence, if needed, is offered by the native names and words
preserved in the accounts. The term for their large canoes, _tahucup_,
is from the Maya _tahal_, to swim, and _kop_, that which is hollow, or
hollowed out. The name _potonchan_, Aguilar translated as, "the place
that stinks" (lugar que hiede). He evidently understood it as derived
from the Maya verb _tunhal_, to stink, with the intensive prefix _pot_
(which is not unusual in the tongue, as _pot-hokan_, very evident,
etc.). The historian Herrera, on some authority not known to me, further
explains this term as one of contempt applied to the people there,
meaning rude and barbarous;[6-1] as we should say, using the same
metaphor, "stinkards."

_Tabasco_ is said by Bernal Diaz to have been the name of the principal
chief of the eight provinces or tribes, who together opposed the
Spaniards. For this reason I would reject the derivation from the
Nahuatl, proposed by Rovirosa,--_tlalli_, earth, _paltic_, wet or
swampy, _co_, in,[6-2]--however appropriate it would be geographically;
and also that from the Maya, _tazcoob_, "deceived," referring to the
deceptions practiced on the Spaniards,--which is defended by Orozco y
Berra[6-3]; and I should accept that which I find suggested by Dr.
Berendt in his manuscript work on Mayan geographical names. He reads
_Tabasco_ as a slightly corrupt form of the Maya _T'ah-uaxac-coh_, "our
(or the) master of the eight lions," referring to the eight districts or
gentes of the tribe. This is significant and appropriate, the jaguar,
the American lion, being a very common emblem in the ruins of Cintla.

The branch of the Mayan stock which occupied the litoral of the province
of Tabasco at that time were those later known as the Tzentals
(otherwise spelled Zendal or Tzeltal). By some writers they have been
called the Chontals of Tobasco, _chontal_, as is well known, being
merely a common noun in Nahuatl to express foreigners or barbarians.
Their identity with the modern Tzentals of Chiapas has been established
by the researches of Dr. Berendt.

The Tzental is a dialect closely akin to pure Maya, though it was
believed by Dr. Berendt to present nearer relations than the Maya proper
to the dialect of the Huastecas, a segregated idiom of the Mayan family,
spoken near Tampico.

_The Locality._--Until M. Desire Charnay brought out the results of the
Lorillard expedition in his handsome work, "The Ancient Cities of the
New World,"[6-4] no one, so far as I know, had expressed any doubt that
Cintla was situated near the mouth of the great river, the Rio de
Tabasco, formed by the confluence of the Usumacinta and the Rio de
Grijalva, and emptying into the bay of Campeche, 18 deg. 35', north
latitude.

M. Charnay did not visit the ruins of Cintla nor the site of Potonchan,
which I am about to describe; but he did make an examination of the
ruins of Comalcalco, about thirty miles west of Cintla; and as they are
of notable magnitude, he proceeds to argue that they represent the
ancient Cintla, of the victory of Cortes.

The arguments on which he founds this contention may be briefly stated.
They are that the accounts refer to two entrances to the river (_dos
bocas_) while the Tabasco has but one; that the bar of Tabasco now
admits vessels of 300 tons, whereas Cortes speaks of it as too shallow
for his caravels; that Herrera says Cortes retired to a small island,
whereas there is none in the Rio de Tabasco; that Herrera further speaks
of a ford by which the soldiers of Cortes "crossed the river," which
would have been impossible in the Tabasco; and finally that the same
writer mentions cacao plantations, though at present none exist near
Frontera. For these reasons he thinks both Grijalva and Cortes entered
the embouchure now known as the Barra de Dos Bocas, some twenty-five
miles west of the mouth of the Rio de Tabasco.

A slight examination dissipates these objections. Both Grijalva and
Cortes note the powerful current of the Rio de Tabasco, carrying fresh
water six miles out to sea, as is observed to-day,[7-1] and this is not
in the least applicable to the insignificant stream flowing out of the
Dos Bocas. M. Charnay was misinformed when he stated there is no island
at the mouth of the Rio de Tabasco. There are in fact two, one, long and
narrow, known as the Isla de Grijalva, the other quite small, close to
the plantation of Dolores (see the map). The latter was probably that to
which Cortes retired. None of the accounts say that the soldiers "forded
the river," but only the short distance between the island and the
mainland. These islands give to the entrance of the river the appearance
of two embouchures or mouths. The depth of the bar varies of course with
the seasons and with the tides.

But what is conclusive is that in 1525 the Spaniards founded the city
Nuestra Senora de la Victoria, on the site of Potonchan. In 1646, it had
a cura and a vicar, and counted 2000 parishioners, and the abundance of
its cacao harvest is especially noted.[7-2] At some later day it was
attacked and destroyed by filibusters; but the remains of the church and
the cemetery are still visible at Dolores, and pilgrimages are yet made
to them on certain holy days by the faithful of the parish of Frontera,
on the opposite shore. This record places the scene of the conflict
beyond all doubt.

_Condition of the Natives._--The various accounts agree in describing
the province as highly cultivated and thickly settled. Maize and cacao
were the principal crops. Temples and edifices are repeatedly referred
to. A few years afterwards (1524) Cortes traversed Tabasco some miles
inland, and has left a description of its industries. The people were
active merchants, and the list of their commodities which he gives
includes cacao, maize, cotton, dye-stuffs, feathers, salt, wax, resins,
paints, gum copal, pottery, beads, shells, precious stones, woven stuffs
and gold of low alloy. The richer citizens had numerous wives and female
slaves, which accounted for the rapid increase in population.[8-1] The
chronicler Gomara furnished a long list of the native articles which
Grijalva brought back in 1519 from Potonchan and the neighboring coast.
They reveal a high degree of artistic culture, and leave no doubt but
that the tribes of the vicinity were as developed in the arts as any in
America.

_Ruined Cities._--Writing about 1875, Mr. H. H. Bancroft says: "On the
immediate coast (of Tabasco) some large towns and temples were seen by
the early voyagers; but I have no information that relics of any kind
have been discovered in modern times."[8-2]

In fact, although it is doubtful if there are any ruins directly on the
coast, there are many but a short distance inland. Those at
Comalcacalco[TN-1] have been figured and described by M. Charnay, and
his work is so well known that a reference to it is sufficient.

At the locality called Pedrito, about fifteen miles from the mouth of
the Tabasco, there are many mounds, embankments, piles of pottery and
other signs of an ancient town. Among the relics is a large circular
stone, "like a round table," with figures in relief engraved on its
sides, and with holes drilled in its surface, in which pegs or wooden
nails are said to have been fitted.[8-3] About ten miles north of this
spot is another group of mounds on the left bank of the Rio de San Pablo
y San Pedro. Doubtless many others exist unknown in the dense forests.

_The Ruins of Cintla._--The ruins of Cintla were visited and surveyed by
the late Dr. C. H. Berendt in March and April, 1869, and, so far as I
know, neither before nor since have they been seen by any archaeologist.
Nor can I learn that Dr. Berendt ever published the results of his
researches. The only reference I can find to them in any of his
published writings is in a paper which he read, July 10th, 1876, before
the American Geographical Society, and which was published in its
Bulletin, No. 2, for that year. The title of this address was, "Remarks
on the Centers of Ancient Civilization in Central America and their
Geographical Distribution." He certainly prepared a much more extended
paper especially on Cintla, with illustrations and maps, fragments of
which I have found among the documents left at his death; but if
published, I have been unable to trace it. Nor can I discover what
became of the considerable archaeological collection which he made at
Cintla and brought away with him, a memorandum about which is among his
papers.

The passage in his address before the Geographical Society touching on
Cintla is as follows:

"It was by mere chance that in the year 1869 I discovered the site of
ancient Cintla, buried in the thick and fever-haunted forests of the
marshy coast, and unknown until then to the Indians themselves. In the
course of the excavations which I caused to be made, antiquities of a
curious and interesting character were laid bare.

"Prominent among these ruins, and presenting a peculiar feature of
workmanship, are the so-called _teocallis_, or mounds, which here are
built of earth, and covered at the top and on the sides with a thick
layer of mortar in imitation of stone work. On one of these mounds I
found not only the sides and the platform, but even two flights of
stairs, constructed of the same apparently fragile but yet enduring
material. One of the latter was perfectly well preserved. I likewise saw
clay figures of animals covered with a similar coating of mortar or
plaster, thus imitating sculptured stone and retaining traces of having
been painted in various colors.

[Illustration: _Fig. 1.--Map of the Ruins of Cintla._]

"The reason for this singular use of cement probably is that in the
alluvial soil of this coast, no stones occur within a distance of fifty
miles and more from the sea shore; stone implements, such as axes,
chisels, grinding stones, obsidian flakes, etc., which are occasionally
found, can have been introduced solely by trade. The pottery and the
idols made of terra cotta show a high degree of perfection.

"Regarding the period down to which such earthenware was made, a broken
vase disinterred from one of the mounds in my presence may give a clue.
Its two handles represent Spaniards, with their European features,
beard, Catalonian cap, and _polainas_, or gaiters."

There is also among his papers the commencement of an address or essay
upon these ruins, written in Spanish, and this, when completed, may have
been printed in some Mexican periodical. I translate from it the
following passage, the remainder having been lost:

"Having learned that in the forests of the coast between the _barras_ of
Chiltepec and Grijalva various mounds, idols and other remains of an
earlier population had been discovered, I proceeded to that part of the
country called _Del Cajete_, and devoted six weeks to its exploration. I
soon found numerous mounds and embankments from which the present
inhabitants had gathered fragments of idols and milling stones of a form
unknown now in the vicinity.

"It very soon became apparent that these mounds were not such as those
isolated ones which are found in various parts of this country, but were
arranged in groups surrounding open spaces, _plazas_, and forming
streets, extending over an area three leagues in length by one in
breadth.

[Illustration: _Fig. 2.--The Great Temple._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 3.--Cross Section of Fig. 2, B._]

"Not a single tradition, not a single native name survives to cast any
light upon these ruins. The whole of this coast was depopulated in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries owing to the slave-hunting
incursions of the filibusters and man-hunters. The Indians who are now
found in the neighborhood have removed there from the interior since the
beginning of the present century, and are absolutely ignorant of the
origin or builders of this city, hidden in the tropical forest."

The locality referred to as _Del Cajete_ was a settlement (rancheria) of
Indians, now better known as San Jose de la Bellota, on a large pond
into which drains the Rio de la Bellota. It was founded in 1815 by a
cura who brought the Indians there from the other side of the river,
back of Frontera.

The general position of the ruins will be seen from the above map. It is
drawn to the scale of the Mexican league, which contains 5000 yards
(varas) each 838 mm. One league is therefore approximately two and three
quarters of our miles. No ruins or mounds were located immediately on or
near the coast.

Almost a continuous line of mounds, embankments and heaps of debris
extends from near Bellota for about nine miles in a general
west-south-west direction over a plain which is now densely covered by a
tropical forest.

Dr. Berendt did not attempt to survey but a few of these numerous
monuments. The plan of one of the largest, called by the natives _El
Cuyo Grande_, "The Great Temple," is shown in the following, figure 2.

The principal mound B is terraced about half way up and was 82 feet in
height. A cross section of it is shown in Fig. 3, A-B.

A series of constructions is connected with this, the whole running in a
direction east-north-east to west-south-west. They consist of a
rectangular embankment six to eight feet high, Fig. 2, A; an isolated
circular mound, D; and two small mounds at the eastern corners of the
great mound, from which parallel embankments, E, extend easterly,
inclosing an open space, which at the extremity is terminated by a long
low mound, C. The total distance from A to C is 1140 feet.

The great mound and most of the others in the vicinity are faced with
mortar made of sand and lime from burnt oyster shells. On one or both
sides are flights of steps which lead up to the summit. These are
constructed of layers of mortar, tiles and hard-pounded earth,
distributed in the manner represented in Fig. 4.

[Illustration: _Fig. 4.--Construction of Stairways._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 5.--Los Cuyos de la Canada._]

The earth is either black or red, and is mixed with sand from the coast
to give it consistency. The tiles or bricks are rectangular in shape,
well made and regular in outline, and laid one against another as in a
pavement.

Another group is called _Los Cuyos de la Canada_, Fig. 5. It consists of
two mounds on a low platform, adjoining each other. The larger, _a_, is
twenty feet in height, the lower, _b_, about fifteen feet. Their sides
are oriented exactly to the true north. A section is shown in Fig. 5,
_g_. Two small oblong mounds, _c_ and _d_, about six feet high, and a
square altar-like heap, _f_, appear to be in relation to the group.
Numerous pieces of mortar and terra cotta occur in the vicinity, and
1500 feet directly west there is a large mound of moderate height.

Almost anywhere in the area of this ancient city, the soil abounds in
fragments of mortar, pottery and images of earthenware. Very frequently
the latter are represented seated on a bell-shaped support, apparently
that they might be stood up upon a flat surface. Two of these are shown
from Dr. Berendt's drawings in Figs. 6 and 7. The handles of utensils
were often decorated in fantastic forms as that shown in Fig. 8.

[Illustration: _Fig. 6[TN-2]--Image with Bell-shaped Bottom and
Handle._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 7.--Image of a Warrior on Bell-shaped Support._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 8.--Decorated Handle of Utensil._]

An abundance of _metates_, or corn-stones, of a shape not now usual in
the neighborhood were exhibited. Some of these were quite graceful,
having several feet and highly ornamented. The vases of pottery were
occasionally noteworthy for their symmetry and beauty, as that shown in
Fig. 9.

[Illustration: _Fig. 9.--Jar of Pottery._]

At the foot of the stairways to the summit of the mounds on each side
were frequently the remains of tigers' heads, well moulded in burnt
clay.

Here and there the remains of wells were discovered, or of excavations
which apparently were intended for the purpose of obtaining water.

Dr. Berendt mentions several tombs, but unfortunately does not specify
their location or construction. He states that they usually contained
several bodies, in a sitting posture, placed side by side with their
arms and ornaments.

No trace of metal whatever was discovered, neither copper nor gold,
which is rather unexpected, as the natives in the time of Grijalva were
acquainted with both these substances.

Such is the brief account I am able to give of these extensive and
interesting ruins from the fragmentary papers of their explorer. If any
reader of these notes can inform this journal of the disposition Dr.
Berendt made of his collection and the full memoranda of his surveys and
excavations, the cause of American archaeology will be further benefited.

MEDIA, PENNA.


FOOTNOTES:

[3-1] The authorities are:

_Carta de la Justicia de la Rica Villa de la Vera Cruz_, July 10, 1519.
This is sometimes referred to as Cortes' first letter.

Bernal Diaz del Castillo, _Historia de la Conquista de la Nueva Espana_.

Andres de Tapia.[TN-3] _Relacion Sobre la Conquista de la Nueva Espana._

_Relacion Anonyma de la Conquista de la Nueva Espana._

[3-2] Francisco Lopez de Gomara, _Conquista de Mexico_. I follow the
Madrid edition of 1852.

[4-1] This delectable surgical item is added by Captain Bernal Diaz.

[5-1] _Historia de las Indias._ Lib. XIV.

[5-2] I have consulted both the original edition (1632) and the Madrid
reprint of 1852. It is thus spelled in both, though Dr. Jourdanet, in
his excellent French translation (Paris, 1877) gives _Cintla_.

[6-1] Herrera, _Historia de las Indias Occidentales_. Dec. III, lib.
vii, cap. iii.

[6-2] Jose N. Rovirosa, _Nombres Geographicos de Tabasco_, (Mexico,
1888).

[6-3] Orozco y Berra, _Historia Antigua de Mexico_, Tom. XIV, Lib. I,
cap. V.

[6-4] I use the French edition, _Les Anciennes Villes du Nouveau Monde_,
pp. 159, 160 (Paris, 1885).

[7-1] Requena says the current from the river is visible "from ten to
twelve leagues from the shore in every season and in high water much
further." Pedro Requena, _Informe sobre Tabasco_, p. 52 (S. Juan
Bautista, 1847. Imprenta del Gobierno).

[7-2] These facts are given in the _Memoria_ of Diaz de la Calle,
printed at Madrid, 1646, extracts from which I find in Dr. Berendt's
manuscripts.

[8-1] Cortes' description is given in his "fourth letter." His route is
extremely difficult to locate accurately.

[8-2] _The Native Races of the Pacific States_, Vol. IV, p. 287.

[8-3] MSS, Notes of Dr. C. H. Berendt.




Transcriber's Note


The following misspellings and typographical errors were maintained.

          Page   Error
  TN-1   8   Comalcacalco should read Comalcalco
  TN-2  12   Fig. 6 should read Fig. 6.
  TN-3  fn. 3-1  Tapia. should read Tapia,

The following words were inconsistently spelled.

  Jose / Jose
  Rio / Rio





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Battle and the Ruins of Cintla, by
Daniel G. Brinton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BATTLE AND THE RUINS OF CINTLA ***

***** This file should be named 31418.txt or 31418.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/4/1/31418/

Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
