Project Gutenberg's University Education in Ireland, by Samuel Haughton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: University Education in Ireland

Author: Samuel Haughton

Release Date: March 8, 2010 [EBook #31553]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNIVERSITY EDUCATION IN IRELAND ***




Produced by Brian Foley and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





  [ Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible; some minor changes have been made to correct typographical
    errors, and some inconsistent spelling.
  ]




                            UNIVERSITY EDUCATION

                                     IN

                                  IRELAND.

                                   BY THE

                     REV. SAMUEL HAUGHTON, M.D, F.R.S.,

                     FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN.


                        LONDON: WILLIAMS & NORGATE.
                         DUBLIN: McGLASHAN & GILL.

                                   1868.

                           _Price One Shilling._


                                  DUBLIN:
                      Printed at the University Press,
                               BY M. H. GILL.




UNIVERSITY EDUCATION IN IRELAND.




INTRODUCTION.


The political condition of Ireland is, at present, grave; and, in the event
of a war with the United States, would become menacing, to England.

Irish politicians assert--and it is partly admitted by their
opponents--that, in the existing state of Ireland, three questions demand
an immediate solution: these questions are, the Land Question, the Church
Question, and the Education Question.

The tenant farmers of Ireland wish for fixity of tenure, and care but
little for compensation for improvements, except as a means of obtaining a
practical fixity of tenure; and they would, unquestionably, rejoice to see
transferred to themselves, as occupiers of the soil, the rights now enjoyed
by absentee noblemen and landlords. It is the opinion of many that the
Land question cannot be settled without such a change of owners as would
practically amount to a revolution.

With respect to the question of the Church, the more intelligent laymen of
the Irish National party openly avow their wish to alienate the property of
the Church, on the ground that its existence forms a barrier to the union
of Irish Protestants with the Catholic majority in the formation of a truly
National Irish party. It is asserted, and apparently not without reason,
that if the Irish Protestants felt themselves cast off by England, and
their Church endowments confiscated, they might become more willing to join
their countrymen in an anti-English policy, which the rude breath of war
might some day fan into a demand for an Irish Republic, under the guarantee
of France and America. It is for English politicians to decide how far the
advantages of religious equality would compensate for the risk of national
disloyalty.

The questions of the Land and Church in Ireland will, doubtless, be fully
discussed in the House of Commons by persons acquainted with those
questions, and competent to do them justice; but it may be fairly doubted
whether the question of Education in Ireland will be examined with as full
a knowledge as will be brought to bear on the other questions. The
following lines are written in the hope of adding a contribution of facts
towards the discussion of one branch of the Education question--that which
relates to University Education in Ireland.

My apology for writing on this question is, that I have been a Fellow of
Trinity College for nearly a quarter of a century, during which time I have
taken an active part in the educational reforms which have placed the
Graduates of Trinity College foremost in all the competitions for the
public services of India, of the Army, and of the Colonies. I am also
entitled to be heard as a Clerical Fellow of Trinity College, holding in
trust for his brother Protestants the precious gift of education based on
pure religion, handed down to us by our forefathers, in defence of which
all true Protestants are prepared, if necessary, to sacrifice their lives.

Two proposals were discussed, and a third was incidentally alluded to, in
the summer of 1867, in the House of Commons, respecting University
Education in Ireland; one of these proposals involves a betrayal of the
religious base on which the Protestant College of Elizabeth was founded;
and another involves a surrender for ever of the high literary and
scientific standard of Dublin University, and a permanent lowering of high
class education in Ireland. Against the one I feel bound to protest, as an
earnest Protestant, and against the other as an advocate for the
advancement of science and letters.

The proposals made in Parliament respecting University Education are all
founded on the generally admitted fact that Roman Catholics in Ireland have
not got the same facilities for University Education as the Protestants of
that country, and that it is expedient at once to redress this grievance.
In order to do so, it has been proposed to do one or other of three
things:--

    I. To secularize Trinity College, by throwing open its Fellowships
       and Scholarships to all Students, irrespective of religious
       qualification.

   II. To open the University of Dublin to other Colleges than Trinity
       College, thus transforming the University of Dublin into a
       National Irish University, on the model of the University of
       France.

  III. To grant a Charter and Endowment to a Roman Catholic University,
       in which the education given shall be based on religion, as in
       Trinity College at present.

I shall endeavour to state briefly the objections which seem to me to be so
fatal to either of the first two proposals, as to leave us no alternative
but to accept the third horn of the Educational dilemma:--


I. SECULARIZATION OF TRINITY COLLEGE.

Trinity College was founded in Dublin by Queen Elizabeth, in 1591, as a
Protestant University, and for the purpose of giving to Irish Protestants a
University Education, based on the doctrines and discipline of the Reformed
Church of England. This infant University was fostered by the guiding hand
of the great Lord Burghley, its interests were defended by the ill-fated
Essex, and its Statutes were drafted by the highly gifted Bishop Bedell.

Trinity College has been well described by her enemies as a "handful of
Protestant Clergymen;" because her Fellows, with the exception of three,
were required to take Holy Orders in the English Church; and at the present
moment five only of her thirty-two Fellowships are permitted by Statute to
be held by laymen.

Trinity College is now nearly three centuries in existence, and may be
regarded as the only English institution that ever succeeded in Ireland.

The sons of the Alma Mater founded by Elizabeth may be excused if they
point with pride to the names of Ussher, King, and Magee, among her
theologians; to Berkeley, Brinkley, and Hamilton, among her thinkers and
mathematicians; and to Swift, Goldsmith, Burke, and Plunket, amongst those
whom she has given to literature, oratory, and politics, whose names shall
live so long as religion, science, and letters attract the respect and
claim the study of educated Englishmen.

Trinity College has never been, and never was intended to be, a national
institution; her emoluments, her Fellowships and Scholarships, are the
property of the Irish members of the English Church; and the proposal to
throw them open to the competition of Roman Catholics and Dissenters is a
proposal for the confiscation, so far, of the property of Irish
Protestants. Trinity College has well and faithfully discharged the part
she was required to fill; she has maintained the pure doctrine of the
English Church against all opponents; she has reared her Students as
faithful children of that Church; she has given them an education that
enables them to compete successfully with all rivals in the walks of
literature and science; and it cannot be fairly alleged against her as a
fault that she has not provided for the educational wants of Irish
Catholics; she was never intended to do so.

The lovers of the gorgeous Rose need not blush because she wants the colour
and grace of the beautiful Lily; and I may well be pardoned for believing
that no brighter or fairer flower blooms in the garden of the West, than
the Tudor Rose planted in Dublin by the proud Elizabeth.

In order to estimate rightly the effects of the secularization of Trinity
College, both upon the Protestants and the Roman Catholics of Ireland, it
will be necessary to give a numerical view of the relative proportions of
the different religions and professions among the Students of that College.
Taking an average of the past ten years, there are 1200 Students on the
books of Trinity College. Of these 1200 Students, 800 are in daily
attendance upon lectures, and may be classified as follows:--

    1. Divinity Students,                 160
    2. Medical Students,                  240
    3. Law Students,                       70
    4. Engineering Students,               60
    5. Civil Service of India,             30
    6. Non-professional Students,         240
                                         ----
                    Total,                800

In order to find the proportion of Roman Catholics,[1] I have taken, at
random, five years from 1855 to 1859, during which 1378 Students entered
Trinity College, of whom 80 were Roman Catholics, and 61 were Protestant
Dissenters and Jews. We may, therefore, assume that the 1200 Students are
distributed as follows:--

    1. English Church,                   1077
    2. Roman Catholic Church,              70
    3. Protestant Dissenters,              53
                                         ----
                    Total,               1200

The preceding figures give an average of six per cent. of Roman Catholic
Students in Trinity College, and in no department of the College do they
exceed ten per cent. Thus, in the Medical School, in which there is a
larger proportion than in other professional schools, during the four years
ending 1867, out of 300 Students matriculated in Medicine, exactly thirty
were Roman Catholics, and three were Jews.

Let us now examine briefly the effect of secularizing Trinity College upon
the Protestant and Roman Catholic Students respectively.

It cannot be believed by any one, that the passing of an Act of Parliament
secularizing Trinity College would alter in the slightest degree the
sentiments and wishes of the 1100 Students of the English Church, or those
of the parents and guardians who placed them in Trinity College, knowing
and expecting that they would there receive, not only a liberal education,
but instruction and training in the principles of the Church of England.
Those 1100 young and intelligent Students would still demand an education
based upon religion; a demand which would be promptly answered by the
Clerical Fellows of the College; and it cannot be doubted that, if they
were well led by earnest and competent teachers, they would found a second
Trinity College within the walls, which would perpetuate the principles of
the College founded by Elizabeth. Such a movement the Parliament would find
itself unable to control; for the portion of the funds of Trinity College
that is now expended on the education of the Clergy would be allowed, in
common justice, to be allocated in future to the same object; and the
Clerical Professors and Fellows would gather round them the germ of the
Trinity College of the future, faithful to the traditions of the past, and
perchance surpassing the reputation of the old College for learning.

From what I know of the earnest spirit of Irish Protestants, and of their
determination to secure for their children an education founded on the pure
word of God, I believe that the Clerical Tutors of the College would at
once transfer to themselves the great majority of the Protestant Students
of Trinity College.

Some 100 or 200 Students might prefer to receive the instruction, and
reward the care, of such lay Fellows as might find their way into the
secularized Corporation, and thus a permanent domestic schism would become
established between the clerical and lay elements of the College, which are
now happily at peace. Whatever might be the future of the College, it is
certain that, at the outset, the Secular Fellows of the College would have
to undergo the rivalry of a trained band of Protestant teachers, supported
by sympathizing Students, both smarting under an angry sense of wrong and
injustice.

Let us now inquire how the secularization of Trinity College would please
the Roman Catholic party in Ireland. The Roman Catholic Clergy warn their
flocks against Trinity College as a Protestant Institution, necessarily
dangerous to the principles of Catholic Students; and, in thus warning
them, they are practically wise, for it is simply impossible for seventy
Catholics to associate with 1100 Protestants, as equals and fellow
Students, without renouncing, more or less, the narrow views respecting
Protestants that prevail among the higher circles of their Hierarchy.

Trinity College, however, although considered dangerous, has never been
placed by the Roman Catholic Clergy in the same category as the Queen's
Colleges, which are essentially secularized institutions, without a
recognized religion, and "godless:" as such they are absolutely condemned
by the Hierarchy, and faithful Catholics are prohibited from entering their
walls.

The practical effect of secularizing Trinity College, if the experiment
were successful, would be to convert it into a fourth Queen's College, and
it would thus become one of a class of Educational Institutions which the
Church of Rome has always, and consistently, forbidden her children to
enter. It is hard to see how such a plan as this can be rationally
advocated, on the ground that it would satisfy the just demands of the
Catholics of Ireland.

So far, therefore, as Irish Roman Catholics are concerned, the
secularization of Trinity College would be to them a loss, and not a gain;
for it would transfer education in this College from the list of dangerous
to that of prohibited enjoyments.

I need scarcely add how mean and vindictive would be the spirit that would
secularize Trinity College, in order to injure the Irish Protestants,
without any corresponding benefit to the Irish Catholics.

I believe, therefore, that it would be impolitic for the English Parliament
to secularize Trinity College, for the following reasons:--

  1. It would irritate the Irish Protestants to deprive them of a College
     founded on the principles of their Church, which has done its duty,
     and has possessed their confidence for three centuries.

  2. It would not satisfy the just demand of the Irish Catholics for
     University Education, merely to admit them to the Fellowships and
     Scholarships of a secularized College, the principle of which they
     must feel bound to condemn.


II. NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND.

The second plan that has been suggested for solving the University question
in Ireland, in one form or other, amounts to a proposal to throw open the
University of Dublin, or the Queen's University in Ireland, or both, so as
to embrace in one University a number of Colleges, each retaining its own
system of religious training and discipline, and its own endowments, and
sending up its Students to pass the Examinations of the Central University,
whose functions would be reduced to those of an Examining Board.

I readily admit that this proposal is free from one of the objections I
have urged against the proposal to solve the University problem by
secularizing Trinity College, and that it leaves both Protestants and
Catholics free to train their sons in the religious faith and traditions of
their forefathers.

This advantage, although great, would, however, in my opinion, be purchased
at the cost of degrading for ever the standard of University Education in
Ireland.

If this objection can be established, it ought to have peculiar weight in
considering the question of Irish University Education. England differs
essentially from Ireland, in affording to her young men countless openings
in every walk of life, with or without the benefits of University
Education, which in England may be regarded as a luxury enjoyed by the
rich; whereas in Ireland an University Education is frequently a necessity
imposed upon the sons of the less wealthy middle classes. The openings in
life for young men of this class in Ireland are so very limited, that they
must either emigrate, or rely on their talents and education, in pushing
their way in the learned professions in England and the Colonies. Hence it
follows, that any lowering of the standard of University Education in
Ireland would be followed by peculiarly disastrous effects.

At the present moment, Trinity College may be regarded as a manufactory for
turning out the highest class of competitors for success in the Church, at
the English Bar, in the Civil Service of India, and in the Scientific and
Medical Services of the Army and Navy; and any legislation which would
produce the effect of lowering the present high standard of her degrees,
would tend to destroy the prospects of the educated classes in Ireland, and
become to those classes little short of a national calamity.

In order to establish my objection, it is necessary to call to our
recollection the ancient and true notion of an University.

With the exception of Oxford and Cambridge, there is no example of an
ancient University in Europe composed of a collection of free Colleges,
united by the common bond of an University, of which all are members, and
which conducts the Examinations for Degrees.

All other ancient Universities resemble the University of Trinity College
in Dublin, in consisting of a single College possessing, either from the
Pope or from the Crown, the University privilege of granting Degrees.

In modern times, no nation but France has seen fit to depart from this
ancient form of University Education; and in that country centralization is
so popular and so complete, that the University of France, with its
affiliated Colleges, has met with a success very certain not to follow a
similar experiment in Ireland. All the Colleges in France are moulded upon
the same type, from which no deviation is permitted; and all are under
State control, which in France restrains freedom of education by the same
trammels as freedom of speech, or liberty of the press. The Minister of
Public Instruction can boast that when the clock strikes his telegraphed
order sets in motion the tongues of his Professors in Paris, in Strasburgh,
in Lyons, and that the same lectures, in almost the same words, are
delivered within the same hour to all the educated youth of France. This
drilling of the intellect by the sergeants of the Emperor pleases for the
present the fancy of the French; it would infallibly fail in Ireland.

The condition essential to success in uniting several Colleges into a
common University is sameness of type in the education given, and sameness
of discipline in the various Colleges. This condition is attained in France
by the centralizing and irresistible power of the State; in Oxford and in
Cambridge it has grown up spontaneously, and has partially succeeded; in
Oxford, however, as in Cambridge, the multiplicity of Colleges and of
rival, though similar interests, has produced feebleness in the government
of the central authority, which is a fault little complained of in the
University of France.

I shall presently inquire whether the Colleges of Ireland present that
similarity of type which is essential to the success of the experiment of
fusing them all into a common University; but in the meantime, admitting,
for the sake of argument, that the experiment would succeed, it is worth
while to ask whether it would be an advantage to the country.

In France we see the perfection of centralization and identity in the
Lyceums and Colleges of the entire country; in Germany, on the contrary, we
witness the full development of the ancient collegiate idea of the
University; twenty-seven distinct and independent University centres of
education exist among forty millions of Germans, each University differing
from the other, and each possessing its peculiar type of excellence, to
attract its Students. I believe that all who are acquainted with the
present condition of science and letters in the two countries will be
disposed to agree in thinking that the intellect of France is cramped by
the imperial cradle in which it is reared, while the genius of Germany is
fostered by the freedom of thought, stimulated by such excellent, though
diverse centres of development, as Vienna, Munich, Heidelberg, Bonn, or
Berlin.

University education in France pleases the doctrinaire, just as parterres
of flowers of similar hue please the eyes of the gardener; while the
Universities of Germany delight the thinker, as the graceful forms and
varied colours of the flowers of some tropical forest please the traveller,
whose instinctive taste prefers the charms and grace of nature to the
symmetry and rules of art.

The experiment of the union of different Colleges in a common University
has succeeded in France, in Oxford, and in Cambridge, in consequence of the
similarity of the Colleges united together; but such an experiment
attempted in Ireland would fail, as certainly as an attempt to unite Oxford
and Cambridge into one University would fail.

We possess in Ireland three distinct types of Collegiate education, of
which may be cited as examples--Trinity College, in Dublin; the Roman
Catholic College of Carlow, and Queen's College, in Belfast. These Colleges
represent, respectively, the religious Protestant type, the Roman Catholic
type, and the secular or mixed type, of Collegiate discipline and training.
Any person of education acquainted with Ireland knows the impossibility of
fusing such distinct elements in a common crucible; and yet each system, in
its way, is excellent, and will produce good fruits, if left to develope
itself, and not forced upon those who conscientiously dissent from its
fundamental principles.

Let us suppose, however, the experiment tried by persons only partially
acquainted with education, and with the condition of Ireland--and by such
only could it be attempted--then it is easy to see that success could be
obtained only at the expense of lowering the standard of education.

It is plain that one or other of two things would happen: either the
University Senate would be composed of persons altogether independent of
the Colleges, and appointed by the State, or it would consist, as in Oxford
and Cambridge, of heads of Colleges and persons representing their varied
interests.

In the first case supposed we should witness the painful and degrading
spectacle of Irish Colleges submitted to the rule of State-appointed,
perhaps, State-paid Governors, who, under the name of an University Senate,
would prescribe the curriculum for degrees, appoint Examiners, and confer
the titles awarded by those Examiners.

It is not possible to suppose that a Senate appointed by an authority
outside the Colleges, and consisting of persons removed from the details of
University Education, would be competent to decide the weighty and
important questions that must come before them; in fact, a Senate
constituted as I have supposed, in discussing questions of education, would
be about as likely to come to a wise decision as a collection of shoemakers
speculating on the structure of a watch, and making proposals for its
improvement, who will certainly destroy the delicate machinery they are
unable to understand, unless they have the sagacity to call in the
watchmakers to their aid.

It might be imagined that the standard of education could be maintained by
such a system, on the hypothesis that a State-nominated Senate would always
appoint competent Examiners; but in such a case those Examiners would
themselves become the University, and would regulate the value of the
degrees conferred by it, and the country could have no guarantee that the
standard of education would continue to be maintained; for this would be to
suppose, on the part of successive Governments, a purity in their
appointment of Senators which no rational man expects will ever be found
outside the boundaries of the kingdom of Laputa.

If the Senate of the National University were composed of State officials,
they would feel themselves bound to maintain the interests of all the
Colleges committed to their care, and it would be impossible to maintain
the standard of Degrees at a point higher than the attainments of the
weakest College in the partnership, whose defective standard would regulate
that of the University Degree, just as the sailing of the slowest tub in
the squadron regulates the manoeuvres of the entire fleet.

If, on the other hand, the Senate of the National Irish University should
be composed, after the model of Oxford and Cambridge, of the heads and
representatives of the various Irish Colleges, although liberty of
education might be preserved, the standard of the degrees would become
degraded by the simple operation of a natural law easy to explain.

The heads of the Irish Colleges, united into a "happy family" University by
the hands of a paternal Government, would either struggle with each other
for supremacy, or enter into a compromise for peace sake, on some such plan
as the following:--

After a few preliminary skirmishes, to try each other's skill, in arranging
a common curriculum in Morals or History, it would be found that profound
and irreconcileable differences existed among the Colleges on the most
elementary principles, and that it would be impossible for the heads of
Trinity College, of St. Patrick's College of Maynooth, of Queen's College
of Belfast, and of other institutions, to agree upon a common curriculum of
education, or even of examination for Degrees, that would satisfy the
reasonable and conscientious scruples of all parties.

Under these circumstances, a sort of bargain would be made between the
heads of the various Colleges, who would agree to take each other's
certificates without challenge, and confer the Degrees recommended by each
independently of the others.

The University and its Senate would thus become simply a machinery for
authorizing the Students of the various Colleges to add certain letters,
such as M. A., or LL. B., after their names; and it would become the
interest of all the Colleges in which a really good education was given,
that such letters should have a formal significance only; the education
itself, testified by the addition of the name of the College, having alone
a real market value readily appreciated by the public. Each College of
reputation would be careful to have its own name inserted after the letters
signifying the University Degree, and thus would be practically created as
many Universities as there are Colleges in Ireland, and a disastrous
competition downwards would be the inevitable result.

The Degrees of the so-called National University would be like the bills of
a weak firm--dishonoured by the public unless endorsed by the name of a
solvent trader--and the letters M. A., or LL. B., would become like the
praises on a bad man's gravestone, purchaseable at so much a letter.

I believe, therefore, that I am entitled to protest against the scheme of
forming a National University by fusing together the different Colleges in
Ireland, on the following grounds:--


  1. Because such a scheme for a National University would prove to be a
     failure, on account of the want of similarity in the Colleges
     composing the University.

  2. Because such a scheme would, in the long run, infallibly lower the
     standard and degrade the character of Irish University Degrees; a
     result that would prove peculiarly disastrous to the educated classes
     in Ireland.


III. ROMAN CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND.

Having disposed of the first two schemes for satisfying the demand of the
Irish Catholics for University Education, and shown one to be impolitic,
and the other to be injurious, it might naturally be expected that I should
now proceed to advocate the advantages of the remaining plan, which
consists in a Charter and Endowment for a Roman Catholic University in
Ireland, in which the Irish Catholics and their Clergy should be allowed to
arrange their own programme of University Education without the
interference of Irish Protestants, or of English doctrinaires; but this
course I feel to be unnecessary, as it mainly concerns Roman Catholics
themselves to state their wishes and explain their views respecting it.

Protestant interference in such a question is as irritating and as useless
as would be the interference of a mutual friend in a quarrel between a man
and his wife.

English politicians, in the matter of University Education for the Irish
Catholics, have hitherto imitated the doctrine laid down by Mr.
Bumble--that "the great principle of out-of-door relief is, to give the
paupers exactly what they don't want; and then they get tired of coming."

Twenty-seven out of twenty-nine of the Irish Catholic Bishops ask for a
Catholic University Charter and Endowment, and are supported in this claim
by an overwhelming majority of their flocks.

The Irish Catholics asked the English Parliament for bread, and they gave
them a stone: instead of a Chartered University, with a fair endowment and
perfect freedom of Education, they received Queen's Colleges, which were
condemned as godless, and which they were prohibited by their Church from
using.

Let the Parliament of England for once try an experiment which will meet
with the approval of Irishmen of all classes, and give to Ireland a third
University, in which the highest and best type of Catholic education shall
be developed freely. Protestantism cannot suffer by the contrast, and
education must certainly benefit.

If Germans can proudly boast of their twenty-seven Universities--if
Italians can point to twenty-one Universities, awaking from their slumbers
at the call of liberty--if little Belgium can support her four
Universities, all active, and required by the wants of her people--surely
it cannot be too much for the Irish people, divided as they unhappily are
by distinctions of religion and bitter recollections of ancient feuds, to
ask that the Protestant University of Elizabeth, and the Secular University
of Victoria, shall be supplemented by a Catholic University, possessing the
confidence of Irish Catholics, and sharing with her friendly rivals, no
longer jealous sisters, the glorious task of leading the youth of Ireland
into the pleasant paths of Literature and Science.

The milk-white Lily is not less beautiful than the crimson Rose; let them
flourish side by side in the garden of Ireland.


FOOTNOTES:

1: Roman Catholics were first admitted into Trinity College by an Act
passed by the Irish Parliament in 1793.






End of Project Gutenberg's University Education in Ireland, by Samuel Haughton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNIVERSITY EDUCATION IN IRELAND ***

***** This file should be named 31553.txt or 31553.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/5/31553/

Produced by Brian Foley and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
