The Project Gutenberg EBook of The House from Nowhere, by Arthur G. Stangland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The House from Nowhere

Author: Arthur G. Stangland

Release Date: March 10, 2010 [EBook #31588]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE FROM NOWHERE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe Aug-Sept 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


[_Time-travel continues to exercise its mesmeric fascination
  upon writers, readers and editors of science fiction alike. Probably
  because almost all of us, at one time or another, have longed greatly
  to visit either the future or the past. Perhaps, in view of the
  dangerous paradoxes such travel must involve, it is a good thing that
  such horological journeys have to date been confined to the printed
  page._]


                        the house from nowhere


                     _by ... Arthur G. Stangland_


     New neighbors are always exciting. But the anachronistic
     MacDonalds offered a bit too much.

       *       *       *       *       *




The morning paper lay unread before Philon Miller on the breakfast
table and even the prospects of steaming coffee, ham, eggs and orange
juice could not make him forget his last night's visitors.

On the closed-circuit Industrial TV screen glowed the words, _Food
Preparation Center breakfast menu for July 24, 2052. No. 1, orange
juice, coffee, ham and eggs. No. 2, waffle, coffee...._

Automatically he punched the button for _No. 1_. Oh, his visitors had
made matters appear justifiable. The presidential election campaign
was going badly, Rakoff the chairman said, and his poll-quota for the
election had been upped from twenty-five grand to fifty.

A stainless-steel capsule popped into the transparent wall dock. Of
course the party quota system was taken for granted, he mused,
removing the capsule, but it was an obligation you didn't welsh on.
The muscle boys in the party organization saw to that. But still,
fifty thousand....

Across the table John, his sixteen-year-old adopted son, stirred. "I
guess you aren't as hungry as I am, Phil."

"What? Oh, sorry." John--down here for breakfast? What was the
matter? The kid sick or something? Every morning he took his meal to
his room to eat in solitude. Funny kid.

Philon removed the food capsule from the wall dock, stopping the soft
gushing of air in the suction tube. Setting it on the table he snapped
it open and removed the individual thermocels of food.

Philon poured coffee from the thermos and absently stirred in cream
and sugar. Fifty thousand....

John was well into his breakfast already. "Phil, I was down to visit
those people on the corner--you know, the house that appeared there
over-night."

"Um."

"Their name is MacDonald," John said. "And they have a son, Jimmie,
just my age, and a younger girl, Jean. Gosh, you ought to see the
inside of their house, Phil. Old-fashioned! At the windows they got
something called venetian blinds instead of our variable mirror
thermopanes. And you know what? They don't even have an FP connection.
They prepare all their meals in the house!"

John's excitement finally aroused Philon's attention. "No Food
Preparation service? But that's unheard of!"

"They're sure swell people though."

"Where in the world did they come from?" Philon poured more coffee.

"Some place out West--Oregon, I think. Lived in a small town."

"How come their house appeared over-night?"

"Yeah, I asked them about that," John said. "They said their house is
a prefab and it was cheaper to move it from Oregon than to buy one
here. So they moved in one night--lock, stock and barrel."

John looked at Philon with a tentative air. "And another thing--Jimmie
and Jean are their real children."

Philon began to frown in disgust. "Real children--how vulgar! No one
does that anymore. That custom went out years ago with the Eugenic Act
of two thousand twenty-nine. Breeding perfect children is the job of
selected specimens. Why, I remember the day we passed our check over
to Maternity Clinic! You were the best specimen in the place--and you
carried the highest price tag too--ten thousand dollars!"

At that moment Ursula, his wife, her green rinse tumbling in stringy
tufts over her forehead pattered into the breakfast room. Her right
eye was closed in a tight squint against her cigarette smoke.

"Well, do I get my share of breakfast," she muttered, "or do I have to
scrabble at the trough like the rest of the hogs around here?"

Philon nodded at a third thermocel in the capsule. "That's yours,
Ursula." He fixed her with a cocked eye. "What time did that gigolo
get you home this morning?"

Ursula blew the hair out of her eyes, then took a good look at her
husband. "Why all the sudden concern about my affairs? I feel like
going to the Cairo I call up Francois. He dances divinely. I feel like
making love I call up Jose...." She shrugged. "So, I say, why the
sudden concern? All these years you say nothing. Every minute away
from home you're involved in big deals to make money, steal
money--maybe even eat it."

He looked at her cryptically. "I've got to raise a fifty-grand quota."

Without even looking up from her breakfast Ursula said absently, "Oh,
that. It _is_ election year again, isn't it?"

"And I'll have to ask you to cancel all unnecessary expenditures for
the time being."

She shook her head. "Can't--I've already reserved _Love's Passion_ for
this afternoon and a whole block of titles for three months."

Philon compressed his mouth, then practically blew the words at her.
"Damn it, Ursula, you're spending too much time psycho-dreaming these
cheap plays. You know the psychiatrist has warned you to lay off them.
Stimulates your endocrine system too much. No wonder you live on
sleeping pills."

"Oh, shut up!" She stared at him, the anger in her tugging at her
loose mouth. "If I feel like a psychoplay I'm going to have me a
psychoplay. It's the only stimulation I get any more."

Muttering, "T'hell with it!" Philon got up from the table and walked
into the living room. Slipping into his gray top coat and hat he
ascended to the copter roofport.

Before stepping into the copter seat he paused to study the MacDonald
house on the corner. Odd-looking house at that. Mid-twentieth century,
yet it looked brand new.

Then, putting the house out of mind, Philon shot his copter skyward
and joined Skyway No. 7 traffic into town.

Descending on his office building he left the ship in care of the
parking attendant and by elevator dropped to his floor. At a door
marked _Miller Electronic Manufacturing Co._ he walked in.

In his office he slouched into his chair and stared at the small
calendar on his desk. Rakoff wanted the fifty-thousand before Royal
Pastel Mink Monday. One week--that wasn't very much time.

Flinching from the unpleasant problem, he stared at the city skyline,
his mind drifting lazily. He thought about Royal Pastel Mink Monday.
Some said it was just another Day dreamed up by furriers to make
people fur-conscious. Others said it commemorated a period of great
public indifference which cost large numbers their freedom to vote.

Of course the other party had their symbology too--like the Teapot
Celebration. No one seemed to know for sure what it meant. Anyway, why
worry how they started? Why did people knock on wood for luck--or
throw salt over their left shoulder?

But then once in awhile there arose some who spelled out a strange
lonely cry, calling themselves the conscience of the people. They
spoke sternly of the thin moral fiber of the country, berating the
people for what they called their amoral evolution brought on by
indifference and negligence until they no longer could hear the still
guiding voice of their conscience. But they were scornfully laughed
down and it seemed to Philon he heard less and less of these men.

In the late afternoon a whip from party headquarters dropped in.
"Hello, Feisel," Philon said with little enthusiasm for the
swarthy-faced man.

Without even the formality of a greeting Feisel smiled down at Philon
in a half-sneer. "Well, Philon, how we doin' with the fifty grand,
eh?"

Philon tossed a sheaf of papers on the desk with a gesture of
impatience. "Now look, I'll raise the fifty G's by the end of the
week."

Feisel lifted a thin black eyebrow and shrugged elaborately. "Just
inquiring, my friend, just inquiring. You know--just showing friendly
interest."

"Well, go peddle your papers to somebody else. You make me nervous."

Feisel sniffed with injured pride. "That's gratitude for you. And just
when I was going to put a little bee in your bonnet. I thought you'd
like to know what happened to another guy just like you. You see, he
got ideas, instead of digging to get his quota. He tried to lam out
and you know where they found him? On the sidewalk below his
twenty-third-floor window."

As Feisel went out, Philon swore softly at his retreating back. But
Feisel's little story sent a chill through him.

That evening when he descended from his copter port and stepped into
his living room he was surprised to hear young voices upstairs.
Deciding to investigate he stepped on the escalator. At John's door he
poked his head in.

"Hello."

A young blond-headed boy with bright clear eyes turned to look at him
and a younger girl with short curly hair smiled back.

John said, "Phil, this is Jimmie, and Jean, his sister. They don't
have a home-school teleclass rig yet, so they're attending with me."

"I see." Philon nodded to the children. "And how did you like your
first day at school?"

"Fine," Jean said, beaming until her eyes almost disappeared. "It was
fun. The teacher was talking about the history of atomic energy and
when I told her we had one of the first editions of the famous Smyth
report on _Atomic Energy_ she was surprised."

"A first edition of the _Smyth Report_? No wonder your teacher was
surprised." Through Philon's mind ran the recollection that first
editions of the Smyth Report brought as high as seventy thousand
dollars.

The children's excited chatter was suddenly interrupted by the front
door chimes. Stepping to the wall televiewer, Philon pressed a button
and said, "Who is it?"

A pleasant-faced man with a startled look said, "Oh--sorry. This
gadget on the door-casing surprised me. Ah--I think my children,
Jimmie and Jean, are here. I'm Bill MacDonald."

Behind him Philon heard Jean suppress a dismayed cry. "Gosh, Jimmie,
it's late. Daddy's had to come for us!"

Philon said, "And I'm Phil Miller, MacDonald. Come in. We'll be down
in a moment."

The MacDonald children and John headed for the stairs in a happy rush,
ignoring the descending escalator, two steps at a time. Philon
followed at a meditative pace, his thoughts trooping stealthily
abreast. Seventy thousand dollars. Now, if he were to....

"Beautiful home you've got here, Miller."

Philon came out of his daydreaming to see MacDonald coming into view
around the corner of a living room ell.

Philon took his extended hand. "Thanks. Glad you like it."

Jean broke in breathlessly. "Oh, Daddy, you ought to see how they
conduct classes--by school TV. You write on a glass square and it
appears immediately at the teacher's roll-board. And when you--"

Jimmie interrupted. "Aw, lemme tell 'im something too, Jean. Dad, John
used a spare TV for Jean's freshman class while we 'showed' for junior
class on his. Gosh, in history, Dad, their old newsreels go back to
World War Two. I even saw your Marine unit--"

MacDonald cut his son short. "That's enough, Jimmie. You can tell us
about it later." He herded his children toward the front door.
"Thanks, Miller, for letting the kids use the school TV. I'm having
one installed tomorrow."

After they left John said with a sparkle Philon had never seen before,
"You know, Phil, those are the most interesting kids I've ever met.
All the others I know are bored stiff. They've been everyplace and
they've done everything.

"But Jimmie and Jean ask more questions about things than anybody I
know. They're really interested. Every time I drop in on them they're
studying history beginning with the middle of the Twentieth Century.
They're absolutely fascinated and read it like fiction."

With more on his mind than his neighbors' unusual behavior Philon
said, "Mmm." He stood looking at the boy for a long moment until John
finally shifted self-consciously.

"What's the matter, Phil?"

Philon ended his musing. "Tomorrow night we're all going to call on
the MacDonalds. And while we're there I want you to slip that copy of
the _Smyth Report_ out of their library."

For a moment the young boy's smooth face was a blank mask. Then it
filled in with shocked surprise, then resentment and finally anger.
"You mean--steal?"

"Of course. If they're too innocent to realize the value of the book
that's their hard luck."

"But, Phil, I can't imagine myself stealing from...."

Impatiently, Philon said, "Since when did you suddenly get so
holier-than-thou? Life is harsh, life is iron-fisted and if you don't
keep your guard up you're going to get socked in the kisser."

John said slowly with a certain tone of shame, "Yes, I know. As far
back as I can remember you've told me that. But in spite of it I can't
help feeling it isn't right to treat the MacDonalds that way. They're
too nice, too good."

"Look, John. You might as well learn the hard facts of life. All the
high-sounding arguments for a moral world and all the laws on the
books implementing those arguments are just eyewash. Sure, the
President swears that he will uphold the constitution and enforce all
the laws.

"Then we carefully surround him with counterspies--wire his rooms with
dictaphones, slit his mail, install secret informers on his staff. All
because no matter who the party is able to elect we don't trust
him--because the society he represents does not trust itself."

"Is that why we have more and bigger jails than ever?"

Philon shrugged. "All I'm trying to tell you is don't go soft-headed
or the world will take your shirt."

The next day before leaving for the office Philon said to his wife,
"Call up the MacDonalds and if they're going to be home tonight tell
them we'll be over for a visit."

Ursula made a face. "Do we _have_ to call on those people? They'll
bore me stiff."

"For heaven's sake, Ursula! It's a matter of vital importance to
me--and you also, if I have to appeal to your wide streak of
selfishness."

"I can't see it."

"I'll explain later. I've got to go."

During the day Ursula called him. "Well, Phil, I called as you said
and I've committed us for dinner tonight."

"Dinner! Hmm, they _are_ convivial people."

"Yes and the dinner is going to be cooked right there in their house.
How vulgar can some people get?"

That evening while dressing Ursula said, "Phil, John spends a lot of
time at the MacDonalds'. What do you suppose he sees in them? It gets
me the way he quotes them all the time and reports their least doings.
Today he came tearing into the house and said, 'Ursula, it's
wonderful!' I said, 'What's wonderful?' And John said, 'The dinner
they're cooking at MacDonalds'. I've never smelled anything like it in
all my life. Why don't we cook in our house like they do? Mrs.
MacDonald was baking cookies and let me have one right out of the
oven. Mmmm, boy was it _good_!'"

Ursula finished, "Now, I ask you, did you ever hear anything so
barbaric--cooking in the house and having all the odors permeate the
whole place?"

"Well, we'll see."

Later when they arrived at the MacDonalds' they were welcomed with a
quiet warmth and friendliness that Philon cynically assumed to be a
new and different front.

As they sat down to dinner Mrs. MacDonald, a rosy-cheeked woman with
a quick and ready smile, said, "I'm sorry we aren't able to get a
connection yet. So everything we're eating tonight is right out of our
deep-freeze."

John Miller said, "Gosh, Mrs. MacDonald, as far as I'm concerned, I'd
rather eat from your deep-freeze anytime than from the FP!"

Bill MacDonald looked across the table at Jean and said, "All right,
Jean."

Jean and all the MacDonalds bent their heads and the girl began, "We
thank Thee for our daily bread as by Thy hands...."

As the girl spoke Phil's gaze drifted around to his wife, who lifted
her shoulders in mystified amazement. But it was a bigger surprise to
see John's bent head. For the moment John was a part of this
family--part of a wholeness tied together by an invisible bond. The
utter strangeness of it shocked Philon into rare clarity of insight.

He saw himself wrapped up in his business with little regard for
Ursula or John, letting them exist under his roof without making them
a part of his life. Ursula with her succession of gigolos and her
psycho-plays and John withdrawn into his upstairs room with his books.
Then he closed his mind again as if the insight were too blinding.

What strange customs these MacDonalds had! Yet he had to admit the
meal looked more appetizing than anything he had ever seen. It gave an
impression of sumptuous plenty to see the food for everybody in one
place instead of individually packaged under glistening thermocel. And
instead of throwaway dishes they used chinaware that could have come
right out of a museum.

Ursula asked, "What kind of fish is this?"

Bill MacDonald answered with a big grin. "It's Royal Chinook salmon
that I caught in the fish derby on the Columbia River only last--"

Mrs. MacDonald colored suddenly. "You'll have to forgive Bill. He gets
himself so wrapped up in his fishing."

Glancing at MacDonald Philon was surprised to see the same confusion
and embarrassment on his host's face.

It was after dinner when Mrs. MacDonald and Jean were clearing the
table that Philon looked over the library shelves. MacDonald himself
appeared uneasy and hovered in the background.

"You'll have to excuse my selections. They're all pretty old.
I--er--inherited most of them from a grandfather."

In a few minutes Philon spotted the _Smyth Report_. Fixing its
position well in mind he turned away. MacDonald was saying, "Come down
in the basement and I'll show you my hobby room."

"Glad to." As MacDonald led the way Philon whispered to John, "You'll
find the book on the second shelf from the bottom on the right side."

John returned him a stony stare of belligerence and Philon clamped
his jaw. The boy dropped his glance and gave a reluctant nod of
acquiescence.

Upstairs a half hour later Ursula, who had filled her small ashtray
with a mound of stubs, suddenly told Philon she was going home.

"But, Ursula, I thought that--"

With thin-lipped impatience she snapped, "I just remembered I had
another engagement at eight."

Mrs. MacDonald was genuinely sorry. "Oh, that's too bad, I thought we
could have the whole evening together."

Casting a meaningful glance at John and getting a confirming cold-eyed
nod in return, Philon got on his feet. "Sorry, folks. Maybe we'll get
together another time."

"I hope so," MacDonald said.

In angry silence Philon walked home. Not until they were all in the
house and Ursula was hastening toward her second-floor room did he say
a word. "I suppose your 'other engagement' means the Cairo again
tonight?"

Ascending on the escalator Ursula turned to look scornfully over her
shoulder. "Yes! Anything to escape from boredom. All that woman talked
about while you were in the basement was redecorating the house or
about cooking and asking my opinions. _Ugh!_"

Philon laughed mirthlessly. "Yeah, I guess she picked a flat number to
discuss those things with. Anything you might have learned about them
you must have got out of a psychoplay."

Stepping off the escalator at the top Ursula spit a nasty epithet his
way, then disappeared into the upstairs hall.

John stood at the foot of the escalator, a reluctant witness to the
bickering. Divining his attitude Philon mentally shrugged it off. The
kid might as well learn what married life was like in these modern
days.

"You got the book, eh?"

John pulled a book from his suit coat and laid it on a small table.
"Yes, there's the book--and I never felt so rotten about anything in
all my life!"

Philon said, "Kid, you've got a lot to learn about getting along in
this world."

"All right--so I've got a lot to learn," John cried bitterly. "But
there must be more to life than trying to stop the other guy from
stripping the shirt off your back while you succeed in stripping off
his!"

With that he took the escalator to the upper hall while Philon watched
him disappear.

Left alone now, Philon settled into a chair by a window and stared
down the street at the MacDonald house. Odd people--it almost seemed
they didn't belong in this time and period, considering their queer
ways of thinking and looking at things. MacDonald himself in
particular had some odd personal attitudes.

Like that incident in his basement--Philon had curiously pulled open a
heavy steel door to a small cubicle filled with a most complex
arrangement of large coils and heavy insulators and glassed-in
filaments. MacDonald was almost rude in closing the door when he found
Philon opening it. He had fumbled and stuttered around, explaining the
room was a niche where he did a little experimenting on his own. Yes,
strange people.

The next day Philon eagerly hastened to a bookstore dealing in antique
editions. Hugging the book closely Philon told himself his troubles
were all over. The book would surely bring between fifty and a hundred
grand.

A clerk approached. "Can I help you?"

"I want to talk to Mr. Norton himself."

The clerk spoke into a wrist transmitter. "Mr. Norton, a man to see
you."

In a few moments a bulbous man came heavily down the aisle, peering
through dark tinted glasses at Philon. "Yes?"

"I have a very rare first edition of Smyth's _Atomic Energy_," said
Philon, showing the book.

Norton adjusted his glasses, then took the book. He carefully handled
it, looking over the outside of the covers, then thumbed the pages.
After a long frowning moment, he said, "Publication date is nineteen
forty-six but the book's fairly new. Must have been kept hermetically
sealed in helium for a good many years."

"Yeah, yeah, it was," Philon said matter-of-factly. "Came from my
paternal grandfather's side of the family. A book like this ought to
be worth at the very least seventy-five thousand."

But the bulbous Mr. Norton was not impressed. He shrugged vaguely.
"Well--it's just possible--" He looked up at Philon suddenly. "Before
I make any offer to you I shall have to radiocarbon date the book. Are
you willing to sacrifice a back flyleaf in the process?"

"Why a flyleaf?"

"We have to convert a sample of the book into carbon dioxide to
geigercount the radioactivity in the carbon. You see, all living
things like the cotton in the rags the paper is made of absorb the
radioactive carbon fourteen that is formed in the upper atmosphere by
cosmic radiation. Then it begins to decay and we can measure very
accurately the amount, which gives us an absolute time span."

With a frustrated feeling Philon agreed. "Well okay then. It's a waste
of time I think. The book is obviously a first edition."

"It will take the technician about two hours to complete the analysis.
We'll have an answer for you--say after lunch."

The two hours dragged by and Philon eagerly hastened to the store.

When Mr. Norton appeared he wore the grim look of a righteously angry
man. He thrust the book at Philon. "Here, sir, is your book. The next
time you try to foist one over on a book trader remember science is a
shrewd detective and you'll have to be cleverer than you've been this
time. This book is, I'll admit, a clever job, but nevertheless a
forgery. It was not printed in nineteen forty-six. The radiocarbon
analysis fixes its age at a mere five or six years. Good day, sir!"

Philon's mouth fell open. "But--but the MacDonalds have had it
for...." He caught himself, and stammered, "There must be some mistake
because I...."

Norton said firmly, "I bid you good day, sir!"

With a sense of the sky falling in on him, Philon found himself out on
the street. No one could be trusted nowadays and he shouldn't have
been surprised at the MacDonalds. Everyone had a little sideline, a
gimmick, to put one over on whoever was gullible enough to swallow it.

Why should he assume a hillbilly family from way out in Oregon was any
different? This was probably Bill MacDonald's little racket and it was
just Philon's bad luck to stumble on it. MacDonald probably peddled
his spurious first editions down on Front Street for a few hundred
dollars to old bookstores unable to afford radiocarbon dating.

For awhile he stared out his office window, brooding. The fifty grand
just wasn't to be had--legally or illegally. And when he recalled
Feisel's little gem about the man falling out his office window Philon
was definitely ill.

Then the cunning that comes to the rescue of all scheming gentry who
depend on their wits emerged from perverse hiding. An ingenious idea
to solve the nagging problem of the fifty thousand arrived full-blown.
Grinning secretively to himself, he walked into the telecommunications
room.

He got the Technical Reference Room at the Public Library and asked
for the detailed plans of the big electronic National Vote Tabulating
machine in Washington. At the other end a microfilm reel clicked into
place, ready to obey his finger-tip control.

For two hours he read and read, making notes and studying the circuits
of the complicated machine. Then, satisfied with his information, he
returned the microfilm.

Leaving the office he descended to the streets and set out for the
party headquarters. Now if only he could sell the neat little idea to
the hierarchy....

At the luxurious marbled headquarters he asked to be let into the
general chairman's office. The receptionist announced him and Philon
walked in to find Rakoff awaiting him behind his beautiful carved
desk.

Rakoff's dead-white cheeks never stirred and his stiff blond hair
stood up in a rigid crew cut. He rolled his cigar in his big mouth.
"Hello, Miller. What's on your mind?"

Philon took a breath and it seemed to him now that this idea was a
crazy one. "I came to tell you I'm unable to raise my fifty grand
quota, Rakoff."

The man's brows moved slightly and his eyes narrowed significantly.
With a rasp in his voice he said deliberately, "That's too bad, Mr.
Miller--for you."

The rasping tongue put a faint quaver in Philon's voice but he went
on. "However, I've brought you an idea that's worth more than fifty
grand. It's worth millions."

Rakoff's eyes hardly blinked. "I'm listening--you're talking."

And Philon talked, talked rapidly and convincingly. When he finished
Rakoff slapped his fat thigh in excitement.

That evening Philon dropped in on Bill MacDonald, who was sitting in
his slippers smoking an old fashioned wood pipe.

"Come in, come in." MacDonald greeted him with a friendly smile. "I
was just doing a little reading."

Philon held out the book. "I'm returning your masterpiece," he said
with a sardonic smile.

MacDonald received it, glancing at the title. "Oh, Smyth's _Atomic
Energy_. Good book--did you find it interesting?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Philon began to laugh. "Well, I'll tell you, Bill, your little racket
of having spurious first editions printed some place and then peddling
them sure caught up with me."

The good-natured smile on MacDonald's face faded in a look of
incredulity. He took the pipe from his mouth. "Spurious first
editions?"

"Yeah, I sure took a beating today but I couldn't help laughing over
it afterwards. Here I've been thinking of you folks as simon-pure
numbers. But I got to hand it to you. You sure took me in with Smyth's
_Atomic Energy_ as being a genuine first edition." Philon went on to
explain the radiocarbon dating of the book.

MacDonald finally broke in to protest, "But that book really _is_ over
a hundred years old." Then he looked up at his wife. "Of course,
Carol, that's the explanation. The radiocarbon wouldn't decay a full
hundred years any more than we...." Suddenly, he seemed to catch
himself, as his wife raised a hand in apparent agitation.

"But why did you want to sell my book to a dealer?" MacDonald
continued.

Philon went on to explain the system of the poll quota. He told him a
lot of other things too about the election of a President and the
organized political machines that levied upon all registered voters
what amounted to a checkoff of their incomes.

Carol MacDonald said, "You mean that not everyone can vote?"

Philon looked at her in surprise. "Well, of course not. Only people of
means vote--and why shouldn't they? They take the most interest in the
elections and all the candidates come from the higher-middle-class of
income. Anyway why should the people squawk? They took less and less
interest in the elections.

"When the proportion of voters turning out for elections got down to
thirty percent those that did turn out passed laws disenfranchising
those who hadn't voted for two Presidential elections. So if things
aren't being run to suit those who lost their rights to vote they've
got no one to thank but themselves."

Bill MacDonald looked at his wife and said in a voice filled with
incredulity, "My lord, Carol, if the people back there only knew what
their careless and negligent disinterest would one day do to their
country!"

Philon looked from one to the other, saying, "You sound as if you were
talking about the past."

MacDonald said hurriedly, "I--er--was referring to the history books."

That night Philon did not sleep well for the morrow would be a day
he'd never forget. Even to his calloused mind the dangers involved in
the exploit were considerable.

In the morning he went into John's room and stood looking down at the
boy, who sleepily opened his eyes.

Philon said, "I'm going to be gone from my office all day. And if
anyone calls or comes to see me here at the house tell him I'm sick.
If necessary I'm ordering you to swear in court that I was here all
day and night. Ursula's gone for the weekend to the seashore, so I'm
depending on you. Do you understand?"

John frowned in confusion. "You say you're sick and staying home all
day?"

Impatience edging his words Philon went over the explanation again.

"What d'you mean 'swear in court?' What are you planning to do, Phil?"
John's eyes were wide open now and full of apprehension.

"Never mind what I'm doing. Just tell anybody inquiring that I'm sick
at home."

"You mean _lie_, eh?"

Phil lifted his hand, then swung, leaving the imprint of his four
fingers on the boy's left cheek. "Now do you understand?"

The boy blinked back a tear and nodded wordlessly.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the late afternoon Philon landed at Washington and under an assumed
name made his way to the government building housing the big Election
Tabulator. At the technical maintenance offices Philon asked, "Is Al
Brant around?"

"Nope. He doesn't come on duty until tomorrow."

At Brant's address Philon knocked on an apartment door. Footsteps
approached inside and the door was opened by a medium-sized man with
black tousled hair. He appeared less than happy to see Philon.

"Hello, Phil. What's on your mind?"

Philon stuck out his hand. "Al, glad to see you again. I know you're
not pleased to see me but let's let bygones be bygones. Can we talk?"

Al Brant stepped back reluctantly. "Well, I guess so. I thought we'd
said everything we had to say the last time."

Philon walked in and settled himself on the davenport. "Yeah, I know,
Al, we had some pretty harsh words. But at least I got you out of the
mess."

Brant said bitterly, "Yeah, got me out of a mess I got into helping
you on one of your shady deals when I worked for you. Well, as I said
before, what's on your mind?"

Philon patted his right chest saying, "Got a hundred thousand here for
you, Al."

Brant's brows lifted in amazement. "A hundred thousand! What's the
catch, Phil?"

Philon's voice dropped to a confidential tone. "You always were a
clever man with electronics, Al, and I've got something here that's
just your meat. I've been studying the design of the Election
Tabulator, and I've discovered a wonderful opportunity for you and me.

"Now listen--it's possible to replace two transmitters on the main
teletype trunk so that a winning percentage of the incoming votes will
be totaled up for my party. Simple little job, isn't it? Worth a
hundred thousand!"

For a long moment Al Brant sat and stared at Philon in cold silence.
Finally, he said, "Do you know what the penalty is for jimmying the
Tabulator to influence voting?"

"No."

"It's life imprisonment!" Brant got up slowly and started across the
room to Philon. "I fell for your line once and got burned--and here
you come again. You must think I'm a born sucker. This time I'm doing
the talking. Give me the hundred grand or I'll kill you with my bare
hands!"

Philon watched him coming as if he were witness to a nightmare. He was
trapped. And in this moment of snowballing fear he ceased to think.
The gun in his pocket went off without conscious effort. Brant
stopped, then collapsed to the floor. Panic took over Philon's mind
and he fled the apartment building as rapidly as was safe.

He was almost back in the city when he tuned in a news broadcast As he
listened, he sat in stunned silence. Brant had roused himself enough
before he died to talk to the man who found him in his apartment.
Brant had named his killer as Philon Miller. Miller felt as if he had
turned to ice.

Then his mind thawed out with a rush of reassuring words. After all,
why should he be worrying? He had John's word in court as a perfect
alibi. Yes, everything would be all right. Everything _had_ to be all
right.

In the late evening Philon arrived at his house with a consuming sense
of great relief, as if the very act of entering his home would protect
him from anything. There was a sense of safety in the mere familiarity
of the environment.

On the mail table he found a note from Ursula saying she had gone for
the weekend. Philon shrugged indifferently. He was glad to have her
out of the way anyhow. But John--there was the best ten thousand
dollars he had ever spent. A sound investment, about to pay its first
real dividend.

"_John!_" His voice echoed in the house with a disturbing hollow
sound. He wet his dry lips and shouted again, "_John_--where _are_
you?"

Only his echoing voice answered him. In growing fright he pounded up
the escalator and rushed into John's room. It was empty. On a desk he
found a message in John's neat hand--

     _Phil and Ursula,_

     _For a long time I have been very unhappy living with you.
     I'm grateful for the food and shelter and education you've
     provided. But you have never given me the love and warmth
     that I seem to crave. The funny part of it is that I never
     understood my craving and what it meant until I saw how love
     and affection bound the MacDonald kids and their folks._

     _This afternoon Jimmie and Jean came over to say good-by
     because they said their father told them they didn't belong
     here--that he was taking his family back where they
     belonged, atomic bomb threat and all--whatever he meant by
     that. After they left I got to thinking how much I'd like to
     go with them. So I'm leaving. Somehow I'm going to talk them
     into taking me with them wherever they are going. So this
     will have to be good-by._

                                                    _John._

Philon lifted his eyes from the note and his glance strayed to the
window. Dreading to look he took two slow steps and peered down the
street. The sight of the empty lot on the corner paralyzed him in his
tracks.

John gone! The MacDonald house gone! Gone was his perfect alibi! In
Washington a dying man's words had spelled out his own death sentence.

A step at the door roused him from his horror-stricken trance. He
looked up to see a detective and a policeman regarding him with cold
calculation.

"What's the matter, Miller?" asked the detective. "We've punched your
announcer button half a dozen times. You deaf? You better come along
to Headquarters to answer some questions about your movements today."

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's The House from Nowhere, by Arthur G. Stangland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE FROM NOWHERE ***

***** This file should be named 31588.txt or 31588.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/8/31588/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
