The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Discourse for the Time, delivered January
4, 1852 in the First Congregational Unitarian Church, by W. H. Furness

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Discourse for the Time, delivered January 4, 1852 in the First Congregational Unitarian Church

Author: W. H. Furness

Release Date: March 17, 2010 [EBook #31670]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DISCOURSE FOR THE TIME ***




Produced by Gerard Arthus, Joseph R. Hauser and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)





A

DISCOURSE

FOR THE TIME

DELIVERED JANUARY 4 1852

IN THE

FIRST CONGREGATIONAL UNITARIAN CHURCH

BY

W. H. FURNESS

PASTOR


       *       *       *       *       *


PHILADELPHIA

C. SHERMAN PRINTER

1852


       *       *       *       *       *


DISCOURSE.

ROM. 14:7.

'NONE OF US LIVETH TO HIMSELF.'


In speaking from these words last Sunday morning, and in endeavoring to
enforce the great truth which they express, I began with referring to
certain facts which characterize that most brutal and ruthless military
revolution which has just commenced in France, and the recent news of
which made every heart, that cherishes any regard for Freedom and
Humanity, burn with indignation. The first statements to which I alluded
have been more than confirmed. Unarmed, unoffending citizens, utterly
ignorant of what was going on, and taking no part in it, were shot down
by hundreds in the streets, and then transfixed with bayonets. If but a
window was opened, a shower of bullets was poured into it. Cannon were
brought to bear upon whole blocks of private dwellings. In one instance,
a woman who rushed out of the house to the help of her husband, who had
fallen under the fire of the soldiery, was instantly despatched and
laid dead at his side. Bloodshed and terror filled the place, and
scenes were enacted, so eyewitnesses report, that baffle description,
and that can find a parallel only when cities are sacked.

Now, I refer to these facts, not to harrow up your feelings, my hearers,
but because these facts, and such as these, speak trumpet-tongued, as to
the vital interest and the sacred religious duty which every private
man, no matter how humble and obscure,--nay, which every woman has, in
those great questions that agitate nations, in what are designated as
matters of public concern and the public welfare.

I know very well that there are those who deplore it, and consider it a
great grievance, that here, in this country, there is so much agitation
of public matters in private circles, and by private, unofficial
persons. To be sure, one would like to have quiet, if he could. But
there is no help for it. We must take our lot as we find it. And such is
the nature of our social fabric; drawing all the power of the government
from the people, from the individuals that compose the people, that it
is made the direct and plain duty of every man and woman of us to know
about those things, which are public, for this very reason, because they
concern the many,--the high and the low, the rich and the poor, the
security, the happiness, the improvement, the civil and the religious
liberties of every man in the land. A necessity is upon us; and if we
have been accustomed to confine our ideas of duty and religion to the
Church and the Sabbath, the sooner we get our minds sufficiently
enlarged to see the religious obligation which binds us to the great
Public of mankind, the better for us, for our neighbors, and for all
men.

So, then, the fact that private men are interested in public affairs,
even though it be attended with a good deal of excitement,--that is not
the thing to be deplored. But what is to be lamented is, that false way
of thinking, out of place in this country, out of time in this age, by
which thousands justify themselves in continuing ignorant and
indifferent to things of a vital private concern, simply because they
are of a public and general character. What is more common than to hear
men say, in reference to such matters, 'They are no concerns of ours. We
care nothing about them. Let those busy themselves about them who are so
disposed. As for us, we are not going to perplex our brains, and fret
and worry ourselves. We will mind our own business.' And, in the proud
consciousness of this virtuous resolution, they wrap themselves up in
their comforts, and keep aloof and indifferent, and flatter themselves
that they are the wise and the prudent, they are the enlightened,
judicious ones. They are no meddlers. They do not trouble themselves
about what does not concern them.

But though we will not meddle with public affairs, who shall answer for
it that public affairs will not meddle with us? With such facts as I
began with mentioning, glaring in our faces, sickening our very hearts
with horror and indignation, who will say that public affairs may not
interfere with us, with our very lives, yes, and with what ought to be
dearer to us than our lives? Let them take their own course, as you say.
And then, as surely as we breathe, bad men will gain the
ascendency,--ignorant, unprincipled, ambitious men, despisers of human
life and human rights, ready to shed blood to any extent to gratify the
devilish lust of power. Into such hands will public affairs fall. And
then there is no man--there is no woman, so retired but she shall find
to her cost, that she has an interest, the very deepest,--that her all
is involved in these things,--that they may tear from her her father,
her husband, her brother or her son, aye, and her own life also, which
she is pampering so delicately.

There is some excuse for the people of France, ground down as they have
been by ages of oppression, denied the right to think, to judge, to act
for themselves, made to believe that their rulers held their power by
the grace of God--there is some excuse for them. But, whatever may be
their excuse, there can be no doubt that it is the ignorance, the
indifference, the cowardice, the selfishness of the people at large that
have caused their public affairs to wade so often towards a settlement,
through such frightful streams of innocent and unoffending blood. Here,
in our land, the peace and security of private life are as fully and
extensively insured as they are, precisely for this reason, because of
the lively and general interest which the people in their private
capacity take in things of public concern. In this country more than in
any other, the people keep a watchful and commanding eye upon public
matters. And, with all the excitement and agitation which it involves,
it is the great pledge of our private and personal security.

But if the indifference to public affairs, which is now confined only to
a class--only to a portion of the people--to too large a portion,
indeed, but still only to a portion,--if it were to become general, if
things were allowed to go on their way, without any interest taken in
them by private persons, by those whose intelligence goes to create a
commanding public opinion, then you would soon find your private
interests, the comfort and lives of individuals, threatened and
assailed. If your public affairs, as they are directed in your Public
Councils, were uncontrolled by the sentiments of private men, they would
soon be coming down into our streets and into our private dwellings with
a most disastrous influence. They would make their appearance in the
shape of armed men. They would be heard in the rattle of musketry and
the roar of cannon; and the door-posts of the humblest and of the
richest homes of the people might be spattered with the blood of
inoffensive men, women, and children,--of the very persons who maintain
that they have nothing to do with public matters.

Already, well off as we may be in comparison with other nations, have
not our public concerns, through the criminal neglect and insensibility
of the people, taken such a direction as, if it does not put us in peril
of having our blood spilt in the streets, yet endangers the sacred
rights of Free Thought and Free Speech, and makes it hazardous to
property and to personal liberty to obey the plainest dictates of
humanity? There are things, as I have already intimated, which ought to
be dearer to us than life, which may be exposed to suffer loss; and
which are exposed to harm at this very hour by the bad administration of
our public concerns.

No doubt, these quiet people who have been so savagely butchered in the
streets of Paris, little dreamed, when they left their homes that day,
that they would be shot down as the enemies of the Government. They had
nothing to do with the Government. They had no thought of crossing its
path. They were pursuing the even tenor of their own quiet way. They
desired only to mind their own business. And yet, had they been taking
the most active interest in public affairs, they could not possibly have
come to so miserable an end, as I will presently show.

The simple, religious truth is, and the sooner every man accepts it,
and makes up his mind and his life to it, the better for him, for our
country, and for the world--the plain truth is, that '_no man liveth or
can live to himself_'--that the interests, the highest interests, the
personal character and salvation, the very life of the individual, in
the most obvious and in the profoundest sense of the word, life, is
wrapt up with the interests of the whole; in other words, with the
public interest, with public affairs. We cannot--no man can separate
himself and stand apart, and insist upon being ignorant and indifferent.
It lies within our own will to say, whether we will meet and endeavor to
answer the claims which the welfare of the whole has upon us, whether we
will take a lively interest in the public interest; but it is not a
matter of our own will whether we shall suffer or not. We may choose
whether or not we will act; but the consequences, and they may be most
deadly,--the consequences of our action or our no-action we cannot
escape. They may fall upon us with a crushing power at our very
firesides, and ruin our private and domestic peace for ever. So long as
we live in society, and build our houses near our neighbors, we may or
may not take an interest in the public provision which is made against
fire, but we cannot avoid the danger and the consequences of a
conflagration. Because a man keeps himself retired, never reading, never
thinking about what is going on on the public theatre of the world, he
has no security against being shot down like a dog in the streets, as
the case of those unfortunate citizens of Paris shows.

Certainly then, since we are liable to suffer from public affairs taking
a wrong direction, whether we take an interest in them or not, it is
worth our while to suffer for a cause. There is small comfort in
incurring danger and in losing one's life for nothing. If we must
suffer, when public events go wrong, it is best by far to suffer for
something. For in times of universal alarm and disorder, when property
and life are put in peril, they suffer the least, though they lose
everything, who are inspired by the conviction that they have tried to
be faithful and to do their duty. They have a life in them which bullets
and bayonets and cannon-balls cannot reach. When men perish for a cause
to which they were utterly indifferent, for which they cared nothing, of
which they knew nothing, then they perish as the brutes perish. Then
death comes to them as a fatal accident; and the only moral that can be
drawn from their fate, is that it is folly for men to think to live unto
themselves. No glory shines from their graves; no renown immortalizes
their memories. But when men suffer and die for a cause, into which they
have thrown their whole souls, when they perish for a principle, then
their death is noble, and they do not die like the brutes, but like men.
Then they are heroes and martyrs, and though dead, they speak with
mighty angel voices; and their blood hallows for ever the spot on which
it is shed, 'down to earth's profound, and up to Heaven,' and they
become immortal in the affection and reverence of mankind, and in the
influence which they exert upon the course of human affairs. For this
reason it is, that I said just now, that those quiet people who have
been killed in the streets of Paris, could not have perished so
miserably had they taken an active interest in the great public question
of Liberty. Then they would have had a spring of life in their own
hearts; then they would have suffered for a cause for which it is worth
any man's while to suffer, and die any death that a relentless power
might inflict.

I know that it is a very wise injunction, that every man should mind his
own business; and that, if every man would only do that, the world would
go on as well as heart could wish. I believe this, firmly. But then,
since, in the very constitution of things, every man's 'own business' is
inextricably interwoven with every other man's 'own business,' who shall
draw the line? Who shall define the circle and the sphere of the private
individual? Has not our Creator defined it already in our very being,
inasmuch as, by the indestructible ties of human sympathy and a common
nature, he has bound up the life, the interests, the business of the
individual, with the life, the interests, the business of the whole? By
his very nature, then, is it not every man's own business to know what
the world is busy about, and to take an interest in the world's affairs,
because they are his own? Is it not a truth written in the constitution
of every individual man, the well-known declaration of the Roman slave:
'I am a man, and I hold nothing human foreign to me?' And does not our
common Christianity teach over and over again in a thousand ways, that
we are all members one of another, and that no man lives for himself?
And is there any one fact, which the progress of events is now making,
more manifest than the oneness of all mankind? Why, my hearers, it is
because this simple and indestructible fact is not seen; because
individuals are for ever trying to live, and work, and enjoy, not with
and for, but at the expense of, their fellow-men, that things are so
continually getting out of joint, and the world is so full of uproar and
misery. My brothers, we are all One; and if we are resolved to mind each
his own business, we must attend to the business which God and nature
have given to us. We must interest ourselves in the cause of our common
humanity. I do not say, that we must make this great cause our business.
It is made our business already by our Maker.

Consider then how the case stands. If we fling our whole hearts with a
generous ardor into the conflict for the welfare of our brother, seeing
to it with all vigilance that public affairs go wisely and justly, then
if the fortunes of this good cause prosper, it is well with us; we
triumph with it. But if it should be defeated, and we should be involved
in its defeat, and suffer danger, loss, and even death itself, still how
powerfully should we be sustained by the consciousness of suffering in
so grand a behalf, for such a glorious reason! Who would not rather
suffer with the Right than prosper with the Wrong? But if we will not
fling our hearts into anything of a general and generous interest, if we
insist that we will keep at a distance from all such matters, that we
will be ignorant and insensible, we gain no additional security. Still
our private lot is inextricably bound up with the public interest; and
when those interests suffer, we must suffer with them, but with no
sustaining power in our own minds. We may be shot down with the heroes
and martyrs of Humanity without the heroes' joy or the martyrs' radiant
crown. 'No man liveth to himself.' Since such is the simple Bible truth,
and since it is a truth, which it becomes us to look at fully, and adopt
as a fundamental principle and law of our thinking and of our living,
let no one turn a deaf ear, and say I am talking politically now,
because I refer to considerations of a public, and if you please, of a
political character, to urge home upon your reason and your consciences
your sacred duty as men, and as Christians, to take a hearty,
intelligent, self-sacrificing interest in what is going on on the public
theatre of the nation to which you belong, and of the world to which you
belong as well, and in whose fortunes, we are every one of us so deeply
interested.

But this is no hour for apologies. This is no time for grown-up men to
be dodging and hiding, and evading a great duty, under words and
phrases. Political! what if I am political? what if every pulpit in the
land should be ringing in these days with political events? God knows
there is need. We should be lost to the ordinary feelings of men, if we
could remain silent when political events are arresting and absorbing
public attention, and threatening to rouse all the passions of the human
heart, and to shake the earth out of its place. This present time, in
which we are living, is no holiday, when a man can throw himself down in
the shade, and dream his soul away. The fires, that are kindling on the
earth, flash their portentous light into the inmost retirement of
private life. The world is resounding with great events. And cold indeed
must be our hearts, we are not worthy to live at so momentous, so
unprecedented a period, if we refuse to be reminded of those
indissoluble ties of a common nature and a common interest, which the
course of things is laying bare to all men's view. As you are men, human
beings, your hearts must beat with a new and stirring sympathy for the
great Public of Christendom, of which you are each an inseparable
portion, when you see the second great nation of Europe, after all the
terrible experience of the last three-quarters of a century, again
falling prostrate in the dust beneath the blow of a base usurper, with
no great exploits at his back to extenuate the insolence of the brutal
deed; again laid low beneath a despot's feet by that vulgar instrument
of power, a standing army. I think there can hardly be found in modern
history any parallel to this outrage upon truth, freedom, and
humanity--to this implied contempt for human rights and human nature. A
robber-hand has seized the great French nation, and flung it down into
the dust to be trampled upon at pleasure. At such startling tidings,
what man is there so humble or so weak, who can repress the solemn
appeal to God, which must rise instinctively from every heart of flesh?
Who can help having his attention arrested and engrossed? Who does not
long to be saying something, doing something, or suffering something,
for the outraged rights, the imperilled interests of our Common
Humanity, our One Nature?

But above all, who that has seen, who that has heard the great Hungarian
exile, who has come to us, bringing his unhappy country in his heart,
that does not feel his kindred to his oppressed brethren everywhere? I
have looked full into those large, sad eyes, in which one seems to look
into the great deep of a nation's sorrows. I have heard that voice,
coming from his inmost soul, with which he pleaded for his dear native
land, and I cannot so much as try to tell you of the profound impression
which he made on me. I can set no limits to the power of such a man as I
have just seen and heard. It may be (God grant it!) that it is not a
mere transitory emotion of enthusiasm that he is awakening among the
people of this land. It may be that the influence he is exerting is yet
to penetrate the rock of our selfishness and insensibility, and call
forth, in full flood, like one of our own great rivers, the mighty
stream of our sympathy that shall sweep away from our land and from the
earth, every vestige of oppression. Such a thing seems almost possible,
when we observe how the advocates of Slavery on our own soil tremble at
his approach, and fear to welcome him. Most devoutly do I hope that he
may exert such an influence. It is my fervent prayer. It is yours, too,
brethren, I do not doubt. But I cannot resist the conviction that he
must fail of achieving the object so near his heart, and for which he is
spending the strength of a giant, wearing away his life, if indeed a
life, so deep and so intense, capable of so much labour, can be worn
away.

Yes, friends, he must fail. And happy will it be for him, great,
wonderful as he is, if he comes out unscathed from the fiery and
searching trial of his principles, upon which he entered the moment he
stept upon our soil. Yes, he must fail. How can it be otherwise? He
must fail; not because this people are averse to the possibility of war,
for they have just come out from a war waged, not to extend Freedom you
know. He must fail, not because we revere the counsels of the Father of
our Country. But he must fail because there is a tremendous obstacle in
his way to our free, unfettered sympathy, upon which that fond hope of
his, that great heart of his, the treasury of a nation's woes, must be
broken at last.

When he spoke in this city the other evening, he repeated what he had
said more than once before, that he had come hither resolved to
interfere with no domestic concern of ours, with none of our party
questions. But there is one 'domestic concern,' one 'party question,'
which, while it is, in an obvious sense, a 'domestic concern,' does, in
fact, necessarily and vitally involve those rights of Humanity for which
this great man pleads, and which he is considered as representing when
he urges upon us the claims of his oppressed country. In reason, and in
the nature of things, it is connected with him and with his great
purpose.

So clearly is this so, that they, who see what a monstrous Wrong our
'domestic concern' is, what a world of evil it has done and is doing,
have watched our illustrious guest with trembling solicitude. For his
own sake they are appalled lest he should waver from a faithful
application of his own cherished faith; not that they desire him to
join them, but they justly expect from him as a true man, that he should
allow no shadow of doubt to rest upon his principles and his position.

For myself, I cannot help thinking, that he looks upon American Slavery
as a thing, which we, ourselves, are at this moment busily engaged in
abolishing. He finds men, eminent in office and in ability, ranked on
the Anti-Slavery side. He knows that they are backed by the great
authority of our Declaration of Independence, and assisted by the
powerful influence of the freest institutions on the face of the earth;
and he naturally regards it as needless and arrogant to interfere in the
affairs of so mighty a nation--a nation so vigorous as to be able, one
would think, to settle any difficulties that may lie in its way, without
assistance from abroad.

But, although he has expressed his determination not to meddle with our
domestic institutions, our domestic institutions threaten to meddle with
him. Scarcely had he landed on our shores, when a voice was heard in our
National Councils, proposing his arrest for incendiary speech; a
proposal, the gross insult of which, not only to him, but to us all, was
only relieved by its unutterable folly. This is not the only hint of the
insolent interference in his concerns, with which the upholders of
Oppression on this side of the world have menaced him. He looks, I
believe, upon American Slavery as an affair which he, he especially who
helped to elevate the peasantry of his own country, knows that we have
the power to settle. But, however much he may have heard about it, he
does not yet know that we have not the will to settle it. He does not
yet know how deep-seated it is, and how mighty and extensive its
influence is in deadening our hearts, and controlling our national
action. Although he is a man of profound sagacity, yet, with all the
information that may have been furnished him, it can only be by degrees,
and by actual observation, that his mind will win its way to a true and
terrible conviction of the actual state of the case. But he will--he
must see how the matter stands; and he will declare, most fervently do I
trust, what he cannot help seeing. The fact must become as plain to him
as noonday, that there is no one thing in which the oppressed nations of
Europe have a deeper interest, than in the abolition of American
Slavery; because this is the one thing which prevents the full
expression of our sympathy in their behalf, and neutralizes that moral
aid, which, if we rendered it to the full extent of our power, would
make all material aid entirely superfluous. Some of his words the other
evening were very significant. Having said that he had done nothing, and
would do nothing to interfere with our domestic affairs, he added that
remarkable declaration:--'I more and more perceive, in the words of
Hamlet, that there are more things in heaven and earth, than _were_
dreamed of in _my_ philosophy.'

How could he have dreamed that a people who had made such a solemn
declaration of human rights before all the world, a people so lavish in
the praise of Liberty, were clinging with such desperation to
Oppression, as if it were the very life and soul of their Union and
their Power. No matter how much he may have been told, and he is in
nothing more remarkable than in the extent of his information, he has
not yet known--he cannot know--it could not have entered into his
generous heart to imagine, that this Domestic Institution of ours is the
one thing that exerts the most marked and predominating influence on our
domestic and our foreign policy. He does not see, but he must, that it
is the one thing that will make his appeal to our National Government
utterly in vain, and that his silence in regard to it will avail him
nothing. It must become plain to him that we are ready enough to
intervene when the Slave Power requires it for the increase and
extension of its own strength. For that we are ready to go to war with
our neighbors, and rob them of their territory. In that behalf our
statesmen have sought to enlist the interests and sympathies of foreign
nations. And that it is, whose interests will prevent us from a full and
generous expression of our interest in the downtrodden of other lands.
We are interfering with human rights at home, we are constitutionally
bound to interfere with them, and we hold it for our advantage to do so;
and we cannot intervene to prevent interference with them abroad. On
this account alone, could a man of such rare power, of such wonderful
eloquence, coming among us upon such a mission, fail. Yes, this favorite
domestic institution, corrupting the whole administration of our
government at home and abroad,--this it is that will disappoint and
defeat the Hungarian patriot's idolised hope. He has come hither as to
the very temple of Freedom, and he finds coiled up under her very altar,
as its guardian, the serpent of Oppression, and already its deadly hiss
has rung in his surprised ear.

American Slavery has much to answer for; but if it adds this to the
mountain of its iniquities, if it is the cause why the hope of bleeding
and fettered Europe is blasted, if it break the noble heart of Hungary's
devoted servant and chief, and more than all, if it cause him to falter
in the cause of universal humanity, what tongue now silent will not join
in execrating it? what heart, hitherto cold, will not consecrate itself
to the work of its abolition?

The nations of the old world, degraded, trampled upon, and bleeding
under the relentless feet of arbitrary power, long and pray for
emancipation. The glorious vision of Liberty flits before their aching
sight. They stretch out their hearts and hands to us. But the
supporters of the old and oppressive forms of government sneer at our
boasted universal freedom, as well they may, and point to our millions
of bondmen. They can say, with truth, that Liberty does not exist here
or anywhere as a realized fact; that it is a chimera and an abstraction,
utterly impracticable; that the people are longing for a dream that has
never been and can never be fulfilled. Neither the foreign oppressor,
nor the foreign oppressed have any foundation in fact for the faith and
the hope of liberty; and much I fear we should do little for the
deliverance of other nations, even if, as we now stand, clinging to
Slavery, we were actually to intervene in their behalf. If we saw any
chance of strengthening and extending our 'domestic institution,' we
might in that case be ready enough to give them our help.

O how plain is it that the one thing which the world claims of us, the
one thing that the great Hungarian has to ask of us, for his own people
and for all Europe, is that we should prove that _Liberty without
Slavery_ is a practicable thing. Let this fact be realized, and the
world's redemption is sure. Show mankind twenty-five millions of human
beings, living together under such free and simple institutions as ours,
with not a single slave among them, and then all that we need do is
done, and our simple existence as a nation becomes an irresistible
intervention against the violation of human rights. To induce us to do
this, the Hungarian patriot may well go down on those knees which he
would not bend to Emperor or Czar, and adjure us for the love of God and
man, by all the dearest hopes and interests of the human race, by the
great name of the holy Jesus, to make our liberty complete, to redeem
our long-violated pledge, to wipe away the blot that eclipses the sun of
our Freedom, and prove, as we may, that all men are children of one
Father, brethren of one household, born to the glorious liberty of the
sons of the living God. If, in any way, he should be the means in the
hands of a gracious Providence of inducing us to do this, he will do
more for us than we could do for him, though we were to place all the
gold of the East, and of the West, at his disposal.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Discourse for the Time, delivered
January 4, 1852 in the First Congregational Unitarian Church, by W. H. Furness

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DISCOURSE FOR THE TIME ***

***** This file should be named 31670.txt or 31670.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/6/7/31670/

Produced by Gerard Arthus, Joseph R. Hauser and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
