The Project Gutenberg EBook of Membership Drive, by Murray F. Yaco

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Membership Drive

Author: Murray F. Yaco

Illustrator: Grayam

Release Date: March 18, 2010 [EBook #31689]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMBERSHIP DRIVE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration: _Want to join our secret organization? Well, first you
have to pass the tests._]




MEMBERSHIP DRIVE



By MURRAY F. YACO


ILLUSTRATED by GRAYAM



Transcriber's Note: This e-text was produced from Amazing Science
Fiction Stories, July, 1960. Extensive research did not uncover any
evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.




Thirty million miles out, Keeter began monitoring the planet's radio
and television networks. He kept the vigil for two sleepless days and
nights, then turned off the receivers and began a systematic study of
the notes he had taken on English idioms and irregular verbs.

Twelve hours later, convinced that there would be no language
difficulty, he left the control room, went into his cabin and fell into
bed. He remained there for sixteen hours.


When he awoke, he walked to a locker at the end of his cabin, opened
the door and carefully selected clothing from a wardrobe that was
astonishing both for its size and variety. For headdress, he selected a
helmet that was not too different in design from the "space helmets" he
had viewed on a number of television programs. It would disappoint no
one, Keeter reflected happily, as he took a deep breath and blew an
almost imperceptible film of dust from the helmet's iridescent finish.

Trousers and blouse were a little more of a problem, but finally he
compromised on items of a distinct military cut; both were black and
unembellished, providing, he hoped, an ascetic, spiritual tone to
temper the military aura.

Boots were no problem at all. The black and silver pair he wore every
day were, by happy coincidence, a synthesis of the cowboy and military
footgear styling he had observed hour after weary hour on the pick-up
panel in the control room.

He placed the helmet carefully on his head, took time to make sure that
it did not hide too great a portion of his impressively high forehead,
and then walked leisurely to the control room.

In the control room he checked the relative position of two green
lights on the navigation panel, shut off the main drives, clicked the
viewscreen up to maximum magnification and took over the manual
controls. A little less than two hours later, at 11:30 A.M. Eastern
Standard Time, he landed smoothly and quietly near the Jefferson
Memorial in Washington, D.C.

Watching from a port in the airlock, Keeter was impressed with the
restraint of the reception committee. Obviously, the entire city had
been alerted several hours before his arrival. Now, only orderly files
of military equipment could be seen on the city's streets, converging
cautiously toward the gleaming white hull and its lone occupant.

He opened the airlock and stepped out on a small platform which held
him a full hundred feet above the grass covered park. He watched as an
armored vehicle approached within shouting distance, then stopped.
Telling himself that it was now or never, he raised both arms to the
sky, a gesture which spoke eloquently, he hoped, of peace, friendship
and trust.


Later that afternoon, behind locked doors and sitting somewhere near
the middle of an enormous conference table, Keeter nonchalantly
confessed to an excited gathering of public officials that he had
landed on the planet by accident. It was not, he implied, a very happy
accident.

"I didn't know where the hell I was," he explained carelessly, in
excellent English that awesomely contained the suggestion of a
midwestern twang. "Some kind of trouble with the ship's computor--if
you know what a computor is." He suppressed a yawn with the back of his
hand and continued. "Anyway, the thing will repair itself by morning
and I'll get out of your hair. Too bad I had to land in a populated
area and stir up so much fuss, but from the ship this place looked more
like an abandoned rock quarry than a city. Now, if it's okay with you,
I'll get back to the ship and--"

A senator, Filmore by name, at the opposite end of the table jumped to
his feet. "You mean you had no intention of contacting us? My God, man,
don't you realize what this means to us? For the first time, we have
proof that we're not alone in the universe! You can't just--"

Keeter called for silence with an impatient wave of his hand. "Come,
come, gentlemen. You're not the only other humanoid race in the galaxy.
We don't have time to call on every undeveloped race we happen to run
across. Besides, I never did like playing the role of 'the mysterious
alien who appears unannounced from outer space.' Primitives always
require so much explanation."

"Primitives!" exploded the senator. "Why, of all the impudent--"

The senator was quieted by a colleague who placed his hand over the
offended man's mouth.

The presiding officer at the meeting, a General Beemish, arose and
addressed the visitor. "We realize that from your point of view this
planet has not exactly achieved the cultural or technological level of
your, er, homeland--"

"You said a mouthful," agreed Keeter, who was now cleaning his nails
with the pin attached to a United Nations emblem that somebody had
stuck to his tunic earlier in the day.

"Look," said the general, gamely trying again. "We're not quite as
unsophisticated as you seem to think. There are three billion persons
on this planet--persons who are well fed, reasonably well educated,
persons who owe allegiance to only one government. We're making great
strides technologically, too. Within a decade, we'll be established on
the moon--our satellite. Why, even our school children are
space-minded."

"Sure," said Keeter, who had turned in his chair and was now staring
out the window. "Nice little place you got here. Say, is there a
bathroom around this place. I gotta--"

Someone showed the visitor to a bathroom where to everyone's
astonishment he proceeded to remove his clothes and leisurely shower.
The meeting was adjourned for thirty minutes. When he had finished his
shower, he dressed, walked back into the conference room, waved a
cheery good-bye, and before anyone realized what was happening, he had
unlocked the door from the inside and closed it behind him.

For a full thirty seconds, no one said anything. Then suddenly someone
managed to gasp, "My God, what'll we do?"

"There's nothing we can do," said General Beemish. There were tears in
his eyes.


Keeter walked all the way back to the ship. It took him an hour and
forty minutes. Long enough, he hoped, for someone to have scooted ahead
and notified the military personnel guarding the area to keep hands
off.

No one attempted to stop him. He boarded the ship, made himself
something to eat, walked to a stock room and pocketed a defective
transistor from an unemptied disposal tube in a corner. Five minutes
later he reappeared on the platform outside of the airlock. Fifteen
minutes later he was delivered in a military staff car to the
conference room he had left barely two hours before.

Everyone was transfigured by his reappearance. Beemish looked
especially radiant as Keeter sat down at the table, pulled the
transistor from his pocket, and stated his business quickly.

"Look, it's probably no use asking, but I need a repair part for that
damned computor. Something's wrong with the automatic repair circuits,
and I don't feel like staying up all night to find the trouble." He
held the transistor toward them at arm's length. "Frankly, I don't
think you'll have much luck reproducing it, but I thought I'd ask
anyway--"

"May I see it?" asked Beemish, leaning forward and eagerly stretching
out a hand.

Keeter seemed to hesitate for a minute, then shrugged his shoulders and
dropped the transistor into the general's sweating palm.

Three persons got up from the table and crowded around Beemish, trying
to get a look at the alien product.

"Well," said Keeter. "What do you think? If it's too far advanced for
you, don't hesitate to say so. I'll just get back to the ship and start
working."

"Not at all, not at all," said a small, white haired man who had
finally wrested the transistor from Beemish. He squinted at the thing
through a pocket magnifier. "We'll have it for you by morning, I'm
quite sure."

"I'm not quite so sure," said Keeter, yawning, "but I need the sleep
anyway. See you here at eight in the morning." He yawned again, got up
from the table and walked out once more through the door.


When Keeter reappeared in the morning, Beemish ushered him into the
conference room with a hearty clap on the back. When everyone was
seated, he pulled a small jewel box from a pocket and handed it
ceremoniously to Keeter.

"I already ate breakfast," said Keeter, setting the box on the table.

"No, no, no," groaned Beemish. "That's not food--open it up, man!"

Keeter lifted the box to eye level, squinted at it suspiciously for a
moment, then sniffed it. "You're sure--"

"Yes, yes," shouted a dozen impatient voices, "open it, open it up!"

Keeter shrugged and opened the box. Twelve tiny, identical transistors
lay gleaming on a bed of black velvet.

"Well?" said Beemish, eagerly.

"Hm-m," answered Keeter.

"What do you mean, hm-m," asked Beemish nervously.

"I mean it's a silly damn way to pack transistors."

"But--"

"But they look like they'll do the job," said Keeter, snapping the lid
closed.

The sighs of relief were heard in the corridor.

Keeter pushed his chair back from the table and stood up. "I realize
that I've put you all to a lot of trouble, and I'd like to offer some
kind of payment for your services, but frankly, gentlemen, I don't know
how I can--"

"Oh, you can, you can," interrupted Beemish excitedly. "What I mean to
say is that if you really want to, you can."

"How?"

"Why, er, you could provide us with a small amount of information."
Beemish looked definitely nervous.

"Be more specific, general." Keeter was beginning to look grim.

"Well, we were thinking--I mean, it would be nice if you'd agree to
have a friendly chat with some of our people. For instance, an hour or
so with our physicists, then maybe a half hour with a few sociologists,
and perhaps the same amount of time with the senator's committee--"


Keeter closed his eyes and sighed. "Okay, okay, boys, but let's make it
quick. Also, let's keep it to twenty minutes for each inquisition. Come
on, when do we start? Now?"

The scientists were the first--and the easiest. He gave them just
enough information to whet their appetites, just enough to plant the
suggestion that it took a great deal of tolerance and patience on his
part to hold an interview with such backward people.

"Gentlemen, I'd love to explain the principle of the neutrino drive,
but frankly, I don't know where to begin. You--you just don't have the
mathematics for it." He didn't bother to add that neither did he.

"Yes, of course, I'm sure I understand what you're getting at. My God,
why shouldn't I? Even a child could understand those equations."

"You call _that_ a representation of the mass-energy constant? No
offense, old man, but I'm afraid you're going to have to start all over
again. Invention doesn't take the place of research, you know."


The social scientists were next:

"As I explained a moment ago, we are heterosexual and live an organized
community life, but not in any cultural context that could be explained
by the term. You might say that our cultural continuum (although the
term for us is quite meaningless) is a function of an intricately
structured social organism, with institutional coordinates that are
largely internalized. Do you follow me gentlemen?" They certainly did
not.

But the senator's committee, as usual, got the information it wanted.


_Senator Humper:_ Now, young man, you claim that your base is on one of
three inhabited planets of Aldebaran. You also claim that in the known
universe there are twelve hundred or more inhabited worlds, all welded
together in a kind of super United Nations. Did you or did you not
state as much?

_Keeter:_ Uh-huh.

_Humper:_ Well, now it appears that we're getting some place. Tell us,
how does each planet manage to qualify for--er--membership in this
organization?

_Keeter:_ Why, they have to pass the test, of course.

_Humper:_ Test? What test?

_Keeter:_ The Brxll-Hawkre-Gaal test. We administer it to anybody who
seems to be qualified.

_Humper:_ Er--tell us, young man, just exactly what sort of test is
this? An intelligence test?

_Keeter:_ Yes, you might call it that, although it has a number of
sections. Actually, Gaal has divided it into three parts.

_Humper:_ I see. Well, what kind of parts?

_Keeter:_ Well, let's see. First there's the fuel test.

_Humper:_ Fuel test?

_Keeter:_ Let me explain, all very simple really. Let's take the case
of a planet that seems to be qualified for Federation membership in
every respect but one. They don't have interstellar flight. Now--since
membership imposes duties requiring commercial, diplomatic and
scientific intercourse between member worlds, the applicant must be
able, within a comparatively short time, to engineer its own
transportation. Follow me?

_Humper:_ Yes. Yes, go on.

_Keeter:_ Well, since the biggest technological stumbling block for
most planets in such a situation is the development of the necessary
fuel, we'll help them along. In other words, we give them the fuel
test; we supply a sample quantity of Z-67As--our standard thermonuclear
power source. If the applicant, working with the sample, is able to
reproduce the fuel in quantity, then that's it. They've passed that
portion of the test, and at the same time have developed the means for
interstellar flight. Follow me?

_Humper:_ Yes, of course. Now how about the second part of the test?

_Keeter:_ Oh, yes, that's the weapons section.

_Humper:_ I'm sorry, I'm afraid I didn't hear you. I thought you said
weapons.

_Keeter:_ I did. You see, it's a matter of self defense. There are a
number of primitive worlds that _have_ developed interstellar flight,
but have not achieved the cultural and social levels that would qualify
them for membership. As a result, they become rather nasty about this
exclusion, and devote themselves to warring against any Federation ship
that comes within range. You'd call them pirates, I think. Anyway, the
Federation Patrol keeps them pretty well in hand, but occasionally, the
Blues--that's our nickname for them since all their ships are blue--do
manage to waylay a ship or raid a Federation planet. So naturally,
every ship must carry suitable armament; the standard equipment is an
R-37ax computor missile--even more complicated for an applicant to
manufacture than the reactor fuel. Therefore we provide a sample
missile along with our blessings. The rest is up to the applicant.

_Humper:_ And the last part of the test?

_Keeter:_ Oh, that's genetic. We require a specimen, a woman from the
applicant's world. She's taken to a Federation laboratory, evaluated
genetically, physiologically, psychologically. Our people are able to
extrapolate the future racial--and to some degree cultural--development
of the entire planet after about two weeks works. Needless to say, the
entire process of testing is painless; the subject is made as
comfortable as possible. And after the test period, the specimen is
returned as quickly as possible to her home world.

_Humper:_ Well, now, don't you think--after what you've seen of
us--that we might possibly qualify, at least qualify to take the test?
I'm sure you'll be surprised--

_Keeter:_ Oh, no you don't! I've fulfilled whatever obligation I had by
answering your questions. That was the agreement, remember? Information
in exchange for the transistors. Now, gentlemen, if you'll excuse me--


Keeter allowed himself to be delivered back to the ship in a staff car.
Beemish and several others were on hand to see him off. He shook hands
all around--a custom which amused him immensely, since the same act
meant something tremendously different in most other parts of the
universe.

Back in the ship, he walked to his cabin, stripped off his clothes,
showered, ate, dressed again. Going into the control room, he checked a
number of detectors, found no evidence that any Blues were hunting for
him, left the control room and walked back to a supply room.

Here, he selected a plastic vacuum solenoid from a rack, hefted it in
one hand for a moment, then deliberately let it drop to the floor. He
picked it up, squinted at it, then walked out to the airlock.


General Beemish was delighted. Everyone was delighted. "No trouble at
all," said Beemish, who had already made a phone call that had
galvanized two thousand scientists and technicians into action. "We'll
have it for you in no time."

"I certainly hope so," said Keeter. Some of the flippancy had left him,
and it was apparent that this new bid for assistance was causing him
considerable embarrassment--for a short time, anyway.

"Yes sir," said Beemish, grinning. "Glad to be of help, in fact, we're
flattered that you'd let us, primitive as we are, help at all. We
primitives don't often have an opportunity to do this sort of thing,
you know." Beemish believed in rubbing while the rubbing was good.

The solenoids, forty in all, were delivered the following morning. They
were packaged in a small black box lined with velvet. This time Keeter
made no comment about the packaging. Instead, he rose from his chair in
the conference room, tucked the box under an arm, and addressed the
group. "Gentlemen, I'd like you to know just how much I appreciate this
favor. Evidently, I misjudged your level of technology, and for this I
apologize. I don't know how I can repay you for this latest favor, but
if you'd like, I'll be glad to formally submit your planet's
application for Federation Membership as soon as I return to
Aldebaran."

"When will that be?" asked Senator Humper unceremoniously.

"Oh, about ten of your years, at a guess."

"Ten years! My God, man. Can't you do something sooner?"

"Well--I suppose, I could administer the first two parts of the test
myself. Why, yes, I suppose I could drop off your samples and your
specimen at the Federation branch laboratory in Andromeda--."

"Wonderful!" shouted Beemish. "When do we begin?"

He was genuinely awed when three weeks later they began loading
enormous quantities of Z-67As into his ship. He did not check the
stuff, but had no doubts that it was, atom for atom, identical to the
sample of fuel he had given them.


The R37Ax computor missiles arrived the same afternoon. There were four
hundred of them. He selected one at random and had it taken into the
ship's laboratory. Here, he ran a number of routine tests. The missile
was not identical to the sample! They had made a number of improvements
in the circuitry! Keeter reflected grimly that a race such as this
would probably be able to deduce a launching and firing system for the
thing, would probably have the planet ringed with launching stations
within weeks. If the Blues _had_ picked up a trace of him, he
reflected, they would be atomized before they got within half a million
miles of the planet.

The specimen for genetics, which he had almost forgotten about, arrived
an hour before he was scheduled to depart. He was stunned again. She
was undoubtedly the most attractive woman Keeter had ever set eyes on.

"Oh, I'm so excited," said the young lady, in a voice slightly
suggestive of the virgin on the way to the sacrifice.

"I'm excited, too," said Keeter honestly.

In the control room, Keeter set a course for Arcturus. He then tripped
a lever which fed a month's supply of the earthmen's fuel into the
ship's almost empty reaction chambers. Another lever fed 50 computor
missiles into 50 completely empty launching racks.

He checked the detectors, but found no trace of the blue ships of the
Federation Patrol. Keeter allowed himself the luxury of a sigh. It was
a long way to Arcturus, a long, lonely way--even for a hardened pirate,
he reflected sadly. Then he remembered that that was why he had asked
for the girl.


THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Membership Drive, by Murray F. Yaco

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMBERSHIP DRIVE ***

***** This file should be named 31689.txt or 31689.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/6/8/31689/

Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
