The Project Gutenberg EBook of Aus meinem Koenigreich, by Carmen Sylva

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Aus meinem Koenigreich

Author: Carmen Sylva

Editor: Wilhelm Bernhardt

Release Date: March 22, 2010 [EBook #31731]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AUS MEINEM KOeNIGREICH ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[This text is intended for users whose text readers cannot use the
"real" (Unicode/UTF-8) version of the file. A few characters, mainly
in the Notes and Vocabulary, have been modified:

  e o
    macron or "long" mark on e and o shown with circumflex instead
  [)i]
    i with breve or "short" mark "unpacked" and shown in brackets
  "-
    line with umlaut, used in Vocabulary for plural forms, shown
    as two separate characters
  {petra}
    Greek words in the Notes are transliterated and shown in {braces}
  "..."
    The original "low-high" quotation marks, used with all German text,
    are shown as guillemets; English quotation marks have the plain
    "typewriter" form.

The Notes were numbered from 1 on each page. This numbering was
retained; the added first number [1.2] represents the physical page.
Line numbers, printed in the margin of the main text, are not used in
the Notes and were omitted from the e-text. Brackets and question marks
are in the original.

These types of character format appear in the Notes and Vocabulary:

  _italics_
  ~fraktur~ ("Gothic") type
    In the original book, all German text was printed in fraktur. The
    ~marks~ were omitted in vocabulary references to plural endings:
    (_pl._ -en) instead of (_pl._ ~-en~).
    Conversely, the same ~marks~ are used to show non-fraktur
    ("antiqua") type in the German stories.
  +bold+ and +gesperrt+ (spaced-out)
    To reduce visual clutter, the same marking was used for both.
    In German, boldface is used only in main entries, while gesperrt
    is used only in examples; English uses only boldface.

None of these symbols are used for any other purpose, so they may be
globally deleted if they distract you.

Typographical errors are listed at the end of the e-text.


The five stories are:

  Piatra Arsa
  Die Jipi
  Die Hexenburg
  Der Tschachlau
  Riul Doamnei]




  [Illustration: "Carmen Sylva."]




  Heath's Modern Language Series


  ~AUS MEINEM KOeNIGREICH~


  Tales From The Carpathian Mountains

  by

  "CARMEN SYLVA"

  (Queen Elisabeth of Roumania)


  _Selected and Edited for Early Reading
  with Introduction, Notes and Vocabulary_

  by

  Dr. WILHELM BERNHARDT


  BOSTON, U.S.A.
  D. C. HEATH & CO., Publishers
  1900




INTRODUCTION


I

THE ROUMANIANS AND THEIR LANGUAGE

Not many years ago, the Roumanians, _i.e._, the inhabitants of the two
principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia, were hardly known by name,
and it was only through the grave events of which the Lower Danube has
been the scene, since the middle of the XIX. century that they are
prominently brought to the fore. We know now that they constitute one of
the most important elements of the population of Eastern Europe--that
they differ essentially from their neighbors, be they Slav, Turk, or
Magyar--and that in some way they are descendants of the old Romans,
though they live detached from the other nations of the Graeco-Latin
family.

The origin of this Latin-speaking nation is still shrouded in mystery.
Are they the descendants of the Getae and Latinised Dacians? Or does the
blood of Italian colonists brought thither by Emperor Trajan (98-117
A.D.) predominate among them?

The Roumanians of to-day are anxious to purge their language of all
Servian, Greek, and Turkish words introduced during the long dominion of
the Turks. They endeavor to polish their tongue so that it may rank with
Italian, to which it is closely related. About one half of the words of
the Roumanian language--as spoken between the Lower Danube and the
Carpathian Mountains--are Latin, while the roots of the other
constituent elements must be looked for in Slavic, Albanesian, Greek,
Hungarian, Turk, and German. There remain, however, several hundred
words not traceable to any known tongue, and these are supposed to be a
remnant of the ancient Dacian spoken on either bank of the Lower Danube
at the period of the Roman invasion, in the beginning of the second
century after Christ.


II

"CARMEN SYLVA," ROUMANIA'S POET-QUEEN

In the opening lines of her collection of poems, Carmen Sylva,
Roumania's poet-queen, describes to us whence she derived her euphonious
self-chosen title: CARMEN--the "Song"--which gave her happiness and
ease, and SYLVA--the "Wood,"--in which, among the birds, she had learned
to sing. The telling of stories in prose and verse has been her greatest
delight since she was a child.

Queen Elisabeth of Roumania is a daughter of Prince Hermann of Neuwied,
and was born on the 29th of December, 1843. Neuwied was a small
principality on the bank of the Rhine, near Ehrenbreitenstein, and her
family was an old and honored one, living at the castle of "Monrepos,"
a short distance from the quaint old town of Neuwied, on that part of
the Rhine, where every rocky height has its romance, and every green
valley its legend. In her early youth, the village-children were the
only playmates of the little princess. When a mere child she developed a
poetic taste and talent. At nine she began to write. At sixteen her
tasks were long and severe: She studied history, the languages (Latin,
Italian, French, and English), grammar, arithmetic, geometry, and
literature, and read poetry, history, and the drama for recreation. From
eighteen to twenty-four she studied, traveled and taught the poor. She
had both talent and inclination for teaching, and was actually preparing
herself for a school-teacher's position, when the marriage with the
Prince of Roumania prevented her from carrying out her plan.

In 1866, Prince Karl of Hohenzollern had been placed upon the throne of
Moldo-Wallachia by the European powers, with the title as Prince of
Roumania. He proved himself an efficient and energetic ruler, and his
popularity was soon so well founded that he was induced to go out
a-wooing, so as to be able to insure the perpetuation of his race to the
principality. In earlier years he had met Princess Elisabeth of Neuwied
at the Court of Berlin, and he there almost saved her life. She was
descending the stairs when her foot slipped, and no one knows what the
result might have been, had not the gallant prince, then a handsome
young lieutenant, caught her in his arms and saved her. Be this as it
may, when the princess and her mother were in Cologne, in 1868, Prince
Karl, then Prince Carol I. of Roumania, paid them a visit. "What a
handsome fellow he has grown to be!" exclaimed Princess Elisabeth.
"Yes," replied her mother, "and he is here for the purpose of asking for
your hand." "He is a man whom everyone must admire," answered the
princess, and on the following day her betrothal to the young ruler on
the Lower Danube was officially announced. In November, 1869, they were
married, and on the 22d of the same month, Princess Elisabeth first trod
Roumanian soil and was received by thousands upon thousands of the
people, who sang to her the Roumanian hymn as welcome and greeting. With
Prince Carol she was supremely happy; he worshipped her and declared
that she was his better self. A little daughter was born to them, but
after a few short years of happy motherhood the Queen bowed in anguish
over a tiny grave, in which she felt that all her hopes were buried.

It was then, that she made the decision thenceforth to labor for the
good of the children of her adopted country, to unveil to them the
treasures of folk-lore that existed among the dwellers of the Carpathian
Mountains, and to do her part in educating them in patriotism by the
narration of simple stories of Roumanian peasant-life and
peasant-fidelity. The royal heart that had lost its own child, went out
and sought to make the children of a nation its own, and succeeded. Year
after year, from her beautiful castle in the Carpathians, where the wild
Pelesch in its calmer moods whispers to her its stories, the poet-queen
has devoted herself to writing for the benefit of her Roumanian
child-subjects, and with each year she has drawn the bond of sympathy
between her husband--who in 1881 had been proclaimed King of
Roumania--and his people closer and surer.

The Queen's best-known book, "_Aus Carmen Sylva's Koenigreich_" had its
origin in this wise: In the spring of 1882, the Roumanian Minister of
Public Instruction asked Her Majesty, if she would not deign to write a
book that could be used in the public schools of the kingdom as a
prize-book to be given to the best scholars at the close of the year's
work. To this request the Queen readily consented and the result was the
delightful stories and legends from the mountains and valleys around her
home in the Carpathians with illustrations by her own hand. They were
written in German and translated into Roumanian. From this book, the
present volume contains a selection of those tales, which, the Editor
thinks, may prove the most interesting to young English and American
readers.

The special charm of "Carmen Sylva's" stories is their sweet simplicity
of thought and language, their freedom from all conventional methods and
their homely beauty.--Supplemented by grammatical and explanatory Notes
and a complete Vocabulary, these "Tales from Carmen Sylva's Kingdom" are
expected to make an excellent and charming reading book, which
advantageously might be put into the hands of beginners as early as the
second half of the first year of their study in German, while for
reading at sight the text would be most suitable for second and third
year students.

WASHINGTON, D.C., October, 1899.




Aus meinem Koenigreich


I

Piatra Arsa[1.1]


Stolz war die schoene Pauna,[1.2] sehr stolz. Sie hatte nicht umsonst so
grosse, dunkle Augen mit schwarzen Brauen, die eine scharfe Ecke
bildeten, und eine Adlernase. Ihr Mund war eher gross, aber schoen
geschnitten, und wenn[1.3] sie sprach oder lachte, sah man die beiden
Zahnreihen leuchten. Ihre schwarzen Zoepfe lagen wie eine Krone ueber der
Stirn, und die Leute nannten sie scherzweise ~Pui de Imparat~[1.4]
(Kaiser's Junges), wenn sie mit ihren breiten Schultern und grossen
Schritten dahinging und den Kopf hielt, als truege[1.5] sie etwas. Sie
war aber doch nicht zu stolz, den Kopf zu drehen, wenn Tannas
vorbeiging, und ihn anzuhoeren, wenn er bei der Hora[1.6] mit ihr sprach.
Wenn man[1.7] sie aber mit ihm neckte, schoss ihr[1.8] das Rot in die
Wangen, und eine scharfe Antwort strafte den Uebermuetigen.

Tannas war von den uebrigen Burschen sehr beneidet, besonders als
man[1.9] die Verlobung fuer ganz sicher hielt. Da wurde das Land mit
Krieg ueberzogen, und Tannas musste fort, mit dem Heere zur Donau
hinab.[2.1] Pauna verschluckte ihre Thraenen vor den Leuten; ob sie aber
nicht heimlich einige vergossen,[2.2] wagte niemand sie zu fragen.

Immer verstand sie es so[2.3] einzurichten, eine der ersten zu sein, die
im Dorfe Nachricht vom Heere erhielten, und wie[2.4] man sich[2.5] von
den ersten Schlachten erzaehlte, musste sie sich an das steinerne Kreuz
lehnen, am Eingang des Dorfes, so schwindlig wurde es der starken Pauna.
Nachts[2.6] konnte sie gar keinen Schlaf mehr finden und musste oft ihr
Licht brennen lassen, um die Schreckbilder nicht zu sehen, die ihr
Tannas von Wunden bedeckt sterbend oder tot zeigten.

So sass sie einmal in dunkler Nacht auf ihrem Bettrande, noch
angekleidet, und wusste nicht, dass draussen einer ums Haus schlich und
jetzt zu ihrem Fensterchen hereinlugte. Sie wusste auch nicht, dass sie
schoen sei,[2.7] mit den weitaufgerissenen Augen vor sich hinstarrend,
die Haende auf den Knieen gefaltet. Da klopfte es[2.8] ans Fenster, und
mit einem verhaltenen Aufschrei sprang sie auf und drehte den Kopf, das
Dunkel mit den Augen durchforschend. Da war[2.9] es ihr, als saehe sie
Tannas, und im naechsten Augenblick hoerte sie sich leise rufen:[2.10]
"Pauna, bitte, liebe Pauna, komm doch[2.11] zu mir heraus! Fuerchte Dich
nicht, ich bin es,[2.12] Tannas!"

Schon hatte Pauna die Hand auf der Thuerklinke; jetzt stand sie draussen
und fuehlte sich sogleich umfasst. Sie aber wehrte den Arm ab, der
sich[2.13] um sie gelegt hatte, und sagte:

"Bist Du es aber auch?[3.1] Will mich keiner zum besten halten?"

"Hier, fuehle Dein Ringlein, Pauna, und hier die Muenze an meinem Halse,
ich konnte es nicht aushalten, ich musste sehen, ob Du mir treu
seist!"[3.2]

"Wer hat Dich denn vom Heere fortgeschickt?"

"Mich? Niemand!"

"Niemand? Und Du bist hier? Ist denn kein Krieg mehr?"

"O doch,[3.3] es ist noch Krieg, ich aber bin heimlich fort aus Liebe zu
Dir, Pauna."

"Aus Liebe zu mir?" Pauna lachte rauh und kurz auf. "Glaubst Du denn,
dass es mich freut, einen Fahnenfluechtigen zum[3.4] Geliebten zu haben?
Geh mir aus den Augen!"

"Aber Pauna! Ist das Deine ganze Liebe? In den Tod, ins Verderben
schickst Du mich!"

"Geh, wohin Du willst, aber das sage ich Dir, nie werde[3.5] ich Dein
Weib; denn meinen Mann verachten zu muessen, das ertrage ich nicht!"

"Du hast einen andern gern!"

"Nein, Tannas, Dich allein, Dich habe ich gern und habe Naechte um Dich
gewacht; das[3.6] aber hat mir nicht getraeumt, dass ich einen Feigling
zum Schatz habe!" Pauna begrub das[3.7] Gesicht in die Haende und weinte.

"Ich dachte, Du wuerdest mich mit Freuden aufnehmen und mich bei Dir
verbergen!"

"O, Schande!" rief das junge Maedchen. "O die Schande, dass ich mich Dir
verlobt,[4.1] aber ich sage Dir, eher soll der Bucegi[4.2] brennen, ehe
ich Dein Weib werde!"

"Und ich sage Dir," rief Tannas, "Du sollst mich nicht wiedersehen, bis
ich ein Krueppel bin oder tot!"

In diesem Augenblicke standen sich[4.3] die beiden jungen Leute mit so
funkelnden Blicken gegenueber, dass ihre Augen im Dunkel leuchteten.

Da verbreitete sich ein roter Schein in der Hoehe und wie sie aufsahen,
schien eine Felsenspitze des Bucegi zu gluehen. Immer heller ward[4.4]
die Glut, bis eine rote Flamme Sterne zu spruehen schien. Die beiden
Liebenden standen wie[4.5] versteinert. Da gingen in den Nachbarhaeusern
die Fenster auf; die Leute riefen einander zu, es sei Waldbrand, nein,
sagten andere, der Berg brenne. Die Hunde wurden laut. Die Haehne
kraehten.

Da fasste Pauna den jungen Mann bei den Schultern und ihn weit von sich
stossend rief sie: "Fort von hier, verbirg Dein Gesicht! Sonst sterbe ich
vor Scham!" Dann schlug sie die Thuere zu und loeschte ihr Licht. Mit
hochklopfendem Herzen sah sie Tannas nach, wie er im Schatten der Haeuser
davonschlich, sah den Berg glimmen und langsam dunkel werden und gab
keine Antwort, als man sie rief, das Wunder zu sehen.

Von dem Tage an fand man Pauna ausserordentlich bleich; kein Laecheln flog
mehr um die Lippen, die sonst so leicht sich spoettisch verzogen, und
keine rasche Antwort verkuerzte das Neckwort, das ihr nachgeschickt
wurde. Still that sie ihre Arbeit, war aber oft so muede, dass sie sich an
den Brunnenrand setzte und mit dem Wasser die Stirn kuehlte. Zuweilen
betrachtete sie sich traeumerisch im Brunnen oder blickte scheu zum
Bucegi hinauf. Mit einem Mal begann man zu sagen, Tannas sei im Dorfe
gewesen; dieser und jener wollte[5.1] ihn beim Schein des brennenden
Berges gesehen haben, und sogar seine Stimme hatte man mit der[5.2] von
Pauna gehoert.

Als diese darueber befragt wurde, perlten Schweisstropfen auf ihrer Stirn
und um ihre Lippen, die leise zitterten, als sie sagte: "War nicht alles
still und dunkel bei mir, als der Berg brannte?"

Paunas Mutter schuettelte den Kopf, biss auf[5.3] die Unterlippe und
meinte, es[5.4] geschaehen allerhand merkwuerdige Zeichen in dieser boesen
Zeit. Da kam die Nachricht, es sei eine grosse, moerderische Schlacht
geschlagen worden, Pauna erfuhr es diesmal zuletzt, ging rasch heim,
schnuerte ihr Buendel, nahm einen Kuerbis und Mamaliga[5.5] in einem Tuche
mit, und als die Mutter aengstlich fragte, wohin sie wolle,[5.6] sagte
sie nur: "Ich komme[5.7] bald wieder, Mutter, habe keine Angst um mich!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In der Abenddaemmerung lag dass Schlachtfeld gebreitet; tausende von Toten
waren umhergestreut, Pferde waelzten sich sterbend oder hinkten mit
gesenktem Kopfe umher. Um maechtige Wachtfeuer lagerte das Heer und
horchte nicht mehr auf das Jammern, das vom Schlachtfeld klang. Eine
hohe Frauengestalt wandelte allein durch die Reihen, nachdem Sie im
ganzen Lager gesucht und nach Tannas gefragt. Beherzt naeherte sie sich
Freund und Feind, reichte manchem einen Trunk und betrachtete die Toten
genau. Jetzt ward es voellig Nacht, und der Mond beschien die schaurige
Staette. Immer noch wandelte das Maedchen hin und her, kniete hier und
dort nieder, legte eines Sterbenden Haupt an ihre Brust und suchte an
graesslich entstellten Leichen nach einem Ring und einer Muenze am Halse.

Nur einmal taumelte sie entsetzt zurueck, als sie Weiber eine Leiche
pluendern sah.

Sie eilte fort, kehrte aber bald wieder zurueck, um[6.1] aengstlich den
Toten zu betrachten.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dass ganze Lager war in Schlummer versunken, und noch immer schlich Pauna
auf dem Schlachtfeld im Mondschein umher; manchmal rief sie leise:
"Tannasse!" Oftmals antwortete ihr ein Stoehnen, aber traurig schuettelte
sie das Haupt, nachdem sie einen Trunk gereicht. Der Morgen fing an,
leise zu grauen und das Mondlicht bleicher zu werden, da sah sie etwas
glaenzen, und wie sie hintrat, lag ein Toter halb entkleidet da, hatte
aber mit der Hand, an der ein kleiner Ring schimmerte, etwas, das er um
den Hals trug, so fest ergriffen, dass man [6.2] offenbar darauf[6.3]
verzichtet,[6.4] ihm die Finger zu oeffnen.

Pauna erkannte ihren Ring und mit dem Aufschrei: "Tannasse!" sank sie
neben der Leiche hin, deren Gesicht, mit Blut ueberstroemt, kaum zu[7.1]
erkennen war. Nach wenigen Augenblicken kam Pauna wieder zu[7.2] sich
und begann, dass geliebte Gesicht zu waschen; sie sah, mit
herabstroemenden Thraenen, dass beide Augen samt der Nase von einem
Saebelhiebe durchschnitten waren, sah aber auch, dass das Blut wieder
hervorquoll. Nun war sie sicher, ihr Geliebter sei nicht tot und eilte
seine Lippen zu benetzen und seine Wunde mit ihrem Tuche zu verbinden.
Da begann er zu seufzen, und wie er seinen Namen nennen[7.3] hoerte,
griff er mit der Hand in die Luft und betastete lange Paunas Gesicht:
"Meine Pauna!" sagte er kaum hoerbar. "Lass mich sterben, ich bin blind,
ich bin nichts mehr auf der Welt!" "Doch, doch!" rief Pauna, "Du bist
mein Geliebter und, will's[7.4] Gott, mein Mann, in kurzer Zeit; nur
still jetzt, still!" --

               *   *   *   *   *

Viele lange Wochen waren seit jenem Morgen verstrichen, Wochen, in denen
Pauna Tag und Nacht an Tannasses Lager gestanden und ihn unermuedlich
gepflegt. Da sah man[7.5] zwei Wanderer die Strasse entlang ins Dorf
kommen: einen Blinden im Soldatenmantel, mit dem Ehrenzeichen auf der
Brust, und ein Maedchen, das[7.6] ihn sorgsam fuehrte, und das mit
freudigem Laecheln den Voruebergehenden sagte: "Hier ist mein Braeutigam!
Er ist ein Held! Seht das Zeichen auf seiner Brust!"

"Und in seinem Gesicht!" fuegte Tannas seufzend hinzu.

Noch nie war eine so grosse Hochzeit gewesen; von fern und nah stroemten
die Leute herbei, um die schoene Pauna zu bedauern an der Seite des
Blinden. Sie aber laechelte allen zu und sagte: "Ich bin stolz! Ich habe
einen Helden zum[8.1] Mann! Und gottlob, dass ich stark bin, ich kann fuer
uns beide schaffen!"

Den Berg aber, den man hatte brennen sehen, nannte man ~Piatra arsa~,
"den verbrannten Stein," denn Hirten und Gemsjaeger schworen, sie haetten
dort die Felsen verkohlt gefunden.




II

Die Jipi[9.1]


In der Gruppe des Bucegi[9.2] ragen wie zwei Riesenzaehne dicht neben
einander die beiden Jipi empor und starren sich[9.3] trotzig an.
Zwischen ihnen stuerzt in staeubendem Wasserfall die Urlatoare,[9.4] "die
Heulende," zu Thal und tobt, bahnbrechend, zur Prahova[9.5] hinab. Man
sagt, die Jipi seien[9.6] vor[9.7] uralten Zeiten Zwillingsbrueder
gewesen, die sich[9.8] so lieb gehabt, dass keiner[9.9] ohne den andern
bleiben konnte, dass keiner einen Bissen Brot annahm, den er nicht mit
dem andern teilte, dass, wenn man den einen etwas fragte, der andere
Antwort gab. Wenn der eine sich weh gethan, weinte der andere und
liess[9.10] sich gar nicht troesten. Sie waren beide so schoen wie Morgen
und Abend, so schlank wie Lanzen, so rasch wie Pfeile und so stark wie
junge Baeren. Ihre Mutter betrachtete sie mit Stolz und Freude und
streichelte ihre Lockenkoepfe, indem sie sprach: "Andrei[9.11] und Mirea,
meine schoenen Soehne, moeget[9.12] Ihr so beruehmt werden, dass die Steine
Von Euch reden!" --

Sie waren von edlem Geschlecht und hatten eine Burg auf hohem[9.13]
Felsenkegel, auf dem sie thronten, als gehoerte[9.14] ihnen die ganze
Welt, und oft sagten sie scherzend, sie koennten[10.1] zusammen nur
_eine_ Frau heiraten, da sie gewiss nicht zwei gleichgeartete Frauen
finden wuerden. Am besten[10.2] sei es, sie heirateten[10.3] gar nicht.
Davon wollte aber die Mutter nichts hoeren, denn sie wollte[10.4] ihrer
Soehne[10.5] Kinder auf den Knieen wiegen und ihnen Schlummerlieder
singen.

Sie sang ihnen oft des Abends[10.6] die alten Lieder,[10.7] waehrend sie
spann, und die beiden Juenglinge umgaben sie zaertlich, Andrei kniete
ihr[10.8] zu Fuessen, auf einem Kissen, Mirea lehnte mit[10.9] dem Arm auf
der Mutter Stuhl und sog den Duft ihres Haares ein, das in dicken,
braunen Flechten unter dem feinen, weissen Schleier[10.10] schimmerte.
"Unsere Mutter ist noch eine ganz junge Frau!" sagte Andrei.

"Ja," rief Mirea, "sie hat noch kein graues Haerchen!"[10.11]

"Und keine Falte!" ergaenzte Andrei. "Wir finden keine Frau, die
Deiner[10.12] wert ist!" sprach Mirea und kuesste den Schleier auf der
Mutter Haupt. "Du stellst sie alle in den Schatten!" lachte Andrei und
kuesste den kleinen Finger der Hand, die eben den wunderfeinsten Faden
spann. "Mein Vater war ein gluecklicher Mann!" rief Mirea.

"Und wir sind glueckliche Kinder!" fuegte Andrei hinzu. Die Mutter
laechelte zu dieser lieblichen Wechselrede und erzaehlte ihnen Geschichten
von der Grossmutter und der rauhen Zeit, in der die[10.13] gelebt, von
ihrem gestrengen Vater und noch gestrengerem Gemahl.

Die Mahlzeiten, welche die drei mit einander einnahmen, waren so heiter,
als waere das Haus voll Gesellschaft, wenn aber wirklich Gaeste kamen,
wurden sie stiller, wie es der Wuerde des Hauses ziemte. Sie waren
treffliche Gastgeber und brachten manche Nacht auf dem Boden zu, um ihr
gutes Lager den Fremden einzuraeumen.

Allen Menschen wurde es[11.1] wohl in dem trauten Heim, in dem die Liebe
wohnte.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eines Tages waren die beiden Brueder auf der Jagd und streiften an den
steilsten Felsen entlang, den Baeren zu finden, der juengst grosses Unheil
angerichtet. Endlich waren sie ihm[11.2] auf der Spur und lautes
Brummen, sowie das Hinabrollen der Steine verkuendete seine Naehe. In dem
Augenblicke aber, als Mirea den Wurfspiess schleudern wollte,[11.3] flog
aus einem nahen Gehoelze ein andrer Speer dem Tiere[11.4] gerade in die
Weiche, worauf glockenhelles[11.5] Gelaechter erklang. Der Baer richtete
sich auf und schritt auf den Hinterbeinen dem Gehoelz zu,[11.6] mit
wuetendem Brummen. Andrei sah die Gefahr, in welcher der kuehne Jaeger sich
befand, und waehrend Mirea trotzig sagte: "Moege er die Jagd beendigen,
die er angefangen!" rief Andrei: "Hoertest Du nicht, es war ein Knabe!"
warf sich dem Baeren,[11.7] der ihn ueberragte, in den Weg und bohrte ihm
sein Messer bis an das Heft in die Schulter. Der Baer hieb in die Luft
und stuerzte dann tot zusammen. "O wie schade!" rief die helle Stimme,
und aus dem Gebuesch trat ein wunderschoenes Maegdlein hervor, in kurzem
Gewande, mit Sandalen und einer weissen Pelzmuetze, unter welcher sich
wild und ueppig die braunen Locken hervorstahlen. Sie hatte gruene Augen
mit goldenem[12.1] Kern und braune, kuehn geschwungene Brauen. Von den
Schultern hing ihr ein Mantel von schneeweissem, seidigem Ziegenhaar, in
der Hand hielt sie ein ebensolches breites Messer wie Andrei, mit dem
sie festen Fusses[12.2] den Baeren erwartet hatte. "Wie schade!" rief sie
wieder, "nun habe ich ihn nicht erlegt!" und Thraenen traten ihr in die
Augen. Andrei stand ganz beschaemt und betrachtete den Baeren, als haette
er ihn gern[12.3] wieder lebendig gemacht, dem schoenen Maedchen zu liebe.
Sie stiess das Tier mit der Fussspitze, ohne[12.4] zu wissen, was sie
that, nur um ihren Unmut zu verbergen; da wandte sich der Baer noch
einmal und hieb nach ihr. In demselben Augenblick ward[12.5] sie
zurueckgerissen und mit einem:[12.6] "Unverstaendiges Kind!" scheltend
von[12.7] Mirea auf die Fuesse gestellt. Verwundert sah sie in die Hoehe,
denn die Stimme war dieselbe wie die des jungen Mannes vor ihr, und nun
gar das Gesicht zum Verwechseln aehnlich. Mit offnem Munde, wie ein
kleines Kind, sah sie von einem Bruder zum andern, bis alle drei in ein
stuermisches, nicht enden wollendes Gelaechter ausbrachen. "Ihr seid
ja[12.8] doppelt!" rief das Maedchen, "wie zwei Haselnuesse in _einer_
Schale!"

"Wir sind auch Haselnuesse aus derselben Schale," sagte Andrei, "wer bist
Du denn, kleine Waldfee? Du bist doch nicht etwa eine verkappte Hexe,
die uns verderben wird?"

"Wer weiss!" sagte das Maedchen, "ich bin vielleicht eine Hexe, mein
Grossvater hat es schon oft gesagt, und ich bin[13.1] doch erst eine
Woche bei ihm."

"Wir moechten[13.2] Dich gleich[13.3] als schlimme[13.4] Hexe behandeln
und Dich auf unsrer Burg gefangen setzen, da Du auf unserm Grund und
Boden ohne Erlaubnis gejagt," sprach Mirea.

"Wir haben auch eine schlimme Mutter auf der Burg!" sagte Andrei.

"So?" rief das Maedchen, "die muss ich sehen, ich bin Eure Gefangene!"

Sie rief einen Jaeger herbei, gab ihm einige Auftraege an[13.5] den
Grossvater, befahl ihm, sie mit den Pferden abzuholen und schritt lustig
mit den Bruedern auf den schwindligsten Pfaden der Burg zu.[13.6]

Die Mutter der beiden jungen Leute, Frau Roxana,[13.7] sah zum Fenster
hinaus und wunderte sich, was fuer einen jungen Hirten ihre Soehne
mitbraechten.[13.8] Hinterher trug man den Baeren auf Baumaesten.

Als sie in die Naehe der Burg gelangten, rief Frau Roxana erschrocken:
"Aber, mein Gott,[13.9] das ist ja[13.10] ein Maedchen! Wo haben sie denn
das[13.11] gefunden?" Einige Augenblicke spaeter erschallten die
jugendlichen Schritte und Stimmen im Hofe, dann in der Halle, dann im
Saal.

"Mutter!" rief Mirea, "hier bringen wir einen Gefangenen, einen Jaeger,
der uns die Jagd verdorben! Was soll seine Strafe sein?"

Frau Roxana betrachtete das junge Maedchen mit grosser Bangigkeit; sie
haette[14.1] sie am liebsten wieder so schnell als moeglich fortgeschickt;
es war aber ein so bezaubernder Anblick, dass Frau Roxana guetig laechelte
und die Hand reichte, die das junge Maedchen ehrerbietig kuesste. "Ich
denke die aergste Strafe fuer sie wird[14.2] wohl sein, mit mir alten Frau
einige Stunden zu spinnen!"

"O ganz und gar nicht; ich spinne so fein wie eine Fee; der Wurfspiess
hat meine Hand nicht schwer gemacht. Und was das Alter betrifft, so
befinde ich mich soeben in der einzigen Gesellschaft meines Grossvaters,
der den ganzen Tag im Sessel sitzt, und der immer einschlaeft, wenn ich
ihm was erzaehlen will." Indem sie sprach, nahm sie ihren Mantel ab und
wollte ihn niederlegen, Andrei aber kam ihr hoeflich zuvor. Frau Roxana
nahm ihr selbst die Pelzmuetze ab und strich ihr das krause, feuchte Haar
aus der erhitzten Stirn. Sie war noch viel schoener so, wie von einer
Loewenmaehne umwogt, und Mutter und Soehne betrachteten sie wohlgefaellig.

"Wie heisst Du denn, liebes Kind?" fragte jetzt Frau Roxana.

"Ich heisse Urlanda;[14.3] welch haesslicher Name, nicht wahr!
Rolanda[14.4] wollten sie mich nennen, aber weil ich so wild war und so
viel Spektakel gemacht habe, wurde Urlanda daraus." Sie sagte das mit
einer so komischen tiefen Stimme, dass alle lachten. "Mein Grossvater
wohnt auf der andern Seite der Berge;[15.1] ich bin heute weit
gelaufen."

"Nun, dann wird Dir die Mahlzeit munden, die unsrer[15.2] wartet."

Sie traten in den Speisesaal, der mit den schoensten orientalischen
Teppichen ausgehaengt war, und in welchem praechtiges Silberzeug prangte.

Die beiden jungen Maenner sprachen maessig dem Weine zu, den sie mit Wasser
mischten, die Frauen liessen sich an Wasser genuegen. Anmutig floss das
Gespraech dahin; man erzaehlte sich Baerenabenteuer,[15.3] immer eines
merkwuerdiger als das andere, und Rolanda liess sich darin nicht
ueberbieten; sie wusste immer noch unglaublicheres zu erzaehlen, und in so
ernsthaftem Tone, als wenn sie einen Eid darauf schwoeren wollte.[15.4]

Viel Heiterkeit veranlasste ihr fortwaehrendes Verwechseln der beiden
Brueder, und als sich Andrei als ihren Lebensretter vorstellte, ward
Mirea eifrig und meinte, er habe[15.5] sie vor einer letzen Umarmung des
Baeren bewahrt. "Gut," rief sie heiter, "dass ich Euch beiden mein Leben
verdanke; sonst koennte[15.6] ich meinen Lebensretter niemals erkennen!"

Nach Tisch bat sie um Kunkel und Spindel; sie wollte zeigen, dass ihr
Spinnen keine Baerengeschichte sei. Dies that sie mit einem schlauen
Blick auf die Brueder. Und wirklich, der Faden, den sie auszog, glich
dem[15.7] einer Spinne, so fein und gleichmaessig war er zur grossen
Bewunderung von Frau Roxana.

"Ich kann auch sehr schoen sticken," sagte das junge Maedchen, "das hat
mich meine Mutter gelehrt, die[16.1] stickte wie eine Fee und hat
gemeint, sie wuerde meine Wildheit zaehmen mit so schoenen Arbeiten; aber
ich war immer schneller fertig als sie dachte, und ehe sie sich dessen
versah, war ich schon wieder draussen, im Gestuete oder auf der Jagd."

Sie seufzte ein ganz klein wenig: "Jetzt ist das Gestuet verkauft und
reiten kann man auch nicht in den elenden Bergen, man hat gar keinen
Platz! Ach! da sind die Pferde!" rief sie und sprang vom Stuhl. "Ich muss
jetzt fort,[16.2] sonst komme ich nicht vor der Nacht heim, und der
Grossvater kann gewiss schelten, wenn er will; er hat so buschige
Augenbrauen und so viele Falten drum[16.3] herum!"

Sie flog auf Roxana zu, kuesste ihr die Hand, gruesste die beiden Brueder mit
einem Schwenken ihrer Pudelmuetze, die sie auf die Locken warf, war zum
Saal hinaus[16.4] und wie ein Knabe im Sattel, wie ein Wirbelwind.

Die Brueder hatten aber auch ihre Pferde bestellt, den jungen Gast bis
zur Grenze des Besitztums zu begleiten, und alle drei lachten und
gruessten zu Frau Roxana hinauf, die mit ernsten Augen und laechelndem
Munde hinabsah. Es[16.5] lag ihr die Sorge auf dem Herzen, sie wusste
nicht weshalb und haette gern die Soehne zu sich zurueckgerufen.

Rolanda wollte bergauf und bergab galoppieren und war kaum daran[16.6]
zu verhindern; erst als ihr Mitleid fuer die Pferde rege gemacht wurde,
liess sie nach und sagte seufzend: "Diese wandelnden Stuehle nennt Ihr
Pferde!"

Da[17.1] die Nacht hereinbrach, lud sie die Brueder ein, nun beim
Grossvater einzukehren. Der alte Herr sass am[17.2] Ofen und strich seinen
schneeweissen Bart, der ihm weit ueber die Brust hinabreichte.

"Wo war denn der Wildfang wieder?" sprach er guetig.

"In schrecklicher Gefangenschaft wegen Jagdfrevels, und hier sind meine
Verfolger gleich mitgekommen, sie wollten sehen, ob ich die Wahrheit
gesagt habe."

Der Alte betrachtete wohlgefaellig die beiden jungen Leute, die in
ehrerbietiger Haltung vor ihm stehen blieben. Bald war die Abendmahlzeit
gerichtet und verlief nicht minder heiter als das Mittagsmahl bei Frau
Roxana.

In dem ersten Fruehlicht ritten Andrei und Mirea wieder von dannen und
waren nicht wenig ueberrascht, aus einem Fenster mit Blumen ueberschuettet
zu werden. Wie[17.3] sie aber in die Hoehe blickten, flog das Fenster zu
und sie sahen niemand.

Dieser Tag war der Anfang von einer langen Reihe von Besuchen und
Gegenbesuchen, von Jagden, Ritten und heimlichen Stunden, der Plauderei
gewidmet.

Rolanda konnte auch ihre trueben Stunden haben, in denen sie noch viel
anziehender wurde; dann sprach sie von den toten Eltern, und wie sie so
ganz allein sei auf der Welt; der Grossvater werde nicht lange mehr
leben, und dann wisse sie nicht, wohin.[17.4]

"O welche Beleidigung!" rief Andrei, "sind wir nicht Deine Brueder? Ist
bei uns keine Heimat fuer Dich?"

"Hat die Mutter Dich nicht lieb?" fuegte Mirea hinzu.

Wieder zog Frau Roxanas Herz sich aengstlich zusammen, und doch hatte sie
das wilde Kind unendlich lieb gewonnen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kurze Zeit nach diesem Gespraeche erklang rasender Hufschlag den Berg
hinauf, zum Hofe herein; es war Rolanda ohne Muetze mit flatternden
Locken. Totenblass stuerzte sie zu Frau Roxana herein:

"Ich bitte Euch um Gotteswillen, behaltet mich bei Euch! Der Grossvater
ist tot, ich habe ihm die Augen zugedrueckt, ich habe ihn gewaschen und
angezogen und in den Sarg und ins Grab gelegt und habe mich nicht
gefuerchtet; aber da sind die Verwandten gekommen, eine ganze Schar und
haben sich um das Erbe gestritten und gerauft und haben mich wuetend
gescholten, da er mir etwas vermacht, und einer mit einem kahlen
Scheitel begehrte mich gleich zur[18.1] Frau! Hu! Da habe ich mich
gefuerchtet! So ein Kerl! Ich habe ihm aber gesagt, dass ich Urlanda heisse
und so boese bin, dass mich gar niemand heiraten kann. Ich will auch gar
keinen Mann, ich will bei Euch bleiben, so lange Ihr mich nicht
hinausjagt!"

Frau Roxana hatte alle Muehe, die hervorsprudelnden Worte zu verstehen
und hatte dann noch mehr zu thun, das aufgeregte Maedchen zu beruhigen.
Sie zog sie an ihr Herz, glaettete die wilden Locken und fuehrte sie dann
in die kleine weisse Kammer, die sie schon oft bewohnt, und sagte ihr,
hier solle ihr Heim sein, so lange ein Dach ueber dem Hause sei.

Rolanda warf sich ihr in die Arme und kuesste ihre Haende und versprach, so
sanft zu werden, so sanft, wie ein grosser, stiller See! Frau Roxana
laechelte und meinte, die Sanftmut werde kommen, wenn sie einmal
Frau[19.1] sei.

"Aber ich will keine Frau werden, ich will immer ein Maedchen bleiben und
frei, frei, wie ein Vogel!"

Frau Roxana seufzte ganz leise und horchte auf die Stimmen ihrer Soehne,
die eben heimkamen und zuerst nach Rolanda fragten, die sie hatten[19.2]
von fern heranlaufen sehen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Es[19.3] war eine merkwuerdige Wandlung in dem Benehmen der Brueder, seit
der Stunde, dass Rolanda bei ihnen war. Sie hatten sie als ihre kleine
Schwester begruesst, worauf das junge Maedchen ploetzlich schuechtern und
befangen ward. Sie gingen von nun an viel mehr hinaus, als frueher, aber
nicht mehr mit einander, sondern auf getrennten Wegen, und Rolanda blieb
viel bei der Mutter, war zerstreut und traeumerisch und weinte heimliche
Thraenen. Wenn sie sich unbemerkt glaubte, sah sie oft von einem Bruder
zum andern und wieder zurueck, als wollte sie etwas entdecken, das ihr
dunkel geblieben. Noch jetzt verwechselte sie die beiden oft, dann
lachte sie aber nicht, sondern blickte aengstlich zur Mutter hinueber.
Frau Roxana sah mit Betruebnis, wie eine duestere Wolke ueber ihrem Hause
sich zusammenzog, und weinte noch viel heimlicher als Rolanda, seitdem
jeder ihrer Soehne einzeln ihr in der Daemmerstunde seine grosse,
unendliche, unbezwingbare Liebe gebeichtet und hinzugefuegt hatte:

"Glaubst Du, mein Bruder liebt sie auch? Er ist so veraendert! Und wem
von uns wird ihr Herz sich zuneigen?" --

Frau Roxana trug manche Kerze ins Bergkirchlein zu Lespes[20.1] und
hoffte durch die muehsame Wallfahrt den Himmel guenstig zu stimmen, dass
nicht ein grosses Unglueck ueber sie hereinbreche.[20.2]

Rolanda war in der letzten Zeit in unbeschreiblicher Aufregung; denn an
dem naemlichen Tage hatten Mirea und Andrei, ohne von einander zu wissen,
jeder ihr seine Liebe gestanden, und das arme Maedchen erforschte
vergebens ihr Herz; sie hatte eben beide lieb, viel zu lieb, um einen
ungluecklich zu machen; sie konnte sie[20.3] auch in ihrem Herzen nicht
von einander trennen, so wenig wie mit den Augen. Sie wolle Frau Roxana
nichts sagen, um ihr nicht wehe zu thun, und sah, wie die Brueder
sich[20.4] nicht mehr mochten[20.5] und sogar scharfe Worte wechselten,
was sonst nie geschehen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Da rief eines Tages Frau Roxana die drei zu sich und sprach:

"Ich habe Eurer Herzen[21.1] schweren Kampf schon allzulange mit
angesehen. Einer von Euch muss ein schweres Opfer bringen, damit der
andre gluecklich werde."[21.2]

"Ja, einer von uns muss[21.3] aus der Welt!" sprach Mirea dumpf.

"Um Gotteswillen," rief Rolanda, "doch[21.4] nicht kaempfen um mich!"

"O nein," sprach Andrei und laechelte wehmuetig, "das waere[21.5]
unmoeglich; man kann allein gehen."

Frau Roxana hob die Haende: "O Ihr gottlosen Kinder! Habe ich Euch so
schwach geboren und erzogen, dass keiner Kraft hat, den ersten Schmerz zu
tragen! Rolanda, bis morgen sollst Du Bedenkzeit haben; bis morgen
wollen wir Kraft und Mut gewinnen!"

So trennten sie sich.

Andrei aber schlug einen Waldweg ein nach Lespes, kniete im
Felsenkirchlein nieder und sprach: "Mein Gott! Du kennst mein Herz und
meine _Kraft_! Gieb, dass ich keine Suende begehe, an mir selbst, an
meiner Mutter, an meinem Bruder, an dein Weibe, das ich liebe; sondern,
wenn sie mich nicht nehmen will, so mache mich zu Stein, damit ich
nichts mehr fuehlen muss!" --

Auf einem andern Wege war Mirea auch zur Kirche gekommen und hatte
dasselbe gebetet. Sie warfen sich[21.6] einen traurigen Blick zu und
gingen jeder allein nach Hause; denn jeder glaubte, er allein habe[21.7]
das Opfer gebracht.

Frau Roxana erschien am naechsten Morgen bleich wie der Schleier, der die
ersten Silberfaeden in ihrem Haare bedeckte.

Die beiden jungen Leute sahen aus, als gingen[22.1] sie in den Tod, nur
Rolanda trat freudestrahlenden Antlitzes[22.2] herein. Es war eine
Verklaerung ueber sie ausgegossen, die sie ueberirdisch schoen machte; sie
erschien einen Kopf groesser und sprach mit sanftem Wohlklang: "Tretet mit
mir hinaus, meine einzigen Teuern; unter Gottes Himmel soll die
Entscheidung fallen!"

Sie ging ihnen voran, als schwebte sie, nur ihre Haende waren
durchsichtig wie Wachs und die Augen, die sie zum Himmel hob waren voll
Thraenen. Auf schwindelnd steilem Absturz blieb sie stehen und kniete vor
Frau Roxana nieder:

"Segne mich, Mutter!" sprach sie. Frau Roxana legte ihre zitternden
Haende auf das schoene Lockenhaupt.

"Und jetzt," sprach Rolanda mit heller[22.3] Stimme, "jetzt hoert mich
an! Ich habe Euch beide so lieb, so unendlich lieb, mehr als mich
selber, mehr als mein Leben, darum kann ich mich keinem geben, aber wer
mich aus dem Abgrund holt, des[22.4] Weib will ich sein!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Noch ehe einer die Hand ausgestreckt, flog sie wie ein Vogel ueber den
Felsenrand in die unermessliche Tiefe. Aber -- o Wunder! -- im
Stuerzen[22.5] verwandelte sie sich in einen schaeumenden Wasserfall, in
der Luft zerstaeubend, wie ein braeutlicher Schleier. Die beiden Brueder
wollten ihr nachstuerzen, konnten aber nicht, denn ihre Fuesse wurden[23.1]
Felsen, ihre Arme Felsen, ihre Herzen Stein, und so ragten sie zum
Himmel empor.

Die unglueckliche Mutter aber breitete die Arme aus und rief: "Und ich
allein soll leben! O Himmel, hast Du denn kein Erbarmen?" Und mit
ausgebreiteten Armen fiel sie zur Erde, ihre Kinder umklammernd. Und
siehe, wo sie lag, verwandelte sich alles in dichtes, weiches Moos, das
sich weiter und weiter ausbreitete und die Felsen zur Haelfte einhuellte.
So stehen sie noch und werden immer so stehen, die wilde, braeutlich
weisse Urlatoare, die opferfreudigen Soehne, die Jipi, und deren treue,
zaertliche Mutter.




III

Die Hexenburg


Wenn man im Prahovathal[24.1] hinaufgeht, so kann man Cetatea
Babei,[23.2] "die Hexenburg," nicht sehen, weil sie hinter dem
Bucegi,[24.3] liegt. Sie ragt als spitzer[24.4] Kegel empor und
scheint[24.5] mit Ruinen bedeckt; von dort bis zu den Jipi[24.6] liegt
ewiger Schnee.

Vor[24.7] langen, langen Zeiten, als noch die Woelfe[24.8] die Herden
hueteten, und Adler und Tauben bei einander nisteten, stand dort eine
stolze Burg, in der es[24.9] sehr emsig zuging. Immerfort trippelten
hundert eilige Schritte hin und her. Bei Nacht aber brannte im Turm ein
Licht und schnurrte ein maechtiges Rad, und ein merkwuerdiger, leiser
Gesang schwebte ueber dem Schnurren und schien damit Takt zu halten. Die
Leute im Thal blickten scheu hinauf und fluesterten: "Sie spinnt wieder!"
Die[24.10] aber dort oben spann, war die Herrin der Burg, eine schlimme
Zauberin, der die Bergmaennlein alles Gold aus dem Erdenschoss brachten,
damit sie fuer alle Braeute den Goldfaden[24.11] spaenne,[24.12] der am
Hochzeitstage ihre Haeupter schmueckt. Das Gold wurde in Massen bei[24.13]
ihr ausgeschuettet; sie wog und waehlte und wehe dem Bergmaennlein,
welches[24.14] das gehoerige Mass nicht gebracht; das wurde zwischen Stamm
und Rinde eines maechtigen Baumes geklemmt, bis es das letzte Koernchen
Goldes[25.1] hergegeben, oder es wurde ihm nur der Bart eingeklemmt, und
da konnte es zappeln und ach und wehe schreien, -- die Alte machte taube
Ohren. Sie hatte darum den Namen Baba Coaja[25.2] bekommen, "Mutter
Rinde," oder, weil sie so hart war wie eine Brotkruste, und so runzelig
wie eine alte Eiche. Sie allein verstand die Goldfaeden zu spinnen und
machte sie im voraus fuer viele hundert Jahre. Eine wunderschoene Tochter
hatte Baba Coaja, die hiess Alba,[25.3] "die Weisse," denn sie war weiss
wie der Schnee, der die Bergspitzen bestaendig bedeckt. Sie hatte eine
Haut wie Samt und braune Augen wie Samt, und Haar wie die Goldfaeden,
die die Mutter spann.

Sie war immer eingeschlossen, denn Baba Coaja hatte viel Arbeit fuer sie,
und es[25.4] sollte sie auch niemand sehen und keiner freien, Sie musste
die Goldfaeden aufwinden und in unterirdischen Kellern schichten, fuer
alle die hundert und hundert Jahre.

Diese Arbeit war aber der holden Maid sehr zur Last, weil die Mutter
allerlei boese Sprueche und Zauber sang und murmelte, waehrend sie spann,
so dass jeder Braut schon ihr Teil Unglueck und Herzeleid mitgegeben war,
sobald die Goldfaeden auf ihrem Haupte geruht, und Alba gedachte traurig
des Ungemachs, das so im voraus bestimmt wurde. Ja, sie setzte sich
sogar einmal selbst ans Rad, waehrend die Mutter fort war, und spann ein
Stueck, indem sie nur gutes wuenschte. Als aber Baba Coaja nach Hause kam,
wurde sie ganz wuetend, schlug ihre Tochter unbarmherzig und sagte: "Du
sollst nicht eher heiraten, als bis Du Dein eigenes Gespinst wieder
erkennst!" und damit[26.1] warf sie das Stueck zu dem uebrigen.

Die Alte war im Herzen froh, dass sie einen Vorwand hatte, ihre Tochter
bei sich zu behalten, da ihr prophezeit war, Alba werde[26.2] sehr
ungluecklich werden und frueh sterben. Das einzige Wesen auf der Welt, das
sie lieb hatte, war ihr holdes Kind; wie[26.3] sehr sie sich aber
bemuehte, Alba[26.4] Freude zu machen mit schoenen Kleidern und allerhand
huebschen Saechelchen, -- sie brachte doch keine Farbe in ihre Wangen und
kein Lachen in ihre Augen; denn das einzige, wonach sich das Maegdlein
sehnte, war Freiheit, und die ward ihr nicht zu teil. Wie gern[26.5]
waere sie einmal unter den Baeumen gewandelt, die den Fuss des Berges
schmueckten, auf dem sie lebte. Dort oben wuchs nichts als kurzes Gras,
und es war laenger Winter als Sommer. Wenn der Wind um die Burg heulte
und tobte, als wollte er sie in Stuecke reissen, dann wurde es[26.6] ihr
so traurig ums Herz; oft sass sie vor dem Kamin und starrte ins Feuer,
sah dem Funkenspruehen zu und dachte an gar nichts.

Manchmal lauschte sie den unheimlichen Gesaengen der Mutter, waehrend das
Schnurren des Rades und das Heulen des Sturmes sich mischten, und dann
dachte sie darueber[27.1] nach, warum ihre Mutter den Braeuten soviel
Bitternis in die Goldfaeden spinne,[27.2] warum denn die Menschen nicht
froh und gluecklich sein duerften in dem schoenen Sonnenschein, der doch
immer froehlich aussaehe. Aber sie konnte niemals den Grund finden und
schlief ein vor lauter Denken.

"Mutter," sagte sie einmal und stuetzte das Kinn auf die Hand, -- "sind
denn die Menschen gerade so wie Du und ich, oder haben sie eine andere
Gestalt und andere Gedanken?"

"Was gehen Dich die Menschen an? Sie sind alle sehr boese und wuerden Dir
nur uebles thun, wenn sie Dich bekommen koennten."

"Aber neulich kam ein wunderschoenes Tier unsern Berg herauf, und darauf
sass einer, der war viel schoener als alle Bergmaennlein; er hatte schwarze
Locken und gar keinen Bart[27.3] und einen Purpurmantel -- war das kein
Mensch?"

Die Alte erschrak heftig bei dieser Rede und sprach: "Wenn _der_[27.4]
noch einmal hier heraufkommt, so werde ich ihm den Hals brechen, und
die[27.5] im Thale werden ihn nie wieder sehen!"

"O Mutter! Thu das nicht! Er war so schoen!"

"Wenn Du noch einmal an ihn denkst, so sperre ich Dich in den Keller,
das sage ich Dir und lasse Dich Gold wiegen Tag und Nacht; Du
thust[27.6] so wie so[27.7] schon gar nichts mehr in der letzten Zeit
und sitzest immer so[27.8] da und stellst unnuetze Fragen. Hast Du denn
nicht alles, was Dein Herz begehrt?"

"Nein, Mutter, ich moechte auch ein so schoenes Tier haben und darauf
sitzen. Hier sind immer nur Schafe, auf denen[28.1] kann man nicht
sitzen."

"Jetzt willst Du gar noch ein Pferd haben, Du thoerichtes Kind! Siehst Du
denn nicht, dass es lebensgefaehrlich ist, hier zu reiten? Das Gras ist
glatt, und die Abgruende sind tief, und ein Fehltritt, so liegt man
zerschmettert da unten!"

Alba dachte lange darueber[28.2] nach, warum es fuer die Pferde gefaehrlich
sei, da doch die Schafe so sicher gingen; sie bekam aber auch hierauf
keine Antwort, da sie nicht zu fragen wagte. Die Bergmaennlein kamen ihr
nun noch viel haesslicher vor, als frueher, und das Gold war ihr so
zuwider, sie konnte es gar nicht mehr sehen. Sie dachte nur an das
schoene, schoene Pferd und an den Juengling, dem es den Hals kosten sollte,
wenn er sich wieder sehen liesse.[28.3] Warum wollte ihm die Mutter den
Hals brechen? Auch hierauf fand sie keine Antwort, wie sehr[28.4] sie
auch nachdachte. --

Einige Zeit darauf ritt der schoene Juengling wieder den Berg empor; ihn
reizte die Neugier, zu sehen, wer in der gewaltigen Burg wohne, deren
Mauern aus lauter Felsbloecken bestanden.

Er war ein Koenigssohn und hiess Porfirie[28.5] und war nicht[28.6]
gewohnt, etwas nicht zu koennen; seiner stuermischen Natur war jede
Schwierigkeit willkommen. Wenn man ihm vom Heiraten sprach, sagte er, er
wolle seine Braut einem[29.1] Drachen entreissen oder von einem Felsen
pfluecken, nur nicht so ganz gemuetlich Freiwerber schicken und eine
gewoehnliche Hochzeit machen.

Alba war gerade damit[29.2] beschaeftigt sich zu schmuecken, als
Zeitvertreib, nachdem sie den[29.3] ganzen Morgen Gold gehaspelt. Sie
hatte Haende und Gesicht gebadet, das lange Haar mit dem Elfenbeinkamm
gekaemmt, um die Stirn eine doppelte Perlenreihe gelegt, in welche sie
seitwaerts eine Alpenrose[29.4] steckte. Ihr Gewand war weiss, mit
goldenem Guertel, darueber kam[29.5] ein gruener Samtmantel, der mit
Perlenketten von einer Schulter zur andern befestigt war. Um das
schneeweisse Haelschen legte sie Smaragden, so gross wie Taubeneier, ein
Geschenk der Bergmaennlein, und dann betrachtete sie sich im Spiegel, in
dem sie aber nicht sehen konnte, wie ihr goldenes Haar schimmernd auf
dem gruenen Samt lag. Nein, sie musste wirklich schlecht sehen,[29.6] oder
der Spiegel war schlecht; denn jetzt schlug sie sich ins Gesicht und
rief: "Wie haesslich bin ich! Nein, wie haesslich! Darum versteckt mich die
Mutter vor allen Menschen, und giebt mir schoene Kleider und Juwelen, wie
einer Koenigin, um zu vergessen, wie haesslich ich bin!"

In dem[29.7] Augenblick erklangen Hufe auf den Felsen und mit
entsetzensstarren Augen erblickte sie den schoenen Fremden, dem es den
Hals kosten sollte,[29.8] wenn er wieder auf der Burg erschiene. Er
musste gewarnt werden, um jeden Preis. Wie eine Gemse flog sie bergab,
mit wehendem Mantel und flatternden Haaren,[30.1] in denen sich[30.2]
die Sonnenstrahlen zu fangen schienen.

Der junge Koenig sah sie ueber die Felsen daherfliegen, als[30.3] beruehrte
ihr Fuss die Steine nicht, und hielt sein Pferd an in staunender
Bewunderung. Er fragte sich, welch' Koenigskind, welche Bergfee ihm da
entgegenfloege, und nun winkte sie mit beiden Armen und rief atemlos:
"Zurueck! zurueck! Komm' nicht hier herauf! Es waere Dein Tod!"

"Und waere es mein Tod," rief er, "so wuerde ich froehlich sterben, da ich
die schoenste Maid erblickt, die je auf Erden gewandelt!"

Alba blieb vor ihm stehen, ein leises Rot ueberflog ihre Wangen, und ihn
mit grossen[30.4] Augen anschauend sagte sie: "Bin ich denn schoen?"

"Ja, wunderschoen, so reizend bist Du mit Deinem goldenen Haar und Deinen
goldenen Augen, dass ich Dich liebe, von dieser Stunde an!"

"Und ich liebe Dich auch!" sagte die unschuldige Maid, die nicht wusste,
dass man unter[30.5] den Menschen gewoehnlich nicht sagt, was man
denkt. --

"Aber sage nicht, mein Haar sei golden, Gold ist ja[30.6] so haesslich!"

"Haesslich?" Der Koenigssohn lachte. "Das habe ich noch nie gehoert? Hast Du
denn so viel Gold gesehen, dass Du es haesslich findest?"

"Ach ja, ich sehe ja nichts als Gold, statt gruener Baeume nur Gold, statt
Blumen Gold, statt Menschen Gold, solche Haufen!" sie breitete ihre Arme
aus und drehte sich um sich selbst. "O wie viel lieber[31.1] moechte ich
auf dem schoenen Tier sitzen! Ich habe noch nie ein Pferd gesehen, darf
ich's anruehren?"

"Ja, freilich, streicheln[31.2] sogar und zu mir heraufsteigen auch; Du
sollst reiten, so lange Du willst!"

Er hiess[31.3] sie, ihren Fuss auf den seinigen stellen und beide Haende in
die seinigen legen, so zog er sie vor sich auf den Sattel, schlang den
Arm um sie und gab dem Pferd die Sporen. Er dachte, sie wuerde sich
fuerchten; das fiel der holden Unschuld aber gar nicht ein, denn sie
kannte keine Gefahr. Sobald der Boden weich wurde, gab er die Zuegel
nach, und fort jagten sie, bald unter dem Waldesschatten, bald ueber
blumige Wiesen.

Alba jauchzte, klatschte in die Haende und rief: "Schneller! noch
schneller!"

So kamen sie in die Naehe der Stadt, die sie durchreiten mussten, um auf
einen Huegel zum Koenigsschloss zu gelangen. Da wurde es[31.4] ploetzlich
der Maid bange:

"Sind das alles[31.5] Menschen?" fragte sie, als sie im Schritt durch
die Strassen ritten. "Und die kleinen Haeuser blaest der Wind nicht um?"

"Nein!" lachte Porfirie. "Hier weht der Wind nicht so, wie dort oben bei
Euch!"

"Hier, meine Leute," rief er, "hier bringe ich Euch Eure Koenigin! Sie
ist eine Wunderblume, und ich habe sie mir vom Felsen gepflueckt."

"Aber ich bin keine Koenigin!" sagte Alba erschrocken.

"Ich, ich bin ein Koenig, und da Du mein Weib wirst, so wirst Du
Koenigin!"

"Dein Weib? Aber ich sollte ja keinen Mann haben, sagte meine Mutter."

"Das hat sie nur so gesagt, weil sie wusste, dass keiner Dich haben
sollte, ausser mir!"

"Bist Du denn gar nicht boese?"

"Nein, ich bin nicht boese."

"Du bist also kein Mensch?"

"Doch, das[32.1] bin ich."

"Aber die Mutter sagt, alle Menschen sind boese, und ich soll nichts mit
ihnen zu schaffen haben."

"Wer ist denn Deine Mutter?"

"Das weiss ich nicht; sie spinnt Gold."

"Spinnt Gold? Zu was[32.2] denn?"

"Fuer Braeute; aber ich will kein Gold bei meiner Hochzeit haben!" fuegte
sie rasch hinzu und griff nach ihrem Kopfe, als muesste sie ihn vor der
schlimmen Beruehrung schuetzen.

"Das wird aber doch nicht anders gehen,"[32.3] sagte Porfirie, "die
Leute wuerden sich wundern. Hier bin ich zu Hause, jetzt reiten wir in
den Hof ein, und Du musst mit meiner Mutter freundlich reden."

"Ist sie alt und haesslich?"

"Nein, sie ist sehr schoen und stolz."

"Was ist stolz?" sagte Alba.

Porfirie sah ihr in die Augen; die waren so lauter und rein, wie die
Sonne; er drueckte die Maid an sein Herz; dann warf er den Dienern die
Zuegel zu, sprang vom Pferde, hob Alba zaertlich herunter und reichte ihr
die Hand, sie die breiten Steinstufen heraufzugeleiten.

Sie traten in einen weiten Saal, da sass eine hohe, stattliche Frau,
von[33.1] vielen Maedchen umgeben, und spann schoene, gelbe Seide. Alle
erhoben sich von der Arbeit und blickten voll staunender[33.2] Freude
auf das herrliche Paar, das eben im Glorienschein der untergehenden
Sonne unter dem Portal erschien.

"Hier, Mutter," rief Porfirie, "ist Eure[33.3] liebe Tochter, mein suesses
Ehegemahl, das ich ganz nahe beim Himmel gefunden, und ich bin
noch[33.4] gar nicht sicher, dass es[33.5] nicht ein Himmelsbewohner ist,
der jeden Augenblick Fluegel bekommen und uns[33.6] enteilen kann!"

"O Du wunderschoene Frau!" rief Alba und fiel zu den Fuessen der Koenigin,
die sie guetig aufhob und kuesste.

"Und Du spinnst auch, nur viel, viel schoener als meine Mutter; denn was
Du spinnst, ist so zart und fein wie Schneeflocken und Blumenblaetter!"

"Was spinnt denn Deine Mutter?"

"Ach immer das harte, haessliche Gold!"

"Gold!" scholl es rings im Kreise, manche lachten und glaubten es nicht.

"Kannst Du auch Gold spinnen?"

"Ich kann, aber darf nicht."

"Warum nicht?" Sie oeffnete die Lippen, um zu sagen, was ihre Mutter
beim[34.1] Spinnen thue, aber ploetzlich ueberkam sie eine merkwuerdige
Befangenheit und das Gefuehl, wie boese man sie ansehen wuerde, wenn die
Maedchen wuessten, von[34.2] wem ihnen alles Unheil in den Brautschleier
gesponnen wuerde. Und dabei sahen sie alle so froh und so lieb aus, die
boesen Menschen, vor denen die Mutter sie gewarnt, eigentlich viel
besser, als ihre Mutter, vor der sich die Bergmaennlein so entsetzlich
fuerchteten.

Sie wurde von ihrer Pein erloest, indem eines der Maedchen fluesterte:

"Das Kleid ist Samt, echter, weisser Samt!" "Und die Juwelen? Von wem
sind die Juwelen?" sagte eine andere etwas lauter.

"Von meinen Freunden," antwortete Alba. "Wollt Ihr sie haben? Ich habe
noch viel solches Spielzeug zu Hause," und die Smaragden vom Halse
loesend, gab sie jedem der Maedchen einen derselben.

Mit den Perlenschnueren haette[34.3] sie es ebenso gemacht, wenn die
Koenigin sie nicht daran verhindert haette.

"Sind denn Deine Freunde so reich?" fragte sie.

"Das weiss ich nicht. Was ist denn reich? Sie bringen alles in Saecken aus
der Erde herauf, und wenn sie nicht genug bringen, so werden sie
gestraft."

Da wurde das Gesicht der Koenigin finster, sie nahm ihren Sohn bei Seite
und sprach: "Das Maegdlein ist keine andere, als die Tochter der
abscheulichen Hexe Baba Coaja. Fuehre sie schnell wieder dahin, wo Du sie
geholt hast, sie bringt nur Unglueck in unser Haus."

"Nur das fordere nicht von mir, Mutter," sprach der junge Koenig
erbleichend. "Ich liebe die holde, unschuldsvolle Maid mit allen
Gedanken, mit dem Blut in meinen Adern, mit jedem Atemzug! Und
waere[35.1] sie Baba Coaja in eigner Person, ich koennte nicht von ihr
lassen!"

Die Koenigin seufzte und befahl, der Maid eine Kammer neben ihrem Gemache
zu bereiten, und am naechsten Tage sollte die Hochzeit sein. Die Koenigin
wollte mit eigner Hand die neue Tochter schmuecken; sie hatte aber einen
schweren Kampf mit ihr zu bestehen, da diese durchaus keinen Goldfaden
auf ihr Haupt haben wollte. Sie entfloh durch das ganze Schloss, wie ein
gescheuchtes Reh, sie warf sich auf die Erde, unter die Decken, die die
Diwans schmueckten, sie bat und flehte mit herabstroemenden Thraenen, man
moege[35.2] sie verschonen. Die Koenigin solle ihr etwas von ihrem schoenen
Seidengespinst auf die Haare legen, nur dass schreckliche Gold nicht!

Waehrend sie aber knieend bat und jammerte, gab die Koenigin einen Wink;
zwei Maedchen banden ihr die Haende, waehrend die dritte den goldenen
Schleier befestigte. Alle erwarteten nun einen Ausbruch von Zorn und
Verzweiflung. Aber Alba ward ganz still. Bleich wie der Tod neigte sie
das Haupt unter der Last: "Du bist haerter als meine Mutter!" sagte sie;
"die[36.1] wollte mich keinem Manne geben, damit ich nicht ungluecklich
wuerde,[36.2] Du aber rufst selber das Leid auf mich herab!"

Niemand verstand diese Rede, und Alba war nicht dazu[36.3] zu bewegen,
sie zu erklaeren, was das allgemeine Misstrauen vermehrte. Sie sah so
traurig aus, dass das Volk in ihr gar nicht mehr die strahlende Maid von
gestern erkannte, und alle Worte der Liebe ihres jungen Gemahls konnten
nicht die Wolken von ihrer Stirn scheuchen.

Am[36.4] Hofe war aber bald von nichts anderem mehr die Rede, als von
den ungezaehlten Schaetzen der jungen Koenigin, und viele trieben den
Koenig, sich dieselben in der Naehe zu betrachten. Ihm[36.5] war es nicht
um die Schaetze zu thun; er dachte nur daran,[36.6] sein junges Weib
wieder laecheln zu sehen, und meinte, wenn er ihr die Sachen holte, die
sie besessen, so werde sie froehlich werden.

Sowie sie aber hoerte, Porfirie beabsichtige nach ihrer Burg
zurueckzureiten, erschrak sie heftig und bat und beschwor ihn, das nicht
zu thun! "Es wird Dein Tod sein, ganz gewiss!"

Er aber liess[36.7] sich nicht bereden, und je[36.8] mehr sie ihm die
Gefahr schilderte, die ihn dort erwarte, um so mehr reizte ihn eben
diese Gefahr, und ganz heimlich machte er sich auf den Weg, als sie noch
im tiefen Schlummer lag. Mit wenigen Begleitern sprengte er zur Burg von
Baba Coaja hinan. Die aber sah ihn von weitem und rief ihm entgegen:

"Fluch ueber Dich, der Du mein Kind entfuehrt hast, um es ungluecklich zu
machen! Da, saettige die Habgier, die Dich zu mir zuruecktreibt, Du
Ungluecklicher! Ich habe nichts nach Dir gefragt, was[37.1] suchst Du
mich?"

Mit diesen Worten schuettete sie Juwelen in endlosen Massen auf die
Reiter nieder; die Edelsteine aber wurden in der Luft zu Eis und Schnee
und wirbelten dergestalt,[37.2] dass die Ungluecklichen sich nicht wehren
konnten, und geblendet den Weg nicht mehr sahen. Die meisten stuerzten in
den Abgrund; der junge Koenig aber, der im Rachedurst sich der Burg
naeherte, um die Alte zu erwuergen, ward dermassen eingehuellt, dass er bald
kein Glied mehr ruehren konnte, und bevor er noch ein Wort hervorbrachte,
war er tief unter dem Schnee begraben. Baba Coaja lachte haemisch und
sagte: "Jetzt wird sie kommen, zu ihm, und nicht zu mir, aber sie kommt
zu mir und nicht zu ihm! Ich habe[37.3] mein Kind wieder, das nicht in
der boesen Welt bleiben soll, und unter den Menschen, die ich hasse!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Und wirklich dauerte es nicht lange, da eilte Alba, vom Wandern matt, im
weissen Samtkleide, dass vom Staube befleckt war, den Berg herauf.

"Wo, wo ist er?" fragte sie mit blassen Lippen.

"So!" sprach die Alte, "mir[37.4] bist Du entlaufen, mit einem fremden
Mann, und kommst wieder und fragst nicht nach mir, sondern nach ihm? Er
ist nicht hier!" --

"Doch,[38.1] doch, ich fand seine Spur, bis zu dem Schnee dort!"

"Weiter kam er auch[38.2] nicht!" lachte die Alte. "Er ist in Deinen
Edelsteinen erstickt!"

Mit einem furchtbaren Schrei stuerzte Alba auf die Schneeflaeche und
begann mit ihren Haenden sie wegzuscharren. Aber umsonst. Zu schwer lag
die Decke, die den Geliebten verhuellte, zu fest war sie gefroren! Mit
dem Ausruf: "O, Mutter! Mutter! Was hast Du mir gethan?" fiel Alba tot
neben Eis und Schnee hin. Baba Coaja stiess einen so furchtbaren Fluch
aus, dass der Berg wankte, ihre Burg zusammenstuerzte und sie samt ihrem
Golde unter ihren Truemmern begrub. --

An der Stelle aber, wo die schoene Alba ihr Leben ausgehaucht hatte,
keimte eine weisse Blume in weissem Samtkleide auf, die man seitdem "Alba
Regina,"[38.3] zu deutsch "Edelweiss,"[38.4] genannt hat. Sie blueht nur
dicht beim ewigen Schnee, der den Geliebten bedeckt, so weiss und rein,
wie sie selber war. --

Vielleicht verwandelt sich der Schnee einstmals wieder in Edelsteine,
wenn ihn eine unschuldsvolle Jungfrau betritt. --

Das Stueck Goldfaden, das Alba gesponnen, sucht man noch immer, und jede
Braut hofft, sie habe es erhascht; darum fuerchtet sich keine vor den
Goldfaeden,[38.5] die so gefaehrlich sind, sondern jede glaubt, ihr sei
das Glueck beschert.




IV

Der Tschachlau


In der Moldau[39.1] steht ein maechtiger Berg, fast so hoch wie der
Bucegi;[39.2] der heisst der Tschachlau; er erscheint sogar hoeher als der
Bucegi, weil er ohne Vorberge gerade aus dem Thal emporsteigt und seinen
schneegekroenten Gipfel leuchten laesst, als ein Wahrzeichen rumaenischen
Heldentums.

       *       *       *       *       *

An einem Morgen, sehr fruehe, stieg ein beruehmter alter Baerenjaeger mit
leichten Schritten den Berg empor.

Mosch[39.3] Gloantza war weit und breit wegen seiner kuehnen Jagden
bekannt; er ging[39.4] sogar in die Hoehle des Baeren, mit einem
brennenden Wachslicht am Ende des Buechsenlaufs und schoss den Baren tot.
Ein guter Erzaehler war er auch, Mosch Gloantza, der gern den jungen
Leuten die Zeit vertrieb und von ihnen wohl gelitten war.

Jetzt kam er in einen dichten Nebel, den er aber bald durchschritten
hatte, und ueber demselben schien die aufgehende Sonne auf eine enge
Felsplatte und auf das lieblichste Bild, das sie nur[39.5] bescheinen
konnte: eine Schar junger Maedchen war dort um ein Muttergottesbild[40.1]
versammelt, das sie eifrig mit Kraenzen und Blumen schmueckten, waehrend
sie durch die weissen, wogenden Nebel von der ganzen Welt abgeschnitten
waren.

Als Mosch Gloantza die Felsplatte erreichte, zuckte ein Blitz zu seinen
Fuessen und droehnte ein Donner, wie Erdbeben, von unten herauf.

"Ah! Mosch Gloantza!" scholl es[40.2] von allen Seiten. "Willkommen hier
oben! Wir bringen der Mutter Gottes Blumen, weil sie hier immer Wolken
hat, und siehe, nun hat sie schon den Segen gesandt! Jetzt erzaehle uns
was,[40.3] erzaehle!" --

Der alte Mann schob die Pelzmuetze zurueck und die buschigen Augenbrauen
in die Hoehe:

"Was soll ich denn erzaehlen?"

"Von alten, alten Zeiten!" riefen die Maedchen, zogen ihn auf ein
Felsstueck nieder und sammelten sich um ihn, die einen setzten sich ihm
zu Fuessen, die andern blieben vor ihm stehen, noch andere erschienen
lachend auf den Felsen ueber ihm und legten sich dorthin, um besser zu
hoeren. Er aber hub an:

"Wisst ihr denn, wer den Tschachlau gemacht hat?"

"Nein" -- "Ja! o gewiss!" scholl es ringsum; "der liebe Gott[40.4]
natuerlich!"

"Fehlgeschossen!"[40.5] rief der Alte, "der liebe Gott hat die Sonne
gemacht und die andern Berge und die Fluesse, aber den Tschachlau,
den[40.6] haben die Rumaenen gemacht."

"Die Rumaenen?" riefen die Maedchen, wie aus einem Munde.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Vor langen, langen Jahren, es[41.1] weiss kein Mensch, wie lange, da war
hier ein grosser Krieg. Die Feinde, die zum Dniestr[41.2] heranrueckten,
waren gar nicht wie Menschen, sondern wie wilde Tiere. Sie waren klein
und krumm[41.3] und hatten flache Gesichter, so gelb wie Zitronen, und
ihre Augen waren so klein, dass man sie gar nicht sah. Sie waren mit
ihren Pferden zusammengewachsen[41.4] und jagten dahin, wie die
Heuschrecken mit dem Ostwind. Wo[41.5] sie hinkamen, da war alles im
Umsehen verzehrt und blieb nichts zurueck als der nackte Boden. Die Kunde
von ihnen hatte das Land mit Schrecken erfuellt, doch waren die Rumaenen
entschlossen, ihren Boden bis aufs aeusserste zu verteidigen. Sie
verbuendeten sich mit einem andern Volke, das war von heller Haut,
blauaeugig[41.6] und hoch gewachsen, mit langem, gelbem Haar, von dem
einige mit dem Messer in Holzstaebe[41.7] schreiben konnten, und vereint
zogen sie an den Dniestr, die Schwaerme von grausamen Heuschrecken nicht
herueberzulassen. Der Kampf war lang und heiss, und das Wasser des Dniestr
war rot von Blut und schwer von Leichen, aber die Leute ohne Augen
liessen sich durch nichts erschrecken. Und wie viele man ihrer auch[41.8]
toetete, es kamen mehr und mehr, immer drei fuer einen, der gefallen war.
Sie hatten vergiftete Pfeile, die den[41.9] sichern Tod gaben, und wenn
sie in naechster Naehe einen[41.10] abgeschossen, so jagten sie davon, um
mit Lanzen wieder vorzustuermen. Die Leichen im Dniestr bildeten endlich
eine Bruecke, ueber welche die kleinen Pferde herueberkamen, und die
Rumaenen mussten sich hinter den andern Fluss, den Pruth,[42.1]
zurueckziehen, um sich dort von neuem zu verteidigen. Die Schlacht
dauerte acht Tage; blutrot ging die Sonne auf, und blutrot ging sie
unter, und blutrot waren Fluss und Feld. Endlich sprach der Fuerst[42.2]
der gelbhaarigen Leute: "Wir muessen weichen, aber wo finden wir ein
Bollwerk gegen diese Drachen?"

"Wir haben noch ein schoenes Land!" riefen die Rumaenen, und zeigten den
Weg. Da rief ihr weiser Fuerst:

"Hoert mich an, Ihr Mannen![42.3] Ein jeder von Euch nehme[42.4] eine
Hand voll Erde und werfe sie vor sich!"

Sie thaten, wie ihnen geheissen war, und da ihrer so viele waren, hatten
sie bald einen grossen Berg gebaut, den sie[42.5] Tschachlau, die
Gelbhaarigen aber Kaukland nannten.

Noch bevor die furchtbaren Feinde herangestuermt waren, ragte der Berg in
die Wolken, und die Heere lagerten auf demselben in unerreichbarer Hoehe.
Hier waren sie die staerkeren und schlugen jeden Angriff aus ihrer Hoehe
ab. Die Drachen unten gedachten aber, sie auszuhungern und umzingelten
den Berg, so dass keiner mehr herunter konnte.[42.6] Bald wurden der
Lebensmittel wenige, und aus hohlen Augen sahen die Heere auf die
feindliche Flut im Thale, die sich auf ihren Aeckern und Weiden saettigte,
nachdem sie alle Weiber und Kinder, die sich nicht hatten fluechten
koennen, getoetet, und alle Wohnungen in Brand gesteckt hatten.

Das schlimmste war der Durst. Da der Berg noch unbewaldet war, so konnte
es[43.1] auch keine Quellen geben, und jeder Krug Wasser, der aus dem
Thal geholt wurde, kostete einem oder mehreren das Leben. In dieser
grossen Not gingen die Fuersten schon zu Rate, ob sie nicht einen Ausfall
machen wollten und kaempfend zu Grunde gehen.

Da trat ein Hirte vor sie hin, jung und schoen, mit langen schwarzen
Locken und Augen, schwarz wie Kohlen, der sprach: "Ich habe Tag und
Nacht gesonnen, den Drachen da unten den Untergang zu bereiten; denn sie
haben vor meinen Augen meiner geliebten Maid die Brust durchstochen, sie
so an einen Baumstamm genagelt, den[43.2] ihren Pferden an die Schweife
gebunden und sie fortgeschleift, dass eine blutige Strasse den Weg
bezeichnete, auf dem sie von dannen gejagt, bis von der wundervollen
Maid nichts mehr da war, als eine lange Haarstraehne, die sich fest um
den Baum geschlungen. Ich weiss, wie ich meinen Rachedurst befriedigen
kann, wenn ich auch[43.3] selber dabei den jaemmerlichsten Tod erleiden
muss. Ich habe den ganzen Berg umgangen, den wir gebaut, und fand eine
Stelle, die man losloesen und hinabwaelzen kann. Ich will sie Euch zeigen;
wenn Ihr tief genug gegraben, so gehe ich hinab und sage den Drachen
dort unten, ich wolle ihnen den Weg zeigen, wie sie den Berg stuermen
koennen, und wenn ich den Bucium[43.4] hoeren lasse, so waelzt den Berg auf
sie herunter, aber nicht eher, damit ihrer[44.1] genug beisammen sind,
und Ihr ueber Geroell und Leichen entkommen koennt!"

"Wie heisst Du denn, Du Tapferer?" sprachen die Fuerste.

"Ich heisse Bujor."

"Weisst Du denn, Bujor, was Dich erwartet, wenn sie Dich als Betrueger
erkennen?"

"Ich weiss es," sprach der junge Mann mit gerunzelten Brauen, "ich sah,
wie sie die Unschuld behandeln, was werden sie den Schuldigen thun!"

"Und Du fuerchtest Dich nicht?"

"Wovor soll ich mich denn noch fuerchten, da mir das Leben leid ist, ohne
meine Maid, die ich habe sterben sehen! Mich kann der Tod nicht
schrecken!" --

Sie gruben nun Tag und Nacht eine tiefe Rinne in den Berg, sie trugen so
viele Steine zusammen, als sie nur[44.2] finden konnten, was alles keine
leichte Arbeit war, da sie von Durst ermattet waren. Aber endlich war
die Erde genug gelockert, um beim ersten Anprall hinabzustuerzen, und
Bujor nahm von ihnen Abschied, machte das Zeichen des Kreuzes[44.3] und
stieg zu Thal.

Er sagte den Wachen, er wolle mit dem Fuersten sprechen, er sei dem
Verhungern nahe und wolle viele vom Tode retten.

Als er vor dem Gefuerchteten stand, schlug dem jungen Manne doch das
Herz; denn der Fuerst sah ganz entsetzlich aus. Ihr muesst Euch vorstellen,
was Ihr Euch nur[44.4] von Grausamkeit und Bosheit denken koennt, und
dann ist das alles noch lammfromm gegen[45.1] des Drachenfuersten
Gesicht.

Er grinste und leckte sich die Lippen, als ihm Bujor erzaehlte, er wolle
ihm eine Stelle zeigen, die ganz unbewacht sei, und an der er leicht den
Berg erstuermen koenne.

"Wenn Du mich aber irre fuehrst," sprach der Fuerst, "so wirst Du so
sterben, dass der Tod Dir als suesses Labsal erscheinen wird."

"So geschehe[45.2] mir," sprach Bujor ernst und bat um einen Trunk
Wasser.

Die Nacht brach dunkel und sternlos herein, da rueckten die Feinde zum
Tschachlau heran, in schweigsamen Scharen; die Hufe der Pferde hatten
sie mit Heu umwickelt, damit sie keinen Laerm machen konnten. Bujor ging
zwischen zwei Reitern, die aus ihren Augenschlitzen ihn unverwandt
anschielten. Er ging sehr langsam, damit moeglichst viele dicht am Berge
seien, bevor er das Zeichen gab; er wusste die Stelle genau, wo der
Bucium versteckt war, und mit klopfendem Herzen ging er voran: Wenn es
ihm nicht gelang, sein Horn an die Lippen zu setzen, ohne dass[45.3] die
Drachen es merkten, was dann? --

Er sah ihre schwarzen Scharen sich dichter und dichter um ihn draengen;
jetzt begannen sie zu steigen, und hier lag der Bucium.

Bujor nahm ihn fest in die Hand, sah sich noch einmal unter den Feinden
um, machte das Kreuz und blies aus aller Kraft. In dem Augenblick wurden
ihm saemtliche Zaehne eingeschlagen und eine Schlinge um seinen Hals
gezogen. Ehe er aber das Bewusstsein verlor, sah er den Berg sich bewegen
und hoerte ein Droehnen, als wenn der Erdenschoss sich aufthaete, dann ein
Angstgeheul ringsum, und dann lag er begraben, inmitten von tausenden
von Feinden. Die Rumaenen aber stuermten zu Thal, ueber Schutt und Erde und
Leichen von Menschen und Pferden fort; es ward ein solches Gemetzel, dass
man noch Jahre nachher nichts als Schaedel und Gliedmassen fand, wie
Maiskoerner geschichtet. Die Feinde wichen zurueck, und die Rumaenen
bahnten sich[46.1] den Weg in die Berge, wo sie geborgen waren; die
Drachen gaben es endlich auf, sie zu verfolgen, und jagten in andere
Laender davon, sie[46.2] zu verheeren.

Bujor war aber nicht tot; ein Stein hatte ihn gedeckt, anstatt[46.3] ihn
zu zerschmettern, so dass die nachstuerzende Erde leichter auf ihm
geschichtet lag und ihm etwas Luft gewaehrte.

Nach mehreren Stunden kam er zu[46.4] sich und spuerte die Schlinge an
seinem Halse; als er sie losmachen wollte, fuehlte er eine erkaltete,
steife Hand, die sie hielt und die er nicht oeffnen konnte. Er gedachte,
sie mit den Zaehnen zu zerbeissen, da merkte er, dass er keine Zaehne mehr
hatte, und wenn er sich zu viel bewegte, rollte die Erde herab und
beengte mehr und mehr den Raum, in welchem er atmete. Da kroch er
langsam an die tote Hand heran, lockerte die Schlinge und zog den Kopf
heraus. Jetzt konnte er sich ruehren. Mit grosser Vorsicht begann er, wie
ein Maulwurf, die Erde wegzukratzen, den Platz unter dem Stein schonend,
dass er atmen konnte. Er musste oft absetzen, denn immer, wenn er glaubte,
Luft zu haben, stiess er auf einen Toten, den er nicht aus dem Wege
raeumen konnte.

Aber endlich, endlich ward eine Stelle hell, so weit wie die Dicke eines
Fingers, dann wie eine Hand, und wie trunken sog er die Luft ein, die
hereinstroemte. Mit letzter Anstrengung arbeitete er sich frei. Als er
den Tag sah, ward er ohnmaechtig. Wie lange er so gelegen, wusste er
nicht. Als er die Augen aufschlug, war es ringsum totenstill; Freund und
Feind waren verschwunden, und was[47.1] unter dem Berge begraben lag,
das stand nicht mehr auf, um zu erzaehlen, was geschehen sei. Bujor kam
sich gar nicht vor wie ein grosser Held, der er doch war, sondern wie ein
armes, verlassenes Menschenkind, das gar kein Recht hatte, am Leben zu
sein, da es[47.2] tot war, fuer Freund und Feind. Doch regten sich Hunger
und Durst, und er schwankte auf matten Beinen zu Thal. Lieber wollte er
von den Drachen gespiesst und geschleift werden, als so elend
Hungers[47.3] sterben, allein unter lauter Leichen. Aber kein Feind
liess[47.4] sich sehen, und Bujor konnte zum Fluss gelangen, seinen Durst
zu stillen; dann sah er sich um, wo die Seinen hingekommen sein koennten.
Auf[47.5] Tage im Umkreise gab[47.6] es keine Menschen dort; was[47.7]
Beine hatte, war entflohen, und was nicht fliehen konnte, war getoetet.
Bujor wandte sich den Bergen zu; dort konnten die Heere sein, die
wie[48.1] vom Erdboden verschwunden waren. Er schlug aber einen falschen
Weg ein und kam weiter und weiter von ihnen ab. Sie waren schon wieder
zu Thal gezogen, bevor er sie erreichte. Endlich war er das[48.2] Suchen
muede und dachte: "Sie halten mich ja doch fuer tot, warum suche ich sie
noch?" stieg weiter in die Berge und ward wieder Schaefer, wie er
es[48.3] frueher gewesen.

Wenn er dann abends[48.4] den Hirten seine Geschichte erzaehlte, so
lachten sie ueber seine schoene Erfindung, denn bis zu ihnen war der
Kriegslaerm nicht gedrungen, sie hatten auch die Drachen nicht gesehen
und Bujors eingeschlagene Zaehne schrieben sie einem Streite zu. Sie
sagten: "Bujor erzaehlt so oft seine Geschichte, dass er sie schon selber
glaubt!" --

       *       *       *       *       *

"Der Arme!" riefen die Maedchen, als Mosch Gloantza still war. "Was
machte[48.5] er denn dann?" -- "Ist er immer dort geblieben?" -- "Wurde
er nie belohnt, fuer seine Heldenthat?" so schwirrten die Fragen der
Maedchen durch einander.

Mosch Gloantza aber hatte seinen Tabak herausgenommen, seine Pfeife
gestopft, rauchte behaglich und schuettelte nur den Kopf zu allen den
Fragen. "Geht ihn suchen," sagte er endlich; "vielleicht hat ihm Gott
zum Lohn ein langes, langes Leben geschenkt!"

"Dann ist er gar zu alt und unheimlich!" riefen die Maedchen und tanzten
eine Hora,[48.6] um Bujor zu vergessen.




V

Riul Doamnei[49.1]


Unweit dem[49.2] lieblichen Gebirgsstaedtchen Campa Lungo[49.3] windet
sich ein frischer, klarer Bach dahin, der Riul Doamnei, "der Bach der
Fuerstin" genannt. Dieser Bach fuehrt Gold in seinem Bette, zuweilen
Stuecke halb so gross wie ein Fingernagel, und es war vor Zeiten Sitte,
dass dieses Gold allemal der Fuerstin gehoerte. Und warum es ihr gehoerte,
das ging so zu:

       *       *       *       *       *

In dem Rumaenenlande war eine grosse Hungersnot, eine Hungersnot, wie man
seit Menschengedenken nichts aehnliches gesehen. Zuerst waren die
Heuschrecken gekommen, in solchen Schwaermen, dass sie die Sonne
verdunkelten, und wo sie sich niederliessen, da war das schoenste
Aehrenfeld in einigen Minuten kahl wie eine Tenne, die Baeume ohne ein
einziges Blatt starrten mit ihren nackten Aesten in den Sommer hinein,
dessen ewig blauer Himmel die Hitze immer[49.4] groesser werden liess, so
dass bei Nacht keine Erfrischung mehr in der Luft war. Sobald alles
ringsum abgefressen war, erhob sich die Wolke von Heuschrecken, um sich
schnell wieder auf das naechste Gruen zu senken. Und so ging es[50.1]
unaufhaltsam fort, und damals war man noch nicht so klug wie heute, wo
man die grossen Strecken mit Petroleum begiesst und das alles dann in
Brand steckt. Kanonen gab es auch[50.2] noch nicht, mit denen man, wenn
sie fliegen, darunter schiessen und sie so auseinandersprengen kann.

Nach den Heuschrecken waren die Polen von Norden her eingefallen, die
Ungarn von Westen und die Tuerken von Sueden, und so wurden die Haeuser
verbrannt und das Vieh geraubt. Jetzt hatten alle diese Feinde das Land
verlassen, hatten aber Fieber und Seuchen unter Menschen und Tieren
zurueckgelassen. Mit schwarzen Lippen und Wunden am[50.3] Koerper gingen
die Menschen umher. Das Vieh verreckte in Massen auf den duerren Feldern,
wo es keinen Halm mehr gab. Nur die Hunde und Raben hatten gute Tage.
Die Luft zitterte vor Hitze, und auf weite Strecken verbreitete sich ein
entsetzlicher Geruch, der wie ein Pesthauch die Menschen niederwarf, so
dass sie in wenigen Stunden starben. Man[50.4] hoerte keine Klagen mehr,
denn dumpfe Verzweiflung hatte alles zum Schweigen gebracht. Es[50.5]
laeutete keine Glocke mehr, es gab weder Sonn-[50.6] noch Feiertag; auch
keine Arbeit, denn man hatte keine Ochsen zum Pfluegen und kein Korn zum
Saeen. Wie Gespenster schlichen die Menschen umher. Kaum fanden
sich[50.7] noch Leute, die Toten zu verscharren. Viele blieben, samt dem
Vieh, auf dem Felde liegen.

Die schoene Fuerstin Irina[50.8] fuehlte ihr Herz vor Mitleid brechen. Sie
hatte alle ihre Juwelen hergegeben fuer die Armen; sie hatte mit ihrem
letzten Gelde Vieh gekauft fuer die Bauern; das war aber gleich der
Seuche erlegen. Sie hatte die Hungernden gespeist, bis sie selbst kaum
mehr genug hatte fuer ihre vier kleinen Kinder. Verzweiflungsvoll stand
sie am Fenster, rang die Haende und betete: "Lieber Gott![51.1] Hast Du
mich denn ganz verlassen? Willst Du unser armes Land ganz vernichten?
Haben wir denn so viel gesuendigt, dass wir solche[51.2] Heimsuchung
ertragen muessen?" -- Da kam ein leises, kuehles Wehen herein, mit einem
so suessen Duft, wie von dem schoensten Blumengarten, und eine silberne
Stimme sagte: "Aus einem Flusse wird Dir Hilfe erwachsen. Suche
nur!"[51.3]

Da ging sie zum Fuersten, ihrem Gemahl, und zu ihren Kindern, nahm
Abschied und sagte, sie werde bald wiederkommen. Sie wisse, wo zu
suchen, um alle von der Qual zu erloesen. Sie that[51.4] so heiter und so
sicher, dass alle Vertrauen und Hoffnung gewannen; denn sie verschwieg
ihnen,[51.5] dass sie nicht einmal[51.6] wusste, was sie suchen solle.

Sie begann eine muehselige Wanderung in der heissen Sommerglut, den
Fluessen nach.[51.7] Manchmal fand sie noch ein mageres Pferdchen, das
sie eine Strecke weit trug, dann aber unter ihrer leichten Last tot
zusammenbrach. Sie ging am Olto[51.8] hinauf, am Gin, am Buzlu, am
Sereth, an allen grossen und kleinen Fluessen. Spaerlich wanden sich diese
durchs Gestein, und die sonst so maechtigen Wasser fluesterten kaum noch
dahin, wo sie sonst rauschten und brausten.

"Lieber Gott!" betete die Fuerstin. "Lass doch[52.1] eine kleine Wolke
erscheinen, wenn ich den Fluss gefunden, der mir helfen soll!" Aber es
kam keine Wolke. Sie wanderte zum zweiten Mal den Argesch[52.2] hinauf
und wollte[52.3] eben traurig umkehren, als sie die Muendung eines
kleinen Baches gewahrte, auf die sie vorher nicht geachtet. Zoegernd
lenkte sie ihre Schritte dahin, mit immer[52.4] schwererem Herzen, je
kleiner und unbedeutender der Bach ihr erschien.

Von den Steinen,[52.5] auf denen sie ging, ermattet, blieb sie einen
Augenblick stehen und seufzte: "Ich finde nichts, gar nichts! Und
vielleicht verhungern und sterben unterdes meine Kinder! Vielleicht war
mein Gedanke thoericht, ein Hirngespinst, eine Luege!" Wie[52.6] sie so
sprach, war[52.7] es ihr, als fiele ein Schatten ueber sie. Sie dachte,
es seien die Thraenen, die ihre grossen, mueden Augen zum ersten Male
fuellten. Sie wischte sie fort; nein es war ein Schatten in der baumlosen
Heide, und wie sie die Augen erhob, hatte sich die Sonne hinter eine
ganz kleinen Wolke versteckt, die langsam groesser wurde.

Irina begann zu zittern vor freudigem Schreck. Hatte Gott sie gehoert,
oder war es wieder ein Irrtum? "Lieber Gott!" betete sie, "wenn dies der
Fluss ist, so lass die Wolke groesser werden und Regen fallen; denn schon
der Regen ist Segen und hilft aus vieler Not!" Sie ging immer ein wenig
weiter; ja, die Wolke wurde groesser; sie ging schneller, ja, sie lief,
bis sie vor Schwaeche nicht mehr konnte;[53.1] da begannen einige grosse
schwere Tropfen zu fallen. Sie sog sie[53.2] mit den Lippen auf, mit den
Augen, mit Haenden und Haaren.

Da rauschte und rieselte es[53.3] ganz leise um sie her, und mit einem
Mal brach ein wahrer Wolkenbruch los. Sie ging, so gut sie konnte, im
nassen Lehm, im Flussbett, bis der Fluss zu schwellen begann und in
braunen, schaumigen Massen angerauscht[53.4] kam, wie ein breiter Fluss.
Sie musste manchmal stehen bleiben und ihren Pfad suchen, ging aber immer
fort aus Furcht, der Regen moechte wieder aufhoeren. Es regnete den[53.5]
ganzen Tag und die ganze Nacht. Die Fuerstin war so nass, dass es[53.6] wie
ein Bach aus ihren Kleidern floss. Sie wand sie[53.7] aus, schuerzte sie
und ging weiter noch einen Tag und noch eine Nacht. Sie war schon im
Gebirge und fiel oft hin vor Erschoepfung. Endlich blieb sie am Ufer
liegen und schlief ein, waehrend der Regen auf sie niederstroemte und das
Wasser immer hoeher schwoll, als[53.8] wollte es nach ihr greifen und sie
fortschwemmen.

Von Frost geschuettelt wachte sie auf. Da stand in der Morgenluft die
leuchtende Sonne so frisch, als haette sie selber ein Bad genommen und
siehe, der Bach war nicht mehr braun, sondern klar und blau wie die
Luft, und im Grunde desselben blinkte und glitzerte es[53.9] wie lauter
Sonnenstrahlen. Irina schuerzte ihr Gewand und watete hinein. Sie musste
sehen, was[53.10] so wunderbaren Glanz hatte. Und siehe, es war lauter
Gold! Im Wasser fiel sie auf die Kniee und dankte Gott laut und
inbruenstig. Gold! Gold! Nun konnte sie helfen. Sie ging behutsam im
Wasser weiter und sammelte die Koernchen und die kleinen Stuecke und
fuellte ihren Mantel damit, bis sie die Last kaum mehr tragen konnte. Nun
aber schnell nach Hause mit ihrem Schatz, den sie vor ihren Gemahl
ausschuettete! Die Kinder lebten noch, wenn auch[54.1] in grosser Schwaeche
und Erschoepfung, und erkannten sie fast nicht, so war sie abgemagert und
sonnverbrannt. Aber Boten gingen nun in die Laender und kauften Korn und
Mais, Samen und Vieh, und der Fluss wurde nicht muede, zu spenden, bis der
Not ein Ende war und lachendes Gruen und fette Weide wieder die
rumaenischen Gefilde deckte. Das dankbare Volk aber nannte den Bach "Riul
Doamnei" und niemand sollte das Gold darin anruehren duerfen als Eigentum,
als nur die Fuerstin des Landes. Die spaeteren Fuerstinnen muessen es aber
wohl[54.2] weniger gut angewendet haben, denn der Fluss ist sparsamer
geworden, und dass Gold, dass hier und da ein Bauer darin findet, wird im
Museum aufgehoben.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


NOTES




I

~Piatra Arsa~


+Page 1.+--1. ~+Piatra Arsa+~ (Roumanian, from Graeco-Latin: +{petra}+;
+petra+; [Ital. +pietra+] "rock," "stone"; and +arsa+ [perf. partic. of
ardeo, ardere, arsi, +arsum+, "to burn," "to be on fire"]).

2. ~+Pau'na+~ (three syllables), Roumanian, a girl's name.

3. ~+wenn+~ (indefinite--repeated action), _when, whenever_.

4. +Pui de Imparat+ (Roumanian, from Lat.: +pullus+, [Eng. +pullet+]
"small," "little," "young"; and Roumanian ablative = Lat. genit. sing.
of +imperator+, "emperor").

5. ~+als truege+ . . .~ (past subjunctive), unreal condition after
~+als+~ (= ~als ob, als wenn, wie wenn~), _as if she carried something_
("on her head" being understood).

6. ~die +Hora+~ (Roumanian, pronounce ~H~ guttural like ~ch~ in ~Loch~
or ~Buch~; from Graeco-Latin: +{choros}+, +{choreia}+; +chorus+,
+chorea+), _dance, country-waltz_.

7. ~+man+~ (indef. pers. pron.) +one+, _they, people_; frequently to be
translated idiomatically by English passive.

8. ~+ihr+~ (idiomat. dat. of pers. pron.) ~in die Wangen~ for possess.
pron. ~in +ihre+ Wangen~.

9. ~+man+~ (idiom.), cf. note 7.


+Page 2.+--1. ~+zur Donau hinab+~, _i.e._ from the Carpathian Highlands
_down to_ the Roumanian plain, N. of _the Lower Danube_.

2. ~+vergossen+~ (~habe~ or ~haette~ implied), auxiliary omitted, as
frequently in "dependent" clauses.

3. ~+so+~, here: _in such a way, as_, or _so, as . . ._

4. ~+wie+~, conjunction (colloq.) for ~als~, _when_.

5. ~+sich+~, dat. (here reciprocal pronoun = _each other, one another_).

6. ~+nachts+~ (adverbial genit. of indef. time _when_) formed in analogy
with ~tags, morgens, abends~, though ~Nacht~ is feminine.

7. ~+sei+~ (indirect subjunctive)--the "statement," "thought," or
"belief" of another related, not quoted.

8. ~+es+~ (indef.) ~klopfte~, _there_ was a knocking, or = ~jemand
klopfte~, _some one_ was knocking.

9. ~+es war ihr+~ (idiom) = ~es schien ihr, es kam ihr so vor~.

10. ~sie hoerte sich +rufen+~, transitive infinitive with pass. sense,
lit.: "she heard (some one) call her," _she heard herself called_.

11. ~+doch+~ (adverbial idiom) with an imperative adds force to the
request = _please! won't you?_

12. ~+ich+ bin +es+~ (idiomat. phrase, lit.: "I am it") = English?

13. ~+sich+ legen~ (reflexive form for pass. as often), _to be put, to
be placed_.


+Page 3.+--1. ~+auch+~ (adverb. idiom), here = _indeed, really_.

2. ~+seist+~, subjunctive in a dependent question, when narrated
indirectly.

3. ~+o doch!+~ (idiomat. phrase) = ~o ja~; ~o gewiss~, _oh yes_; _sure
enough_.

4. ~+zum+~ (definite article, idiomat.), as a (_as my_), for a
(_for my_).

5. ~+werde+~ (pres. tense) ~ich~, for future ~werde ich +werden+~, as
frequently in German.

6. ~+das+~ (anticipates idiomatically the contents of the following
sentence), remains untranslated.

7. ~+das+ Gesicht~, definite article idiomatically for possess. pronoun
= ~+ihr+ Gesicht~.


+Page 4.+--1. ~+verlobt+~. Idiom? Cf. page 2, note 2.

2. ~+der Bucegi+~ or ~Bucsecs~ (pronounce ~Butschedsch'~), _Mount
Butschetje_, the highest point of the Carpathian Mountains
(or Transylvanian Alps), 9528 feet high.

3. ~+sich+~, reflexive or reciprocal pronoun? Cf. page 2, note 5.

4. ~+ward+~ (old form of the past of ~werden~), less used now than
~wurde~.

5. ~+wie+~ (here = ~als wie~), _as if_.


+Page 5.+--1. ~+wollte+~, here = ~behauptete~, _claimed, asserted_.

2. ~+der+~, here = ~derjenigen~, therefore with emphasis.

3. ~biss +auf+ die Unterlippe~, no preposition in English; comp. ~+mit+
Steinen werfen~, to throw stones; ~+mit+ dem Kopfe schuetteln~, to shake
one's head; ~+mit+ den Zaehnen knirschen~, to gnash (to grind one's
teeth); ~+auf+ dem Piano spielen~, to play the piano; ~+in+ die Haende
klatschen~, to clap hands, etc.

4. ~+es+~ (introductory subject, the logical subject ~"Zeichen"~ follows
the verb), _there . . ._

5. ~+Mamali'ga+~, a favorite dish of the peoples of Eastern Europe;
prepared of corn-flour it answers the Italian "Polenta." Trans.: _corn
meal-mush_ or _hominy_.

6. ~+wolle+~ (idiomat. omission of the infinitive of a verb of motion
after the modal auxiliaries) = ~+gehen+ wolle~.--Why the subjunctive
mood? Cf. page 3, note 2.

7. ~+komme+~. Idiom? Cf. page 3, note 5.


+Page 6.+--1. To express "purpose" = Eng. _in order to_, the combination
~+um+ . . . +zu+~ with the infinitive is used; ~um~ beginning the
sentence and ~zu~ taking its usual place with the infinitive.

2. ~+man+~, _they_, refers to the marauders mentioned above.

3. ~+darauf'+~ remains untranslated. Why? Cf. page 3, note 6.

4. ~+verzichtet+~, idiomat. omission of the auxiliary; in what clauses
only? Cf. page 2, note 2.


+Page 7.+--1. ~+zu+ erkennen +war+~ (the auxiliary ~sein~ with ~zu~ and
the infinitive always in passive sense) = ~erkannt werden konnte~.

2. ~+wieder zu sich kommen+~ (idiom), _to recover_, or _to collect one's
self, to become one's self again_.

3. ~er hoerte seinen Namen +nennen+~. Explain the idiom! Comp. ~sie hoerte
sich +rufen+~, page 2, note 10.

4. ~+will's Gott+~ (conditional inversion, ~wenn~ omitted) = ~wenn es
Gott (so) will~.

5. ~+man+~. How to be rendered? Cf. page 1, note 7.

6. ~ein Maedchen, +das+~, neuter on account of the grammatical gender of
~Maedchen~.


+Page 8.+--1. ~zu+m+ Mann~. Idiom? Comp. ~zu+m+ Geliebten~, page 3,
note 4.




II

~Die Jipi~


+Page 9.+--1. ~+Die Jipi+~ (pronounce as in German) from Slavic +jipu+,
"rod," "stick," name of two towering peaks in the Carpathian Mountains.

2. ~+der Bucegi+~, cf. page 4, note 2.

3. ~+sich+~, reflexive or reciprocal pronoun? Cf. page 2, note 5.

4. ~+die Urlatoare+~ (Roumanian, pronounce oa = o, from Lat.: +ululare+,
"to howl," "to roar," literally: "Roaring River") name of a
mountain-stream in the Carpathian Mountains.

5. ~+die Prahova+~ (~h~ guttural), one of the numerous rivers which
rising on the southern slope of the Carpathian Mountains traverse the
Roumanian plain and join the Lower Danube on the left.

6. ~+seien+~. Account for the mood! Cf. page 2, note 7.

7. ~+vor+~ (of time), _ago_.

8. ~+sich+~. Explain the form!

9. ~+keiner+~ (none), here = ~keiner von beiden~, _neither_ (of them).

10. ~er liess +sich+ nicht troesten~ (reflexive with passive sense),
_could not be . . ._

11. ~+An'dre[)i]+~ (three syllabic), ~+Mirea+~ (pronounce ~ea~ = e
(French)), proper names = Ger. ~Andreas~ and ~Friedrich~ (+mir+, Slav. =
~Friede~, peace), Eng. _Andrew_ and _Frederick_ (Fred[dy]).

12. ~+moeget+~ (optat. subjunctive) ~ihr . . . werden~, _I wish you to
become_.

13. ~auf +hohem+ Felsenkegel~, in English with indef. article.

14. ~+gehoerte+~. Mood? Why? Cf. page 1, note 5.


+Page 10.+--1. ~+koennten+~. Account for the subjunctive; cf. page 2,
note 7.

2. ~+am besten+~, predicate superlative made up of ~an dem~ (contracted
~am~) and the dat. of the superlative, _the best_.

3. ~+sie hei'rateten+~ (past. subj. for conditional) = ~wenn sie . . .
heirateten~.

4. ~+wollte+~, here = ~wuenschte~.

5. ~+ihrer Soehne Kinder+~, for the more common ~die Kinder ihrer Soehne~.

6. ~+des Abends+~. Force of the genitive? Cf. ~nachts~, page 2, note 6.

7. ~+die alten Lieder+~, i.e. _the old ballads_ of the country.

8. ~+ihr+ zu Fuessen~. Comp. ~+ihr+ in die Wangen~, page 1, note 8.
Explain the idiom!

9. ~lehnte +mit+ dem Arm~, no preposition in English; cf. page 5,
note 3.

10. ~+der weisse Schleier+~. _A white veil_ of finest texture interwoven
with spun-gold (therefore often called der ~Goldfaden~ or pl. ~die
Goldfaeden~, "gold threads"), is the most conspicuous ornament on the
heads of married women of Eastern Europe.

11. ~kein graues +Haerchen+~ (idiomat. use of the diminutive), _not a
bit_ (the least bit) _of_ (_a_) _gray hair_.

12. ~+Deiner+~ (genit. of ~Du~) dependent on adj. ~wert~.

13. ~+die+~ (emphatic.) = ~diese~ or ~dieselbe~ or ~sie~.


+Page 11.+--1. ~+es+ wird mir wohl~ (impersonal idiom), _I am at ease_;
_I feel happy_.

2. ~+ihm+ auf der Spur~. Idiom? Comp. ~ihr in die Wangen~, page 1, note
8, and ~ihr zu Fuessen~, page 10, note 8.

3. ~+wollte+~, here = ~im Begriff war~, _was_ (_about_) _to_.

4. ~+dem Tiere+~ (idiom. dat.) ~in die Weiche~, for ~in die Weiche +des
Tieres+~ (genit.).

5. ~+glockenhelles Gelaechter+~, in Engl. with indef. article.

6. ~dem Gehoelze +zu+~. The preposition ~zu~ in the sense of _to,
towards, in the direction of_, follows its case; but ~zu~ may also be
taken as prefix of separable compound verb ~zu'schreiten~.

7. ~+dem Baeren+ in den Weg~ = ? Cf. ~+dem Tiere+ in die Weiche~, note 4,
above.


+Page 12.+--1. ~mit +goldenem+ Kern~. Idiom? Comp. ~auf hohem
Felsenkegel~ (page 9, note 13) and ~glockenhelles Gelaechter~ (page 11,
note 5).

2. ~+festen Fusses+~ (phrase formed with adverb. genit. of manner) = ~mit
festem Fusse~, i.e. ~standhaft~, _steadfast_(ly), _firm_(ly).

3. ~er haette +gern+~ (phrase), _he would have liked_.

4. The preposition ~+ohne+~ with ~+zu+~ and the infinitive corresponds
to English _without_ with the verb-noun in _-ing_. About ~ohne dass~ (for
~ohne . . . zu~), see page 45, note 3.

5. ~+ward+~ = ? Cf. page 4, note 4.

6. ~+mit einem+~ (dat. neut.), the words ~"Unverstaendiges Kind!"~ being
the noun; transl. _with the remark:_

7. (~gestellt~, pass.) ~+von+~, _by_.

8. ~+ja+~ (adverb. idiom) = _why! you know_ (expletive).


+Page 13.+--1. ~ich +bin+~ (idiomat.) ~bei ihm~. The German present
tense expresses what _has been and still is_, analog. to English perfect
tense. Transl.: _I have been with him_.

2. ~+moechten+~ (might), _should like_.

3. ~+gleich+~ (colloq.), for ~sogleich~, _at once, immediately_.

4. ~als +schlimme+ Hexe~. Idiom? Comp. ~mit goldenem Kern; auf hohem
Felsenkegel~.

5. ~+an+~ (+on+), _to_; _for, at_; _near, near by, by_. Great care must
always be taken in rendering the preposition ~an~, as there are only a
few cases where it answers to the English "on."

6. ~der Burg +zu+~. Cf. page 11, note 6.

7. ~+Roxana+~, _Roxane_, woman's name, common in the East.--Famous for
her beauty was Princess Roxana of Bactria, who in the year 327 B.C. was
married to Alexander the Great of Macedony.

8. ~+mitbraechten+~ (past subj.). Account for the mood! Cf. page 3, note
2. State the question direct!

9. ~+"mein Gott!"+~ must not be translated literally, since it means
nothing more than _"good Heavens!"_ or _"good gracious!"_

10. ~+ja+~. Cf. page 12, note 8.

11. ~+das+~ (emphat.) = ~dieses~ or ~dasselbe~. Account for the neuter;
cf. page 7, note 6.


+Page 14.+--1. ~sie haette +am liebsten+~ (superlat. of ~gern~), _she
would have liked best_. Comp. ~er haette +gern+~ (page 12, note 3).

2. ~+wird+ (wohl) +sein+~, idiomat. use of the fut. tense instead of the
present, to express supposition or possibility, with the adverbs ~wohl~
or ~doch~ added, to bring out the sense more clearly; transl. _is_, (as)
_I suppose_.

3. ~+Urlanda+~, of the same origin and meaning as ~Urlatoare~ (see page
9, note 4).

4. ~+Rolanda+~, girl's name, fem. of ~Rolandus~ ("Hruodlandus"), the
most famous of the 12 paladins who lived in the palace of
Charlemagne.--Regarding the transposition of the consonant r in changing
+Ro+(landa) to +Ur+(landa), comp. the following German-English cognates:
th+ir+d -- ~d+ri+tte~; +fri+ght --~+Fur+cht~; th+rough+ -- ~d+ur+ch~,
and the dialect. form B+ri+mingham for B+ir+mingham.


+Page 15.+--1. ~+auf der andern Seite der Berge+~, _i.e._ on the
northern slope of the Carpathian Mountains = in Transylvania
(~"Siebenbuergen"~), now a crown-land of Austria-Hungary.

2. ~+unsrer+~ or ~unserer~ (genit. of ~wir~), dependent on ~warten~,
archaic. and poetic. construction for the modern ~warten auf . . .~

3. ~+Baerenabenteuer+~ (+bear-adventures+), = bear-stories,
"fish-stories"; _incredible hunting adventures_. Comp. the phrase:
~jemandem einen Baeren~ (= ~eine Baerengeschichte~) ~aufbinden~, to play a
hoax on some one.

4. ~+wollte+~ (idiomat.), here = _was_ (willing or) _ready to_. Comp.
~sie +wollte+~ (_wanted, wished_) ~ihrer Soehne Kinder auf ihren Knieen
wiegen~ (page 10, note 4), and ~als er den Wurfspiess schleudern
+wollte+~ (_was to, was about to_), page 11, note 3.

5. ~er +habe+~. Mood? Why? Direct quotation?

6. ~+koennte+~ (conditional subjunctive), for conditional ~wuerde . . .
koennen~.

7. ~+dem+~, with emphasis. Why? Cf. page 5, note 2.


+Page 16.+--1. ~+die+~ (with emphasis) = ~diese~, or ~sie~. How known
that it is not relative?

2. ~+fort+~, the infinitive of a verb of motion, as ~gehen~, being
implied.

3. ~drum~ (colloq. for ~darum'~), about (it) them; ~+drum herum'+~,
_round about_ (them).

4. ~+hinaus'+~, the perf. partic. of a verb of motion, as ~gegangen,
gesprungen, geeilt~, etc., being implied.

5. ~+es+ lag ihr +die Sorge+ auf dem Herzen~, ~"es"~ being the
introductory and grammatical subject, while the logical subject (~"die
Sorge"~) follows after the verb = ~die Sorge lag ihr auf dem Herzen~.

6. ~+daran'+~--refers back to the preceding--_from doing so_.


+Page 17.+--1. ~+da+~ (conjunction), temporal (as, when) or causative
(as, since)?

2. ~+am+ Ofen~ (cf. page 13, note 5) = ?

3. ~+wie+~ (conjunction), colloq. for? Cf. page 2, note 4.

4. ~+wohin'+~ (elliptic.) ~"sie gehen sollte"~ being understood.


+Page 18.+--1. ~zu+r+~ (Idiom?) ~Frau~. Comp. ~zu+m+ Geliebten~ (page 3,
note 4) and ~zu+m+ Mann~ (page 8, note 1).


+Page 19.+--1. ~+Frau+~ (here = _married woman, somebody's wife_), in
English with indef. article.

2. ~+hatten+ heransausen sehen~. Note the abnormal position of the verb
in the relative clause, a construction more frequently met with now than
formerly.

3. ~+es+~ (introductory), _there . . ._


+Page 20.+--1. ~+Lespes+~, village and holy shrine in the valley of the
Prahova (river) in the Carpathian Mountains. Remember that the great
bulk of the Christian population of Roumania (= Moldavia and Wallachia)
belong to the Greek or Eastern Catholic Church.

2. ~+hereinbreche+~ (pres. subj.). The conjunction ~dass~ (= ~auf dass,
damit~), expressing "purpose" is followed by the subjunctive.

3. ~+sie+~ (object), _them_.

4. ~+sich+~ (reciproc. pronoun) = ?

5. ~+moegen+~ (colloquially used as absolute verb), _to like_; _to
stand_; _to bear_.


+Page 21.+--1. ~+Eurer Herzen schweren Kampf+~. Comp. ~ihrer Soehne
Kinder~ (page 10, note 5).

2. ~+werde+~ (pres. subj.). Account for the mood; cf. page 20, note 2.

3. ~+muss+~. Idiom? Cf. page 5, note 6.

4. ~+doch nicht+~ (elliptic.) = ~ihr wollt doch nicht~, or ~ich hoffe
(ich denke) ihr wollt nicht . . .~

5. ~+waere+~ (conditional subj.) for conditional ~wuerde . . . sein~.

6. ~+sich+~. Account for the form of the pronoun!

7. ~+habe+~ (pres. subj.). Cf. page 2, note 7.


+Page 22.+--1. ~+gingen+~ (past subj.). Account for the mood; cf.
page 1, note 5.

2. ~+freudestrahlenden Antlitzes+~ (phrase formed with adverbial
genitive of manner) = ? Comp. ~festen Fusses~ (page 12, note 2).

3. ~+mit heller Stimme+~. Idiom? Comp. ~auf hohem Felsenkegel~ (page 9,
note 13) and ~mit goldenem Kern~ (page 12, note 1).

4. ~+wer+ mich . . . holt, +des+ Weib will ich sein~ = ~ich will das
Weib +des+~ (obsol. = ~dessen~ or ~desjenigen~, _of him_) ~sein, +der+~
(_who_) ~mich . . . holt~. The nominative of the correlative pronoun is
~+der+, +wer+~ or ~+derjenige+, +welcher+~ (_he_), _who_.

5. ~+im Stuerzen+~ (verb-noun corresponding to the English form in
_-ing_), _in_ or _while falling . . ._


+Page 23.+--1. ~+wurden+~ (past of absolute verb ~"werden"~), here =
_were changed_ or _turned to . . ._




III

~Die Hexenburg~


+Page 24.+--1. ~+das Prahovathal+~, _valley of the Prahova_ (river), cf.
page 9, note 5.

2. ~+Cetatea+~ (pronounce ~tschetate~, Roumanian, from Latin: +civitas+,
French: +cite+; Ital.: +cittadella+), "_borough_," "_citadel_."
~+Babe[)i]+~ (three syllabic, Roumanian, genit. sing. of Slavic +baba+)
"old woman," "witch."

3. ~+der Bucegi+~, cf. page 4, note 2.

4. ~+als spitzer Kegel+~. Idiom? Comp. ~auf hohem Felsenkegel, mit
goldenem Kern, mit heller Stimme~.

5. ~+scheint+~ (seems, appears), _looks as if_.

6. ~+die Jipi+~, cf. page 9, note 1.

7. ~+vor+~ (of time) = ?

8. ~+als die Woelfe die Herden hueteten und Adler und Tauben bei einander
nisteten+~, _i.e._ in the golden age when everything was as in Paradise.

9. ~+es+~ (indef.), _things, affairs, life_.

10. ~+die+~ (emphat.) = ~die, welche~ (correlat. pron.), _she_ (the
one), _who . . ._

11. ~+der Goldfaden+~ (gold thread) or pl. ~Goldfaeden~, _i.e._ the
Roumanian bridal veil interwoven with spun-gold; cf. page 10, note 10.

12. ~+spaenne+~ (past subj.). Why? Cf. page 20, note 2.

13. ~+bei+~, _by, near, at, at the house of, in, with, among_. Here = ?

14. ~+welches+~ (neuter), on account of grammatical gender of
~Bergmaennlein~.


+Page 25.+--1. ~das letzte Koernchen +Goldes+~ (the genit. after a simple
noun of measure, is obsolete and poetical), for the more common
~Koernchen +Gold+~.

2. ~+Baba+~ (cf. page 24, note 2). ~+Coaja+~ (two syllabic, pronounce oa
= o, and j as in German), Roumanian, related to Lat. "cortex" and Eng.
"cork."

3. ~+Alba+~ (from Lat: +albus, a, um+, "white").

4. ~+es+~ (introductory and grammatical subject). Logical subject? Cf.
page 16, note 5.


+Page 26.+--1. ~+da'mit+~ (emphat.) = ~+hier+mit; mit +diesen+ Worten~.

2. ~+werde+~. Why the subjunctive? Cf. page 2, note 7.

3. ~+wie sehr+ (wie sehr . . . auch)~, _no matter how much, however
much_.

4. ~+Alba+~, here: dative case.

5. ~+wie gern waere sie+~. Comp. ~er haette gern~ (page 12, note 3), and
~sie haette am liebsten~ (page 14, note 1).

6. ~+es wird mir traurig ums Herz+~ (idiomat. impers. phrase), _I_
(begin to) _feel gloomy_ (heavy, depressed, melancholy), _I am heavy at
heart_.


+Page 27.+--1. ~+darue'ber+~ (+over it+) idiomatic. anticipating the
contents of the following sentence, remains untranslated. Comp. ~darauf~
(page 6, note 3).

2. ~+spinne+~. Why the subjunctive? Cf. page 3, note 2. Direct question?

3. ~+er hatte gar keinen Bart+~, he was young and smooth-faced, thus
strikingly contrasting to the old gnomes with their long gray beards.

4. ~+der+~ (emphat.) = ~jener~, _that man, that fellow_.

5. ~+die im Thale+~ (elliptic.), for ~die Leute, die im Thale wohnen~,
_those in the valley_.

6. ~+du thust+~ (pres. tense). Explain the idiom! Cf. page 13, note 1.

7. ~+so wie so+~ (colloq. phrase), _anyway, at all events_.

8. ~+so+~ (= ~so faul~ or ~so muessig~) ~+dasitzen+~ (colloq. phrase), _to
idle away one's time_.


+Page 28.+--1. ~+de'nen+~ (emphat.), for demonstrat. pronoun (~diesen~,
_these_) or pers. pronoun (~ihnen~, _them_). How seen that it is not
relative?

2. ~+darue'ber+~, remains untranslated. Why? Cf. page 27, note 1.

3. ~+sich sehen lassen+~ (reflexive phrase with passive sense), _to be
seen_. Comp. ~er liess +sich+ nicht troesten~ (page 9, note 10).

4. ~+wie sehr+ . . . +auch+~ = ? Cf. page 26, note 3.

5. ~+Porfi'rie+~ (three syllabic), proper name, from Graeco-Latin:
+{Porphyrios}+; +Porphyrius+ (= "Purple Bearer"), _Porphyry_.

6. ~+nicht+ gewohnt, etwas +nicht+ zu koennen~ (two negatives with the
force of an emphatic affirmation), = ~gewohnt, +alles und jedes+ zu
koennen~, _wont_ (bent, accustomed) _to carry out all his plans_
(or _designs_).


+Page 29.+--1. ~+einem Drachen+~ (privative sense of the dative, mostly
after verbs compound with the prefix ~ent-~) ~+entreissen+~, _to snatch
from a dragon_.

2. ~+damit'+~ (+therewith+, +with it+) remains untranslated. Why? Comp.
~+darue'ber+~ (page 27, note 1).

3. ~+den ganzen Morgen+~, accusative expressing duration of time: _how
long?_

4. ~+die Alpenrose+~ (also called ~Almenrausch~ or ~Alpenfeuer~),
"RHODODENDRON HIRSUTUM" of the botanists, one of the prettiest and most
highly priced alpine flowers, related to our Purple Azalea or
Pinxter-Flower.

5. ~+kam+~ (+came+). Note the rhetorical figure of "personification,"
which consists in representing inanimate objects as if endowed with life
and action, an idiom occasionally employed as a substitute for the
passive voice which is less used in German than in English; trans. _was
put_ or _placed_.

6. ~+schlecht sehen+~, here: _to have weak eyes, to be short_
(or _near-_) _sighted_.

7. ~+dem+~, with emphasis. Why?

8. ~+sollte+~ (+should+), _was to_; _was_ (_said_ or) _threatened
to . . ._


+Page 30.+--1. ~+die Haare+~ (idiomat. pl.), _hair_; comp. ~die Luefte~,
air.

2. ~+sich+ fangen~ (reflexive for passive, as often), _to be caught_.

3. ~+als+~, here = ~als wenn~; cf. page 1, note 5.

4. ~+Einen mit grossen Augen anschauen+~, a phrase expressing surprise
and astonishment.

5. ~+unter+~ = +under+ (place); _among_ (number?) = Here = ?

6. ~+ja+~ (adverbial idiom) = ? Cf. page 12, note 8. See also page 31,
line 1 (of the text) and state which of the two words ~ja~ found there,
is affirmative particle (= _yes_) and which adverbial idiom (= _why!_ or
_you know_).


+Page 31.+--1. ~gern~ (positive), "gladly," "willingly"; ~lieber~
(comparative), "rather," "better"; ~am liebsten~ (superlative), "best of
all"; ~+ich moechte lieber+~, _I should_ (rather wish) _prefer_.

2. ~+streicheln sogar+~ (elliptic. ~"darfst du es"~ being implied).

3. ~+heissen+~ = 1) to call _or_ to name; 2) to be called _or_ named; 3)
_to bid, to order_. Here = ?

4. ~+es+~ (idiomat.) ~wird mir bange~ (impersonal phrase), _I become
alarmed, I begin to feel uneasy_.

5. ~+das alles+~ (neut. sing., idiomatically relating to persons of
different gender) for masc. and fem. pl. ~alle diese (Leute)~, _all
these_.


+Page 32.+--1. ~+das+ bin ich~, refers back to the preceding. The
English _this_ (_that_), _these_ (_those_), when immediately preceded or
followed by the verb "to be" are rendered in German by the neuter
pronoun ~dieses~ (usually shortened to ~dies~ or ~das~), without any
regard to the number or gender of the noun referred to.

2. ~+zu was?+~ here = ~fuer was? zu welchem Zwecke?~ _for what purpose?_

3. ~es geht~ (impers. phrase), it can be done, it will do; ~+es wird
nicht anders gehen+~ (about the idiomat. use of the future, cf. page 14,
note 2), _that cannot be done otherwise_ (or _without it_), _I suppose_.


+Page 33.+--1. (~umgeben~, pass.) ~+von+~ = ?

2. ~+staunender Freude+~, genitive, dependent on adj. ~voll~, _full
of . . ._

3. ~+Euer, Eu(e)re, Euer+~ possessive form of pers. pronoun ~Ihr~, which
in earlier language was used in polite address (= modern ~Sie~), _your_.

4. ~+noch gar nicht+~ (adverb. idiom), _not yet, by any means_.

5. ~+es+~ (neuter) referring to ~das Ehegemahl~, obsol. (= 1. husband;
2. wife), trans. _she_.

6. ~+uns+~. Case? Dependent on? How to render? Cf. page 29, note 1.


+Page 34.+--1. ~+beim Spinnen+~, comp. ~im Stuerzen~, page 22, note 5.

2. (~gesponnen~, pass.) ~+von+~ = ?

3. ~sie +haette+ . . . gemacht~ (past subj. for conditional) = ~sie
+wuerde+ gemacht +haben+~.


+Page 35.+--1. ~+waere sie+~ (condit. inversion, ~wenn~ omitted) = ~wenn
sie waere~; comp. ~will's Gott~ (page 7, note 4).

2. ~+moege+ verschonen, +solle+ legen~ (indirect subj.). Direct:
~"Verschont mich!"~ ~"Lege mir auf die Haare!"~


+Page 36.+--1. ~+die+~, with emphasis. Why?

2. ~+wuerde+~. Mood? Why? Cf. page 20, note 2.

3. ~+dazu'.+~ Idiom? Cf. page 27, note 1.

4. Distinguish ~+am Hofe+~ (_at court_) and ~auf dem Hofe~ (in the
yard).

5. ~+es+ ist mir um etwas zu thun~ (impers. phrase), _I care for
something_.

6. ~+daran'+~ (on [_of_] it). Idiom?

7. ~er liess +sich+ nicht bereden~ (reflexive for passive) = ? Comp. ~er
liess sich nicht troesten~ (page 9, note 10).

8. ~+je mehr+ . . . +um so mehr+~ (for the more common ~desto mehr~),
correlat., _the more . . . the more . . ._


+Page 37.+--1. ~+was?+~ (colloq.) for ~warum?~ _why?_

2. ~+der'gestalt+~ (~+der+~ [emphat.] ~Gestalt~, ~von +der+ Gestalt~),
phrase formed with adverbial genit. of manner, _in such a manner, to
such an extent_ or _degree_; syn. ~+der+massen~ (= ~von~ or ~in +dem+
Masse~), 5 lines below.

3. ~+ich habe+~ (idiomat., present tense for future) = ?

4. ~+mir+ . . . +ent+laufen~. Force of the dative? Cf. page 29, note 1.


+Page 38.+--1. ~+doch, doch!+~ (adverb. idiom), cf. page 3, note 3.

2. ~+auch+~ (idiomat.) omit in English!

3. ~+Alba Regi'na+~ (Roumanian, pronounce ~re-dschi'na~; the same form
as in Latin: +alba+ "white," and +regina+ "queen," "queenlike,
queenly"). _Queen Alba_ or _Queenly_ (= Noble) _White_ = ~Edelweiss~.

4. ~+das E'delweiss+~, "LEONTOPODIUM ALPINUM" of the botanists, English
"Lion's foot" _or_ "Padelion" (from French +Pas-de-lion+), a woolly
alpine plant, whose large, downy, and star-like white flowers are highly
priced by the tourists. In translating retain the German name of the
plant.

5. ~+die Goldfaeden+~, cf. page 10, note 10, and also page 24, note 11.




IV

~Der Tschachlau~


+Page 39.+--1. ~+die Moldau+~, (the principality of) +Moldavia+, the
north-eastern part of the kingdom of Roumania.

2. ~+der Bucegi+~, cf. page 4, note 2.

3. ~+Mosch+~ (Roumanian) = ~der Alte~.

4. ~er +ging+~ (repeated action), _he would go_.

5. ~+nur+~ (adverbial idiomat.), _ever_ or _possibly_.


+Page 40.+--1. ~+um ein Muttergottesbild versammelt+~. Comp. page 20,
note 1.

2. ~scholl +es+~ (indefinite), i.e. _voices_ were heard.

3. ~+was+~ (colloq.), for ~etwas~.

4. ~+der liebe Gott+~ (a most popular phrase), _the good Lord_ or _our
good father in Heaven_.

5. ~+fehlgeschossen!+~ (or ~fehlgetroffen!~) perf. partic., lit.:
"missed the mark," used elliptically in exclamations; transl.: _entirely
mistaken!_ or _quite out!_

6. (~den Tschachlau~,) ~+den+~ (with emphasis), colloq. repetition of
the object; omit in English!


+Page 41.+--1. ~+es+ weiss kein Mensch~, (~es~ introductory or
grammatical subject, the logical subject ~kein Mensch~ following after
the verb) = ~kein Mensch weiss~.

2. ~+der Dniestr+~ (Russian, pronounce "Dnyestr"), a large river of
south-western Russia, emptying into the Black Sea near Odessa.

3. ~+klein und krumm, flache Gesichter, gelb wie Citronen, kleine
Augen+~, unmistakable characteristics of the Huns, a savage race from
Asia, who about the year 370 A.D. for the first time burst into Europe.

4. ~+sie waren mit ihren Pferden zusammengewachsen+~, so it was fabled,
because they lived and were always seen on horseback. Comp. the ancient
Greek myth of the fabulous race of the Centaurs.

5. ~+wo+ sie +hin+kamen~ (separated) for the more common ~+wohin+ sie
kamen~.

6. ~+ein Volk von heller Haut, blauaeugig, hoch gewachsen, mit langem,
gelbem Haar+~, refers to the Getae ("Goths"), a Teutonic tribe which, in
the second century after Christ, had left the shores of the Baltic,
their original home, and had taken possession of the land about the
Black Sea, thus becoming the Eastern neighbors of the ancient
Roumanians.

7. ~+einige konnten mit dem Messer in Holzstaebe schreiben+~, _some of
whom knew the art of cutting_ (or scratching) _letters in_
(willow-)_sticks_, with reference to the runic characters, which by the
priests of the ancient Teutonic tribes, for the purpose of sorcery, were
cut in pieces of smoothed wood, generally willow, and which were called
"run-stafas."

8. ~wie viele +auch+~ (idiomat.), _no matter how many_.

9. ~+den+ Tod~, no article in English.

10. ~+einen+~, refers to ~Pfeil~.


+Page 42.+--1. ~+der Pruth+~ (pronounce as in German), the
boundary-river between Russia and Roumania.

2. ~+der Fuerst der gelbhaarigen Leute+~, i.e. Hermanarich, the king of
the Ostrogoths (Eastern Goths), who in the year 375 A.D. succumbed to
the Huns.

3. The noun ~der Mann~ has a double plural: ~die Maenner~, _men_, and
~+die Mannen+~, _vassals, warriors_.

4. ~jeder +nehme!+~ (subj. for missing 3rd pers. sing. of the
imperative), _let every one take!_

5. ~+sie+~ (with emphasis), _they themselves_ (i.e. the Roumanians).

6. ~+herunter konnte+~. Idiom? Cf. page 5, note 6.


+Page 43.+--1. ~+es+~ (indef.) ~konnte keine . . . geben~, _there_ could
be no . . .

2. ~+den+~ (with emphasis) = ~diesen, den letztern~, _this, the latter_.

3. ~+wenn+ . . . +auch+~, _even if, no matter whether_.

4. ~+der Bucium+~ (Roumanian, pronounce ~Butschum~, from Graeco-Latin:
{bous}; _bos_). Comp. Latin: "+bucina+" or "+buccina+", the name of the
instrument by which in the military camps of the ancient Romans the
signals were sounded. Transl. _herdman's horn_.

+Page 44.+--1. ~+ihrer+~ (partitive genitive), _of them_, dependent on
~genug~.

2. ~so viele Steine, als sie +nur+~ (adverb. idiom), cf. page 39,
note 5.

3. ~+machte das Zeichen des Kreuzes+~, as Catholics do in devotion.

4. ~+was+ . . . +nur+~, _whatever, however much_.


+Page 45.+--1. ~+gegen+~ (+against+), here: _in comparison with,
compared with_.

2. ~+gesche'he+~ (optative subj., expressing "concession"), _may
happen_; _may be done_.

3. ~+ohne dass+ . . . merkten~. The preposition ~ohne~ cannot govern the
infinitive ~mit zu~ (see page 12, note 4), when there is a change of
subject, but must then be followed by a clause beginning with ~dass~.


+Page 46.+--1. ~+sich+~ (dat. pl. of reflex. pronoun), for possess.
pronoun ~+ihren+ Weg~, cf. page 1, note 8.

2. ~+sie+~, refers to ~Laender~.

3. As with the preposition ~ohne~ (cf. page 12, note 4), the infinitive
with ~zu~ is used with the preposition ~+anstatt+~ (or ~statt~) when the
subject of the infinitive is the same as that of the leading verb. It
corresponds to English _instead of_ with the verb-noun in _-ing_.

4. ~+wieder zu sich kommen+~ (phrase), cf. page 7, note 2.


+Page 47.+--1. ~+was+~ (= ~das, was~, correlative), indef. neuter sing.
for masc. and fem. pl. ~+die+, +welche+~.

2. ~+es+~ (neuter). Note agreement with grammatical gender of
~Menschenkind~.

3. ~+Hungers+ sterben~ (idiomat. phrase formed with adverb. genit. of
manner), _to die of hunger, to starve to death_.

4. ~er liess +sich+ sehen~. How to be rendered? Comp. ~er liess sich nicht
troesten~ (page 9, note 10) and ~wenn er sich wieder sehen liesse~ (page
28, note 3).

5. ~+auf+~ (time, prospectively), _for_.

6. The English phrases, _there is, there are_, are expressed by the
impersonal ~es~ with ~sein~ or with ~geben~. With ~sein~ the verb agrees
with the following predicate noun (e.g. ~es +waren+ keine Menschen
dort~), but with ~geben~ the verb remains always singular (e.g. ~es gab
keinen Menschen dort~, and ~+es gab+~ [_there were . . ._] ~+keine
Menschen dort+~).

7. ~+was+~ (= ~das was~ or ~alles was~). Idiom? Cf. note 1, above.


+Page 48.+--1. ~+wie+~ (= ~als wie~, _as if_), _seemed_.

2. ~+das Suchen+~, accus., while ~des Suchens~ (genit. after ~muede~,
_tired of something_), would be more in accordance with modern usage.

3. ~+es+~ (idiomat.), refers back to the preceding and remains
untranslated.

4. ~+abends+~, force of the genitive? Cf. ~nachts~, page 2, note 6.

5. ~+machte+~ (colloq.), for ~that~.

6. ~+eine Hora+~, comp. page 1, note 6.




V

~Riul Doamnei~


+Page 49.+--1. ~+Ri'ul+~ (Roumanian, ~+Ri+~ = Lat.: +rivus+; Eng.:
+river+; Span., Portug., +rio+; and ~+ul+~, definite article in
Roumanian suffixed to the noun), "_the brook_"; ~+Doamnei+~ (Roumanian,
pronounce "domne[)i]," gen. sing. of "doamna" = Lat. +domina+) "_of the
princess_," _the Queen's_. ~+Riul Doamnei+~, name of a mountain-stream
emptying into the Argesch, one of the tributaries of the Lower Danube.

2. ~unweit +dem+~ (dat.), rather uncommon for ~unweit +des+~ (gen.)

3. ~+Campa Lungo+~ (Roumanian, from Latin: +Campus Longus+, "Longfield";
"Longmeadow"), a mountain-town and summer-resort on the southern slope
of the Carpathians, about 100 miles north of Bucharest, the capital of
Roumania.

4. ~+immer groesser+~ = ~groesser und groesser~.


+Page 50.+--1. ~+es+~ (indefinite), either referring to ~Heuschrecken~
or to be taken generally = _things_ or _affairs_.

2. ~+auch noch nicht+~, _not yet . . . either_ or _neither . . . then_.

3. ~+am Koerper+~ (sing.; collectively), for pl. ~an ihren Koerpern~.

4. ~+man+~. How to be rendered idiomatically? Cf. page 1, note 7.

5. ~+es+~ (introductory) = ? Cf. page 41, note 1.

6. ~+Sonn- noch Feiertag+~ (~Sonn-~ belongs also to ~tag~) = ~Sonntag
noch Feiertag~.

7. ~Leute fanden +sich+~. Idiom? Cf. page 2, note 13.

8. ~+Iri'na+~ (pronounce as in German), Roumanian, woman's name, from
Greek: +{Eirene}+ (= "Peace"), _Irene_.


+Page 51.+--1. ~+"Lieber Gott!"+~ a popular address of the Deity; cf.
page 40, note 4.

2. ~+solche+~ or (with the indef. article) ~eine solche . . .~ or ~solch
eine . . .~

3. ~suche +nur+~ (adverb. idiom), with an imperative persuasively,
_just_ go in quest (or in search of it)! _do_ search for it!

4. ~+that+~ (+did+), here: _acted_ or _appeared_ or _proceeded_.

5. ~+ihnen+~ (privative dative). How to render? Cf. page 29, note 1.

6. ~+nicht einma'l+~ (indef.), _not even_.

7. ~den Fluessen +nach+~, in the sense of "in the direction of" the
preposition ~nach~ follows its case, here: _up_ the rivers.

8. ~+Olto, Gin, Buzlu, Sereth+~, and ~+Argesch+~ (eight lines below),
the names of a few of the numerous rivers which, rising on the southern
slope of the Carpathian Mountains, traverse the Roumanian plain and join
the Lower Danube on the left.


+Page 52.+--1. ~+doch+~ (adverb. idiom), with an imperative adds force
to the request; _please! won't you?_

2. ~+den Argesch+~, comp. page 49, note 1, and page 51, note 8.

3. ~+wollte+~ = 1. wanted, wished; 2. _was about, was at the point_; 3.
claimed, pretended. Here = ?

4. ~+immer schwererem+~ (cf. page 49, note 4), here = ~um so schwererem~
or ~desto schwererem Herzen~, _with her heart the heavier_ (or _the more
dejected_), ~je kleiner~, _the smaller . . ._

5. ~+von den Steinen, auf denen sie ging, ermattet+~, for ~von dem
Gehen~ (or ~Wandern~) ~auf den Steinen ermattet~.

6. ~+wie+~ (conjunction), colloquially for? Cf. page 2, note 4.

7. ~+es war ihr+~ (phrase) = ? Cf. page 2, note 9.


+Page 53.+--1. ~+konnte+~. Idiom? Cf. page 5, note 6.

2. ~sie sog +sie+~, the second ~sie~ might well have been avoided by
substituting the demonstrat. pron. ~dieselben~.

3. ~+es+~ (indef.) ~rauschte und rieselte~, _there_ was a rustling and
drizzling.

4. ~+angerauscht+~. Note the idiomatic use of the perf. partic. of a
verb of motion after ~kommen~, to express the manner of coming. Transl.
_roaring_.

5. ~+den ganzen Tag+~. Force of the accusative? Cf. page 29, note 3.

6. ~+es+~ (indef.), for ~das Wasser~.

7. ~sie wand +sie+ aus~; cf. note 2, above.

8. ~als +wollte+~, _as if it was to . . ._ Why the past subjunctive? Cf.
page 1, note 5.

9. ~+es+~ (indef.), _something_.

10. ~+was+~, _what_ (_it was that_).


+Page 54.+--1. ~+wenn auch+~ (= ~obgleich, obschon, wiewohl~),
_although_.

2. ~+wohl+~ (adverb. idiom), _probably_; _no doubt_; _I suppose_.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


VOCABULARY


+A+

~+A'bend+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), evening;
  ~abends~, in the evening, at night.

~+A'benddaemmerung+~, _f._, evening-twilight, dusk (of the evening).

~+A'bendmahlzeit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), supper, tea.

~+a'ber+~, but, however;
  ~aber doch~, for all that, nevertheless.

~+ab'fressen+ (frass, gefressen)~, to eat up, to graze.

~+ab'geschnitten+~, see ~abschneiden~.

~+ab'geschossen+~, see ~abschiessen~.

~+Ab'grund+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), precipice, abyss.

~+ab'holen+~, to call _or_ to come for, to meet.

~+ab'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to diverge; to wander (from, ~von~).

~+ab'magern+~, to emaciate, to lose flesh.

~+ab'nehmen+ (nahm, genommen)~, to take off.

~+abscheu'lich+~, horrid, wicked, detestable.

~+Ab'schied+~, _m._, leave, departure; farewell;
  ~von Einem Abschied nehmen~, to bid some one farewell.

~+ab'schiessen+ (schoss, geschossen)~, to shoot; to let fly.

~+ab'schlagen+ (schlug, geschlagen)~, to repel (an attack).

~+ab'schneiden+ (schnitt, geschnitten)~, to cut off; to separate.

~+ab'setzen+~, to stop, to make a break.

~+Ab'sturz+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), precipice.

~+ab'wehren+~, to ward off.

~+ab'zuholen+~, see ~abholen~.

~+ach!+~ (_interj._), ah! oh! ~ach ja~, oh yes (indeed);
  ~ach und wehe schreien~, to sigh and cry, to groan and moan.

~+acht+~, eight;
  ~acht Tage~, a week.

~+ach'ten+~, to pay attention (to, ~auf~).

~+Ack'er+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), field.

~+A'der+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), vein.

~+Ad'ler+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), eagle.

~+Ad'lernase+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), aquiline (_or_ hooked) nose.

~+aehn'lich+~, resembling, (a)like, similar;
  ~zum Verwechseln aehnlich~, so much alike that the one might be easily
    taken for the other, _or_ that one cannot tell the one from the
    other.

~+Aeh'renfeld+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), corn-field (in ear).

~+al'le+~, all.

~+allein'+~, alone, solitary, by one's self (himself, etc.); forsaken.

~+al'lemal+~, always, at all times, once for all.

~+al'lerhand+~, all kinds (_or_ sorts) of.

~+al'lerlei+~, all sorts (_or_ kinds) of.

~+al'les+~, (all and) everything.

~+allgemein'+~, common, general, universal.

~+all'zulange+~, far too long, altogether too long.

~+Al'penrose+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), alpine rose, "rhododendron."

~+als+~, as, like; than;
  (_conj._) when (= ~sobald als~) as soon as; (= ~als ob~) as if;
  ~als bis~, than until, than that;
  ~nicht eher als~, not before.

~+al'so+~, then, therefore.

~+alt+~, old, ancient;
  ~der Alte~, old man;
  ~die Alte~, old woman;
  ~die Alten~, old folks.

~+Al'ter+~, _n._, (old) age.

~+am+~ = ~an dem~.

~+an+~ (_dat. accus._), at, near, by; to, against; on.

~+An'blick+~, _m._, look, sight.

~+an'dere+ (der)~, other;
  ~keine andere~, no one else.

~+an'ders+~ (_adv._), otherwise.

~+An'drei+~ (_Roumanian_), Andrew.

~+An'fang+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), beginning, opening.

~+an'fangen+ (fing, gefangen)~, to begin.

~+an'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to concern, to regard.

~+an'gekleidet+~, see ~ankleiden~.

~+an'gesehen+~, see ~ansehen~.

~+an'gezogen+~, see ~anziehen~.

~+An'griff+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), attack.

~+Angst+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), anxiety, apprehension (for, ~um~).

~+Angst'geheul+~, _n._ (_collect._), cry (_or_ scream) of distress,
    cries _or_ screams of distress.

~+aengst'lich+~, anxious(ly), frightened, in a fright.

~+an'halten+ (hielt, gehalten)~, to rein in, to pull up (a horse).

~+an'heben+ (hob [hub], gehoben)~, to begin (to speak), to enter upon
    one's discourse.

~+an'hoeren+~, to listen to, to give an ear (to some one, _accus._).

~+an'kleiden+~, to dress, to clothe.

~+an'mutig+~, pleasant(ly), pleasing(ly).

~+an'nehmen+ (nahm, genommen)~, to take, to accept.

~+An'prall+~, _m._, shock, onset.

~+an'rauschen+~, to rush on.

~+an'richten+~, to prepare; to cause, to make, to do;
  ~Unheil anrichten~, to cause (to do) mischief.

~+an'ruehren+~, to touch.

~+ans+~ = ~an das~.

~+an'schauen+~, to look at (some one, _accus._).

~+an'schielen+~, to squint _or_ to leer at, to look asquint upon.

~+an'sehen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to look (at _or_ upon some one, _accus._);
  ~mit ansehen~, to witness; to let pass.

~+an'starren+~, to stare (at some one, _accus._).

~+anstatt'+~ (_genit._), instead of;
  ~anstatt zu~, _with inf._, instead of _. . .-ing_.

~+An'strengung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), exertion, effort.

~+Ant'litz+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), face.

~+Ant'wort+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), answer, reply, retort;
  ~Antwort geben~, to answer, to reply.

~+ant'worten+~, to answer (some one, _dat._), to reply.

~+an'wenden+~, to employ, to use.

~+an'ziehen+ (zog, gezogen)~, to attract; to dress;
  ~anziehend~, attractive.

~+an'zuhoeren+~, see ~anhoeren~.

~+Ar'beit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), work, employment.

~+ar'beiten+~, to work, to make.

~+arg+~, severe (punishment).

~+aerg'ste+ (der)~, see ~arg~.

~+Arm+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), arm.

~+arm+~, poor, miserable;
  ~der Arme~, poor man, poor fellow;
  ~die Armen~, the poor, poor people.

~+Ast+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), branch (of a tree), twig.

~+a'temlos+~, breathless, out of breath.

~+A'temzug+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), (draught of) breath, respiration.

~+at'men+~, to breathe.

~+auch+~, also, too, likewise;
  ~auch nicht~, neither.

~+auf+~ (_dat. accus._), on, upon; for (_time_).

~+auf'geben+ (gab, gegeben)~, to give up.

~+auf'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to open (_intrans._), to be opened;
    to rise (sun).

~+auf'gehoben+~, see ~aufheben~.

~+auf'geregt+~, see ~aufregen~.

~+auf'heben+ (hob, gehoben)~, to raise, to lift (up); to keep, to
    preserve; to exhibit.

~+auf'hoeren+~, to stop, to cease.

~+auf'keimen+~, to shoot up, to germinate.

~+auf'lachen+~, to burst out laughing.

~+auf'nehmen+ (nahm, genommen)~, to receive, to welcome.

~+auf'regen+~, to excite.

~+Auf'regung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), emotion, agitation.

~+auf'richten+, sich~, to raise one's self; to get up.

~+auf'saugen+ (sog, gesogen)~, to suck up, to imbibe, to catch
    (rainwater).

~+auf'schlagen+ (schlug, geschlagen)~, to open (the eyes).

~+Auf'schrei+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), shriek, scream.

~+auf'sehen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to look up.

~+auf'springen+ (sprang, gesprungen)~, to jump (_or_ to start) up.

~+auf'stehen+ (stand, gestanden)~, to rise, to get up.

~+auf'thaete+~ (_past subj._), see ~aufthun~.

~+auf'thun+ (that, gethan)~, to open (_trans._);
  ~sich aufthun~, to open, (_intrans._) to be opened.

~+Auf'trag+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), order, direction.

~+auf'wachen+~, to awake.

~+auf'winden+ (wand, gewunden)~, to wind up, to reel up.

~+Au'ge+~, _n._ (_pl._ -n), eye.

~+Au'genblick+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), twinkle of the eye; moment.

~+Au'genbraue+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), eye-brow.

~+Au'genschlitz+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e) = ~Schlitzauge~, _n._, eye-slit;
    slit-eye; Mongolian eye.

~+aus+~ (_dat._), out of, from, of.

~+aus'brechen+ (brach, gebrochen)~, to burst out; to go off.

~+aus'breiten+~, to spread.

~+Aus'bruch+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), outbreak, outburst.

~+auseinan'dersprengen+~, to separate by an explosion, to disperse,
    to scatter.

~+Aus'fall+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), sally, "sortie."

~+aus'gegossen+~, see ~ausgiessen~.

~+aus'gehaengt+~, see ~aushaengen~.

~+aus'giessen+ (goss, gegossen)~, to shed, to spread.

~+aus'halten+ (hielt, gehalten)~, to hold out; to stand, to endure.

~+aus'haengen+~, to cover, to line.

~+aus'hauchen+~, to breathe out;
  ~das Leben aushauchen~, to breathe one's last, to expire.

~+aus'hungern+~, to starve into surrender.

~+Aus'ruf+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), outcry, shout.

~+aus'schuetten+~, to empty, to lay down, to deposit.

~+aus'sehen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to look, to appear.

~+aus'stossen+ (stiess, gestossen)~, to utter, to ejaculate (a cry).

~+aus'strecken+~, to stretch out.

~+aus'winden+ (wand, gewunden)~, to wring out.

~+au'sser+~ (_dat._), beside, save.

~+ausseror'dentlich+~, extraordinary (-ily), unusual(ly), uncommon (ly).

~+aeu'sserste+ (der)~, utmost, extreme;
  ~bis aufs aeusserste~, to the last.

~+aus'ziehen+ (zog, gezogen)~, to draw _or_ to take out, to extract.


+B+

~+Ba'ba+~ (_Slavic_), mother, old woman.

~+Bach+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), brook, creek.

~+Bad+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), bath.

~+ba'den+~, to bathe, to wash.

~+bahn'brechen+ (brach, gebrochen)~, to force one's way.

~+bah'nen+~, to clear (the way).

~+bald+~, soon, before long;
  ~bald . . . bald~, soon . . . soon, now . . . then, by turns,
    alternately.

~+ban'g(e)+~, uneasy, anxious;
  ~es wird mir bange~, I become afraid _or_ apprehensive.

~+Ban'gigkeit+~, _f._, anxiety, uneasiness, dismay.

~+Baer+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), bear.

~+Bae'renabenteuer+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), hunting-story.

~+Bae'renjaeger+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), bear-hunter.

~+Bart+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), beard.

~+bat, ba'ten+~, see ~bitten~.

~+bau'en+~, to build, to heap, to form.

~+Bau'er+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), peasant, farmer, countryman.

~+Baum+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), tree.

~+Baum'ast+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), branch (of a tree).

~+baum'los+~, treeless, waste, barren.

~+Baum'stamm+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), tree-trunk.

~+beab'sichtigen+~, to intend.

~+bedau'ern+~, to pity, to feel for.

~+bede'cken+~, to cover _or_ to strew with.

~+Bedenk'zeit+~, _f._, time for considering _or_ reflection,
    breathing-time, consideration.

~+been'digen+~, to finish, to settle.

~+been'gen+~, to narrow, to confine, to limit.

~+befahl'+~, see ~befehlen~.

~+befan'gen+~ (_perf. partic._), disconcerted, confused, embarrassed.

~+Befan'genheit+~, _f._, confusion, embarrassment.

~+befeh'len+ (befahl, befohlen)~, to order, to give directions,
    to charge.

~+befe'stigen+~, to fasten.

~+befin'den+ (befand, befunden), sich~, to find one's self, to be,
    to exist.

~+befle'cken+~, to stain, to tarnish;
  ~vom Staube befleckt~, covered with dust.

~+befra'gen+~, to question, to interrogate.

~+befrie'digen+~, to satisfy.

~+begann'+~, see ~beginnen~.

~+begeh'en+ (beging, begangen)~, to commit, to do.

~+begeh'ren+~, to desire, to wish eagerly, to want (for, ~zu~).

~+begie'ssen+ (begoss, begossen)~, to sprinkle.

~+begin'nen+ (begann, begonnen)~, to begin, to set about.

~+beglei'ten+~, to accompany, to escort.

~+Beglei'ter+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), companion.

~+begra'ben+ (begrub, begraben)~, to bury.

~+begrue'ssen+~, to greet, to welcome.

~+behag'lich+~, comfortable (-bly), cheerful(ly), contented(ly),
    undisturbed.

~+behal'ten+ (behielt, behalten)~, to keep.

~+behan'deln+~, to treat.

~+beherzt'+~, courageous(ly), stout-hearted(ly).

~+behut'sam+~, cautious(ly), heedful(ly).

~+bei+~ (_dat._), at, by, near, with, at the house of; on the occasion;
  ~bei Dir~, in your house;
  ~bei meinem Grossvater~, at my grandfather's.

~+beich'ten+~, to confess.

~+bei'de+~, both; either (of them).

~+beim+~ = ~bei dem~.

~+Bein+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), leg, foot.

~+beisam'men+~, (close) together.

~+bei'ssen+ (biss, gebissen)~, to bite, to gnaw.

~+bekannt'+~, known (for, ~wegen~).

~+bekom'men+ (bekam, bekommen)~, to get, to receive.

~+Belei'digung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), insult.

~+beloh'nen+~, to reward.

~+bemue'hen+, sich~, to endeavor, to try.

~+Beneh'men+~, _n._, conduct, manners.

~+benei'den+~, to envy.

~+bene'tzen+~, to wet, to moisten.

~+bere'den+~, to persuade;
  ~sich bereden lassen~, to be persuaded.

~+berei'ten+~, to prepare, to make ready, to fit up, to furnish;
  ~Einem den Untergang bereiten~, to work some one's ruin.

~+Berg+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), mountain.

~+bergab'+~, down-hill.

~+bergab'fliegen+ (flog, geflogen)~, to fly _or_ to rush down-hill.

~+bergauf'+~, up-hill.

~+ber'gen+ (barg, geborgen)~, to save, to shelter;
  ~geborgen~, in safety.

~+Berg'fee+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), mountain-fairy.

~+Berg'kirchlein+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), mountain-chapel.

~+Berg'maennlein+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), mountain-sprite, gnome.

~+Berg'spitze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), mountain-top.

~+beruh'igen+~, to appease.

~+beruehmt'+~, famous, noted, celebrated.

~+berueh'ren+~, to touch.

~+Beruehr'ung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), touch, contact.

~+beschaef'tigen+~, to keep busy;
  ~sich beschaeftigen~, to busy one's self.

~+beschae'men+~, to make some one ashamed of himself;
  ~beschaemt~, ashamed.

~+beschei'nen+ (beschien, beschienen)~, to shine upon, to light up.

~+besche'ren+~, to give, to bestow, to present; to destine (to _or_ for,
    _dat._).

~+beschwoe'ren+ (beschwor, beschworen)~, to conjure; to implore.

~+beses'sen+ (besass, besessen)~, to possess, to own.

~+Besitz'tum+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), property, estate.

~+beson'ders+~, especially, particularly.

~+bes'ser+~, see ~gut~.

~+bestan'den+~, see ~bestehen~.

~+bestaen'dig+~, continual(ly), permanent(ly).

~+be'ste+ (der)~, best;
  ~zum besten halten~, to make game _or_ fun of.

~+beste'hen+ (bestand, bestanden)~, to go _or_ to pass through,
    to encounter; to consist (of, ~aus~).

~+bestel'len+~, to order.

~+bestim'men+~, to fix, to decide, to determine.

~+Besuch'+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), visit, call.

~+beta'sten+~, to feel (with the fingers), to touch.

~+be'ten+~, to say a prayer, to pray (to God).

~+betrach'ten+~, to view, to look upon (on, at, _accus._);
  ~sich betrachten~, to look upon (on, at), to examine;
  ~in der Naehe betrachten~, to examine closely.

~+betref'fen+ (betraf, betroffen)~, to regard, to concern.

~+betre'ten+ (betrat, betreten)~, to tread _or_ to step upon, to set
    foot upon.

~+Betrueb'nis+~, _f._, sadness, grief, distress.

~+Betrue'ger+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), cheat, imposter.

~+Bett+~, _n._ (_pl._ -en), bed, channel (of a river).

~+Bett'rand+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-er), bedframe, bedstead.

~+bevor'+~, before, ere;
  ~bevor noch~, even before.

~+bewah'ren+~, to save _or_ to protect (from, ~vor~).

1. ~+bewe'gen+~, to move;
  ~sich bewegen~, to move (_intrans._)

2. ~+bewe'gen+ (bewog, bewogen)~, to induce.

~+bewoh'nen+~, to occupy (a room).

~+Bewun'derung+~, _f._, admiration.

~+Bewusst'sein+~, _n._, consciousness.

~+bezau'bern+~, to charm, to bewitch.

~+bezeich'nen+~, to mark.

~+Bild+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), picture; living picture, "tableau," scene.

~+bil'den+~, to form.

~+bin+, ich~, (_pres. indic. of auxil. v._ ~sein~), am, I.

~+bin'den+ (band, gebunden)~, to bind, to tie, to fasten.

~+bis+~ (~bis an~ [_accus._]; ~bis nach, bis zu~ [_dat._]), till, to,
    up to;
  (_conj._) until.

~+Bis'sen+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), bit, morsel.

~+bist+, du~, (_pres. indic. of auxil. v._ ~sein~), art (thou),
    are (you).

~+biss+~, see ~beissen~.

~+bit'ten+ (bat, gebeten)~, to beg, to beseech, to implore;
  ~bitten um~, to ask for;
  ~bitte!~ please! pray!

~+Bit'ternis+~, _f._, bitterness.

~+bla'sen+ (blies, geblasen)~, to blow.

~+blaest+ . . . +um+~, see ~umblasen~.

~+Blatt+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), leaf.

~+blau+~, blue.

~+blau'aeugig+~, blue-eyed.

~+blei'ben+ (blieb, geblieben)~, to stay, to remain; to get along;
  ~liegen bleiben~, to remain lying;
  ~stehen bleiben~, to remain standing; to stop, to stand still.

~+bleich+~, pale.

~+blen'den+~, to blind, to dazzle.

~+Blick+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), glance; eye.

~+bli'cken+~, to look (at, ~auf~);
  ~in die Hoehe blicken~, to look up.

~+blick'te+ (blickten) . . . +hinauf'+~, see ~hinaufblicken~.

~+blick'te+ . . . +hinue'ber+~, see ~hinueberblicken~.

~+blieb+ . . . +zurueck'+~, see ~zurueckbleiben~.

~+blies+~, see ~blasen~.

~+blind+~, blind;
  ~der Blinde~, blind man.

~+blin'ken+~, to gleam.

~+Blitz+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), lightning.

~+blueh'en+~, to bloom.

~+Blu'me+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), flower.

~+Blu'menblatt+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), flower-leaf, petal.

~+Blu'mengarten+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), flower-garden.

~+blu'mig+~, flowery.

~+Blut+~, _n._, blood.

~+blu'tig+~, bloody.

~+blut'rot+~, blood-red.

~+Bo'den+~, _m._, ground, lands; soil; floor (of a room);
  ~auf dem Boden~, on the floor;
  ~unser Grund und Boden~, our estate (_or_ territory); premises.

~+boh'ren+~, to bore, to thrust.

~+Boll'werk+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), bulwark; protection.

~+boe'se+ (der)~, base, wicked, hard, bad, ominous.

~+Bos'heit+~, _f._, malice, malignity.

~+Bo'te+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), messenger, deputy, emissary.

~+brach+ . . . +herein'+~, see ~hereinbrechen~.

~+brach+ . . . +los+~, see ~losbrechen~.

~+brach'te; brach'ten+~, see ~bringen~.

~+brach'ten+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zubringen~.

~+Brand+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), combustion, fire;
  ~in Brand stecken~, to set on fire.

~+brann'te+~, see ~brennen~.

~+Brau'e+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), (eye-)brow.

~+braun+~, brown, auburn; dark; muddy.

~+brau'sen+~, to roar, to thunder.

~+Braut+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), bride.

~+Braeu'tigam+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), (bride-groom), the one intended.

~+braeut'lich+~, bridal.

~+Braut'schleier+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), bridal veil.

~+bre'chen+ (brach, gebrochen)~, to break.

~+breit+~, broad; broad-bladed; wide; far;
  ~weit und breit~, near and far.

~+brei'ten+~, to spread, to extend.

~+brei'tete+ . . . +aus+~, see ~ausbreiten~.

~+bren'nen+ (brannte, gebrannt)~, to burn, to be lighted.

~+brin'gen+ (brachte, gebracht)~, to bring, to bring about,
    to contrive, to cause;
  ~ein Opfer bringen~, to make a sacrifice;
  ~zum Schweigen bringen~, to silence.

~+brin'gen+ . . . +herauf'+~, see ~heraufbringen~.

~+Brot+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), (loaf of) bread.

~+Brot'kruste+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), crust of bread.

~+Brue'cke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), bridge.

~+Bru'der+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), brother.

~+brum'men+~, to growl;
  ~das Brummen~, growling.

~+Brun'nen+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), well, spring, fountain.

~+Brun'nenrand+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-er), curb _or_ lining of a well.

~+Brust+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), breast, chest; heart.

~+Buech'senlauf+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), rifle-barrel.

~+Bu'cium+~, _m._ (_Roumanian_), cow's horn, cowherd's horn.

~+Buen'del+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), parcel, packet; bag and baggage.

~+Burg+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), castle.

~+Bur'sch(e)+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Burschen~), young fellow.

~+bu'schig+~, bushy; shaggy, tufty.


+C+

~+Cam'pa+~ (_Roumanian_), field.

~+Cetate'a+~ (_Roumanian_), citadel, castle, borough.

~+Citro'ne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lemon, lemon-peel.

~+Coa'ja+~ (_Slavic_), bark, crust.


+D+

~+da+~ (_adv._), there, then;
  (_conj._) as, since, whereas;
  ~da unten~, down there, down below;
  ~es war nichts mehr da, als . . .~, nothing was left but . . .

~+dabei'+~ (emphat. ~da'bei~), thereby, hereby; at (by) it;
    in this (undertaking), in the attempt.

~+Dach+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), roof.

~+dach'te+~, see ~denken~.

~+dach'te+ . . . +nach+~, see ~nachdenken~.

~+daher'fliegen+ (flog, geflogen)~, to fly _or_ to rush along.

~+dahin'+~ (emphat. ~da'hin~), there, thither.

~+dahin'fliessen+ (floss, geflossen)~, to glide along, to go on.

~+dahin'fluestern+~, to whisper along, to flow on as in a whisper;
    to purl (to guggle _or_ to murmur) along.

~+dahin'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to pass along.

~+dahin'jagen+~, to rush _or_ to dash along.

~+dahin'lenken+~, to direct there.

~+dahin'winden+ (wand, gewunden), sich~, to wind along; to meander on
    _or_ along.

~+da'liegen+ (lag, gelegen)~, to lie there.

~+da'mals+~, at that time, in those days.

~+damit'+~ (emphat. ~da'mit~), therewith, with it (with this);
    with them; with these words;
  (_conj._) that, in order that.

~+Daem'merstunde+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), hour of twilight; dusk.

~+dank'bar+~, grateful.

~+dan'ken+~, to thank.

~+dann+~, then, thereupon.

~+dan'nen+~ (_adv._), there;
  ~von dannen~, thence, away.

~+daran'+~ (emphat. ~da'ran~), on (upon) it, from it, of it, about it.

~+darauf'+~ (emphat. ~da'rauf~), thereon, on it; on this; thereupon,
    later.

~+daraus'+~ (emphat. ~da'raus~), of it (of this).

~+darf+~, see ~duerfen~.

~+darin'+~ (emphat. ~da'rin~), therein; in it (in this), in there,
    in the same.

~+darue'ber+~ (emphat. ~da'rueber~), over it; over this _or_ that;
    about this matter.

~+darum'+~ (emphat. ~da'rum~), round _or_ about it (_or_ them);
    about this (_or_ these); for this reason, therefore.

~+darun'ter+~, under (beneath) it; among (amidst of) them, between them.

~+das+~ (_demonst. pron._), that, this.

~+da'sitzen+ (sass, gesessen)~, to sit there.

~+dass+~, that; so that; in order that.

~+dau'ern+~, to last;
  ~es dauerte nicht lange~, it was not long (before . . .).

~+davon'+~ (emphat. ~da'von~), of it, of this.

~+davon'jagen+~, to hurry _or_ to dash away.

~+davon'schleichen+ (schlich, geschlichen)~, to steal away.

~+dazu'+~ (emphat. ~da'zu~), thereto, to it.

~+De'cke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), cover, covering.

~+de'cken+~, to cover.

~+Dein, Dei'ne, Dein+~ (_possess. pron._), thy, your.

~+de'nen+~ (_relat._) = ~welchen~, which; whom, (_demonst._) = ~diesen,
    ihnen~, these, them.

~+den'ken+ (dachte, gedacht)~, to think (of, ~an~), to suppose,
    to imagine;
  ~sich denken~, to fancy.

~+denn+~ (_explet._), say! then;
  (_conj._) for, since.

~+der, die, das+~ (_article_), the;
  (_relat._) who, which.

~+de'ren+~ (_genit. of relat. pron._), whose, of which (of whom).

~+der'gestalt+~, of such a nature; in such a manner; to such an extent.

~+der'jenige, die'jenige, das'jenige+~, that.

~+der'massen+~ = ~dergestalt~.

~+dersel'be, diesel'be, dassel'be+~, the same; he (she, it).

~+des'sen+~ (_genit. of demonst. pron._), of it;
  (_relat._) whose, of which.

~+deutsch+~, German;
  ~zu deutsch~ (= ~auf deutsch~), in German.

~+Dich+~ (_pers. pron._), thee, you.

~+dicht+~, thick, tight, dense;
  (_adv._) close (by _or_ near, on).

~+dick+~, thick, heavy.

~+Di'cke+~, _f._, thickness, width.

~+Die'ner+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), servant.

~+die'ser, die'se, die'ses+~, this (one); that (one); the same;
  ~dieser und jener~, one and another.

~+dies'mal+~, this time.

~+Dir+~ (_pers. pron._), (to) thee, (to) you.

~+Di'wan+~, _m._ (_pl._ [-e] -s), divan, sopha.

~+Do'amnei+~ (_Roumanian_), of the princess.

~+doch+~ (_adv._), yet, however;
  (_explet._) certainly, after all, you know;
  (_interj._) o yes, yes!
  ~aber doch~, for all that;
  ~du bist doch nicht~, I hope you are not.

~+Do'nau+~, _f._, Danube (river).

~+Don'ner+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), thunder.

~+dop'pelt+~, double, in duplicates.

~+Dorf+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), village.

~+dort+~, there.

~+dorthin'+~, thither, there.

~+Dra'che+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), dragon, monster.

~+Dra'chenfuerst+~, _m._, (_pl._ -en), prince of the dragons _or_
    monsters.

~+draen'gen+, sich~, to throng, to press, to crowd.

~+drau'ssen+~, outside, without, out of doors, out of the house.

~+dre'hen+~, to turn;
  ~sich drehen~, to turn (round).

~+drei+~, three;
  ~die drei~, the three, the trio.

~+drin'gen+ (drang, gedrungen)~, to press forward, to force one's way;
  ~bis zu Einem dringen~, to reach some one.

~+drit'te+ (der)~, third.

~+droeh'nen+~, to rumble, to boom.

~+droehn'te+ . . . +herauf'+~, see ~heraufdroehnen~.

~+drue'cken+~, to press (to, ~an~).

~+drum+~ (_colloq._) for ~darum~.

~+Du+~ (_pers. pron._), thou, you.

~+Duft+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), fragrance, perfume, redolence.

~+dumpf+~, dull, heavy(-ily); gloomy(-ily), with a hollow voice.

~+Dun'kel+~, _n._, darkness.

~+dun'kel+~ (_attrib._ ~dunkler, dunkle, dunkles~), dark, black.

~+durch+~ (_accus._), through; by, by means of.

~+durchaus'+~, absolutely, positively.

~+durchfor'schen+~, to explore, to search.

~+durchrei'ten+ (durchritt, durchritten)~, to ride through,
    to traverse _or_ to cross (on horseback).

~+durchs+~ = ~durch das~.

~+durchschnei'den+ (durchschnitt, durchschnitten)~, to cut through
    _or_ across.

~+durchschnit'ten+~, see ~durchschneiden~.

~+durchschrei'ten+ (durchschritt, durchschritten)~, to stride
    (to walk, to pass) through.

~+durch'sichtig+~, transparent.

~+durchste'chen+ (durchstach, durchstochen)~, to run through
    (with a sword or a spear), to pierce.

~+duer'fen+~ (_pres. indic._ ~darf, darfst, darf; duerfen~, etc.),
    ~durfte, gedurft~; may, to be allowed, to be at liberty, to have
    a right;
  ~niemand sollte duerfen~, no one else should have a right to . . .

~+duerf'ten+~, see ~duerfen~.

~+duerr+~, dry, barren.

~+Durst+~, _m._, thirst.

~+due'ster+~, dark, murky; threatening.


+E+

~+e'ben+~ (_adv._), just; (= ~soeben~), just now, just then;
  ~eben dieser~, just this, the very.

~+e'benso+~, just so, just the same.

~+e'bensolcher, -solche, -solches+~, of the same kind _or_ pattern.

~+echt+~, genuine, veritable.

~+E'cke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), corner, angle.

~+e'del+~ (_attrib._ ~edler, edle, edles~), noble.

~+E'delstein+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), precious stone, jewel, gem.

~+E'delweiss+~, _n._ (lit. NOBLE-WHITE), lion's foot, padelion
    (_a plant_).

~+e'he+~, before, than;
  ~eher . . . ehe~, rather (sooner) . . . than, ~noch . . . ehe~,
    (still) before . . .

~+E'hegemahl+~, _n._ (_obsol._), consort, wife.

~+e'her+~, sooner, rather;
  ~eher . . . ehe~, rather (sooner) . . . than.

~+Eh'renzeichen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), badge of honor, medal for bravery.

~+ehr'erbietig+~, reverent(ly), respectful(ly).

~+Ei'che+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), oak.

~+Eid+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), oath.

~+eif'rig+~, eager(ly), zealous(ly).

~+ei'gen+~ (_attrib._ ~eigner, eigne, eignes~), one's own;
  ~in eigner Person~, in person.

~+ei'gentlich+~ (_adv._), properly speaking; actually, really.

~+Ei'gentum+~, _n._, property.

~+ei'len+~, to hurry, to hasten.

~+ei'lig+~, hasty (-ily), speedy (-ily).

~+eil'te fort+~, see ~forteilen~.

~+eil'te+ . . . +herauf'+~, see ~heraufeilen~.

~+ein, ei'ne, ein+~, a (an), one;
  ~was fuer ein (eine, ein)~, what a . . ., what kind of a . . .

~+einan'der+~, each other, one another;
  ~durch einander~, through each other;
  ~mit einander~, with each other;
  ~neben einander~, side by side (of each other);
  ~von einander~, from one another;
  ~zu einander~, to one another.

~+ei'ner, ei'ne, ei'nes+~, one (of them), some one; something.

~+ein'fallen+ (fiel, gefallen)~, to fall in _or_ down _or_ upon;
    to invade, to make a descent;
  (_impers._) ~es faellt mir gar nicht ein~, I do not dream of that,
    it does not enter my head.

~+Ein'gang+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), entrance.

~+ein'gehuellt+~, see ~einhuellen~.

~+ein'geschlossen+~, see ~einschliessen~.

~+ein'huellen+~, to enwrap, to envelop, to cover.

~+ei'nige+~, some; several, a few.

~+ein'kehren+~, to stop, to put up.

~+ein'klemmen+~, to squeeze _or_ to jam in.

~+ein'laden+ (lud, geladen)~, to invite.

1. ~+ein'mal+~ (_definite_), one time, once.

2. ~+einmal'+~ (_indef._), once, once upon a time;
  ~noch einmal~, once more.

~+ein'nehmen+ (nahm, genommen)~, to take.

~+ein'raeumen+~, to cede, to yield, to give up (to, _dat._).

~+ein'reiten+ (ritt, geritten)~, to ride in, to make one's entry
    (on horseback).

~+ein'richten+~, to arrange.

~+ein'saugen+ (sog, gesogen)~, to imbibe; to inhale.

~+ein'schlafen+ (schlief, geschlafen)~, to fall asleep.

~+ein'schlagen+ (schlug, geschlagen)~, to strike, to beat; to knock out;
  ~einen Weg einschlagen~, to take (to follow _or_ to pursue) a road.

~+ein'schliessen+ (schloss, geschlossen)~, to lock in _or_ up, to confine
    (to a room).

~+einst'mals+~, once, one day (in the future).

~+ein'zeln+~, single(ly), separate(ly), individual(ly).

~+ein'zige+ (der)~, single, only (one), exclusive.

~+ein'zukehren+~, see ~einkehren~.

~+ein'zuraeumen+~, see ~einraeumen~.

~+ein'zurichten+~, see ~einrichten~.

~+Eis+~, _n._, ice.

~+e'lend+~, miserable (-bly), wretched(ly).

~+El'fenbeinkamm+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), ivory comb.

~+El'tern+~, _pl._, parents.

~+empor'+~, up, upwards.

~+empor'ragen+~, to project, to stand _or_ to jut out, to tower up.

~+empor'reiten+ (ritt, geritten)~, to ride up _or_ upwards.

~+empor'steigen+ (stieg, gestiegen)~, to climb up, to ascend, to rise.

~+em'sig+~, industrious(ly), busy (-ily).

~+En'de+~, _n._ (_pl._ -n), end;
  ~am Ende~, at the end.

~+en'den+~, to end, to conclude;
  ~nicht enden wollend~, endless, never-ending, boundless.

~+end'lich+~, at last, finally.

~+end'los+~, endless, boundless, immense.

~+eng+~, narrow.

~+entde'cken+~, to discover.

~+entei'len+~, to escape (from, _dat._).

~+entflie'hen+ (entfloh, entflohen)~, to flee, to run away, to escape
    (from some one, _dat._).

~+entfueh'ren+~, to carry off.

~+entge'genfliegen+ (flog, geflogen)~, to fly _or_ to rush towards
    (some one, _dat._).

~+entge'genfloege+~, see ~entgegenfliegen~.

~+entge'genrufen+ (rief, gerufen)~, to call (to shout) to some one,
    _dat._

~+entklei'den+~, to undress, to strip.

~+entkom'men+ (entkam, entkommen)~, to escape, to get off.

~+entlang'+~ (_accus._, _postposit._), along.

~+entlang'streifen+~, to rove (to roam) along.

~+entlau'fen+ (entlief, entlaufen)~, to run away (from, _dat._).

~+entrei'ssen+ (entriss, entrissen)~, to snatch (from, _dat._).

~+Entschei'dung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), decision, issue;
  ~die Entscheidung faellt~, the affair is settled; a choice is made.

~+entschlie'ssen+ (entschloss, entschlossen)~, to resolve, to determine.

~+entsetz'ensstarr+~, terror-stricken.

~+entsetz'lich+~, terrible (-bly), horrid(ly), enormous(ly).

~+entsetzt'+~, terrified, aghast.

~+entstel'len+~, to disfigure, to maim.

~+er+~, he (it).

~+Erbar'men+~, _n._, pity.

~+Er'be+~, _n._, inheritance, heirdom.

~+erblei'chen+~, to grow _or_ to turn pale.

~+erbli'cken+~, to see, to perceive.

~+Erd'beben+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), earthquake.

~+Er'de+~, _f._, earth; interior _or_ womb of the earth; ground, soil;
    dirt; floor (of a room);
  ~auf Erden~, on earth, under the sun.

~+Er'denschoss+~, _m._, interior (_or_ womb) of the earth.

~+erfah'ren+ (erfuhr, erfahren)~, to learn, to be informed of.

~+Erfin'dung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), invention; fib.

~+erfor'schen+~, to explore, to examine.

~+Erfri'schung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), refreshing, recreation.

~+erfuel'len+~, to fill; to strike (with fear).

~+ergaen'zen+~, to complete, to supplement.

~+ergrei'fen+ (ergriff, ergriffen)~, to seize, to lay hold of.

~+erhal'ten+ (erhielt, erhalten)~, to get, to receive.

~+erha'schen+~, to catch, to seize, to lay hold of.

~+erhe'ben+ (erhob, erhoben)~, to raise, to lift up;
  ~sich erheben~, to raise one's self; to rise, to start up.

~+erhiel'ten+~, see ~erhalten~.

~+erhi'tzen+~, to heat.

~+erkal'ten+~, to grow cold;
  ~erkaltet~, dead, of a dead _or_ corpse.

~+erken'nen+ (erkannte, erkannt)~, to recognize, to discover.

~+erklae'ren+~, to explain.

~+erklin'gen+ (erklang, erklungen)~, to resound, to ring out;
    to be heard.

~+Erlaub'nis+~, _f._, permission, license;
  ~ohne Erlaubnis jagen~, to poach.

1. ~+erle'gen+~ (_infinitive_), to kill (game).

2. ~+erle'gen+~ (_perf. partic._), see ~erliegen~.

~+erlei'den+ (erlitt, erlitten)~, to suffer.

~+erlie'gen+ (erlag, erlegen)~, to succumb (to, _dat._).

~+erloe'sen+~, to free, to deliver, to rescue.

~+ermat'ten+~, to grow tired _or_ fatigued.

~+ernst+~, earnest(ly), grave(ly), stern(ly).

~+ernst'haft+~, serious(ly).

~+errei'chen+~, to reach, to get to.

~+erschal'len+~, to resound, to be heard.

~+erschei'nen+ (erschien, erschienen)~, to appear, to make one's
    appearance.

~+erschien'+~, see ~erscheinen~.

~+Erschoepf'ung+~, _f._, exhaustion.

~+erschre'cken+ (erschrak, erschrocken)~, to be startled _or_
    confounded (at _or_ by, ~bei~).

~+erst+~ (_adv._), only, but, not until, not before.

~+er'ste+ (der)~, first; earliest.

~+ersti'cken+~, to suffocate (by _or_ with, ~an~), to choke, to smother.

~+erstuer'men+~, to take (by storm _or_ assault).

~+ertra'gen+ (ertrug, ertragen)~, to bear, to suffer, to stand.

~+erwach'sen+ (erwuchs, erwachsen)~, to grow, to arise, to spring,
    to proceed.

~+erwar'ten+~, to await, to wait for, to expect; to face.

~+erwuer'gen+~, to strangle, to throttle; to kill, to slay.

~+erzaeh'len+~, to tell.

~+Erzaeh'ler+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), story-teller.

~+erzieh'en+ (erzog, erzogen)~, to bring up, to educate.

~+erzo'gen+~, see ~erziehen~.

~+es+~, it, something; there.

~+et'wa+~, perhaps.

~+et'was+~, something, somewhat.

~+Euch+~ (_dat. and accus. pl. of pers. pron._), (to) you.

~+Eu'er, Eu'(e)re, Eu'er+~ (_poss. pron._), your.

~+e'wig+~, eternal(ly), perpetual(ly).


+F+

~+Fa'den+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), thread.

~+Fah'nenfluechtige(r)+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Fahnenfluechtige[n]~), deserter.

~+fal'len+ (fiel, gefallen)~, to fall _or_ to throw one's self;
    to fall in battle = to be killed;
  ~Einem zu Fuessen fallen~, to fall _or_ to throw one's self at some
    one's feet.

~+falsch+~, false; wrong (way).

~+Fal'te+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), fold; wrinkle.

~+fal'ten+~, to fold.

~+fand+~, see ~finden~.

~+fan'gen+ (fing, gefangen)~, to catch, to capture, to take prisoner;
  ~gefangen setzen~, to imprison, to detain in custody;
  ~der (die) Gefangene~, prisoner.

~+Far'be+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), (fresh, high) color;
  ~Farbe . . . bringen~, to bring about (to cause, to produce) color.

~+fas'sen+~, to seize.

~+fast+~, almost, nearly; hardly.

~+Fee+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), fairy.

~+fehl'geschossen+~, see ~fehlschiessen~.

~+fehl'schiessen+ (schoss, geschossen)~, to miss the mark;
  ~fehlgeschossen!~ entirely mistaken! quite out.

~+Fehl'tritt+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), false step, slip.

~+Fei'ertag+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), holiday.

~+Feig'ling+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), coward.

~+fein+~, fine, thin, delicate, soft.

~+Feind+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), enemy, foe.

~+feind'lich+~, hostile.

~+Feld+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), field; (= ~Gefilde~, _n._), fields, plains.

~+Fels'block+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), large piece of rock, block.

~+Fel'sen+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), rock, crag.

~+Fel'senkegel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), (sugar-loaf-mountain), rocky height
    _or_ cliff.

~+Fel'senkirchlein+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), mountain-chapel.

~+Fel'senrand+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-er), edge of a rock.

~+Fel'senspitze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), peak, crag.

~+Fels'platte+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), shelf of rock.

~+Fels'stueck+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), piece of rock, boulder.

~+Fen'ster+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), window;
  ~am Fenster~, by (_or_ near) the window.

~+Fen'sterchen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), little (small) window.

~+fern+~, far (away), afar;
  ~von fern~, from afar, from _or_ at a distance.

~+fer'tig+~, done;
  ~mit etwas fertig sein~, to have done _or_ finished something.

~+fest+~, firm(ly), tight(ly);
  ~festen Fusses~, without stirring from one's place.

~+fett+~, fat, rich.

~+feucht+~, moist, damp.

~+Feu'er+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), fire.

~+Fie'ber+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), fever.

~+fiel+~, see ~fallen~.

~+fiel+ . . . +ein+~, see ~einfallen~.

~+fiel+ . . . +hin+~, see ~hinfallen~.

~+fie'le+~ (_past subj._), see ~fallen~.

~+fin'den+ (fand, gefunden)~, to find, to get;
  ~sich finden~, to be found.

~+fing+ . . . +an+~, see ~anfangen~.

~+Fin'ger+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), finger.

~+Fin'gernagel+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), finger-nail.

~+fin'ster+~, dark; gloomy; stern, sinister.

~+flach+~, flat.

~+Flam'me+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), flame.

~+flat'tern+~, to float, to hang loose, to wave.

~+Flech'te+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), plait _or_ tress (of hair).

~+fle'hen+~, to beseech, to entreat, to implore.

~+flie'gen+ (flog, geflogen)~, to fly, to sweep, to dash, to pass
    swiftly.

~+flie'hen+ (floh, geflohen)~, to flee, to take to flight.

~+flie'ssen+ (floss, geflossen)~, to flow.

~+flog+~, see ~fliegen~.

~+flog+ . . . +bergab'+~, see ~bergabfliegen~.

~+flog+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zufliegen~.

~+floss+~, see ~fliessen~.

~+floss+ . . . +dahin'+~, see ~dahinfliessen~.

~+Fluch+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), curse;
  ~Fluch ueber dich!~ a curse upon you!

~+fluech'ten+, sich~, to flee, to take to flight.

~+Flue'gel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), wing.

~+flue'stern+~, to whisper.

~+flue'sterten+ . . . +dahin'+~, see ~dahinfluestern~.

~+Fluss+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), river.

~+Fluss'bett+~, _n._ (_pl._ -en), bed of a river.

~+Flut+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), flood.

~+for'dern+~, to demand, to ask.

~+fort+~, away; on, along;
  ~er musste fort~, he had to leave;
  ~ich bin fort~, I have left _or_ gone.

~+fort'eilen+~, to hasten away.

~+fort'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to go on, to continue (walking).

~+fort'geschickt+~, see ~fortschicken~.

~+fort'schicken+~, to send away _or_ on furlough; to dismiss.

~+fort'schleifen+~, to drag (_or_ to draggle) on _or_ along.

~+fort'schwemmen+~, to wash away, to carry away.

~+fort'waehren+~, to continue (to be), to last.

~+fort'wischen+~, to wipe off, to dry (tears).

~+Fra'ge+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), question, inquiry.

~+fra'gen+~, to ask, to inquire (for, ~nach~);
  ~nichts nach Einem fragen~, not to care for _or_ about some one.

~+Frau+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), woman, lady (Lady), Mrs., "Frau," wife;
  ~Frau Roxana~, "Frau" Roxane.

~+Frau'engestalt+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), womanly figure, woman.

~+frei+~, free;
  ~sich frei arbeiten~, to free one's self, to set one's self free.

~+frei'en+~, to court (a lady); to marry.

~+Frei'heit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), freedom, liberty.

~+frei'lich+~, of course, indeed.

~+Frei'werber+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), match-maker, deputy-wooer.

~+fremd+~, strange; foreign;
  ~der Fremde~ (~ein Fremder~), stranger, visitor, guest;
  ~ein fremder Mann~, a stranger.

~+Freu'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), joy, pleasure;
  ~mit Freuden~, gladly, joyfully;
  ~Einem eine Freude machen~, to give some one joy.

~+freu'destrahlen+~, to beam with joy.

~+freu'dig+~, gladsome(ly), cheerful(ly), joyful(ly).

~+freu'en+~ (= ~erfreuen~), to delight, to give pleasure;
  ~es freut mich~, it gives me joy.

~+Freund+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), friend.

~+freund'lich+~, kind(ly), pleasant(ly).

~+frie'ren+ (fror, gefroren)~, to be cold; (= ~gefrieren~) to freeze,
    to congeal.

~+frisch+~, fresh, cool, lively.

~+froh+~, happy, joyful, merry.

~+froeh'lich+~, glad(ly), cheerful(ly).

~+Frost+~, _m._ frost, cold, chill;
  ~von Frost geschuettelt~, shivering with cold.

~+frue'h(e)+~, early; in young years.

~+frue'her+~, earlier, former; before; formerly, in former times.

~+Frueh'licht+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), morning-light.

~+fueg'te+ . . . +hinzu'+~, see ~hinzufuegen~.

~+fueh'len+~, to feel.

~+fueh'ren+~, to lead, to guide, to direct; to carry;
  ~irre fuehren~, to lead astray, to misdirect.

~+fuel'len+~, to fill.

~+fun'keln+~, to sparkle.

~+fun'kenspruehen+~, to emit sparks;
  ~das Funkenspruehen~, emitting of sparks, scintillation.

~+fuer+~ (_accus._), for, as; to;
  (_adv._) ~was fuer ein (eine, ein)~, what a . . ., what kind of a . . .

~+Furcht+~, _f._, fright, fear.

~+furcht'bar+~, horrible (-bly), terrible (-bly).

~+fuerch'ten+~, to fear, to dread;
  ~der Gefuerchtete~, the much dreaded;
  ~sich fuerchten~, to be afraid _or_ in fear.

~+Fuerst+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), (reigning) prince; ruler.

~+Fuer'stin+~, _f._ (_pl._ -nen), (reigning) princess.

~+Fuss+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), foot; bottom;
  ~festen Fusses~, without stirring from one's place;
  ~zu Fuessen~, at some one's feet.

~+Fuss'spitze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), point of the foot.


+G+

~+gab+~, see ~geben~.

~+gab+ . . . +nach+~, see ~nachgeben~.

~+ga'ben+ . . . +auf+~, see ~aufgeben~.

~+galoppie'ren+~, to gallop.

~+ganz+~, entire(ly), whole (wholly), ful(ly), absolute(ly), altogether;
  ~ganz jung~, very young;
  ~ganz und gar nicht~, not at all, by no means whatever;
  ~ein ganz klein wenig~, a very little bit.

~+gar+~, at all; even, still more particularly;
  ~gar nicht~, not at all; by no means;
  ~gar zu alt~, altogether too old;
  ~gar kein~, no . . . at all, no . . . whatever.

~+Gast+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), guest.

~+Gast'geber+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), host, entertainer.

~+gebae'ren+ (gebar, geboren)~, to give birth, to bring forth.

~+ge'ben+ (gab, gegeben)~, to give, to bestow (upon, _dat._);
  ~es giebt~, there is (there are); there is (are) found;
  ~eine Antwort geben~, to answer.

~+gebe'tet+~, see ~beten~.

~+Gebir'ge+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), mountain-range, (Carpathian) mountains.

~+Gebirgs'staedtchen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), mountain-town.

~+geblen'det+~, see ~blenden~.

~+gebo'ren+~, see ~gebaeren~.

~+gebor'gen+~, see ~bergen~.

~+gebracht'+~, see ~bringen~.

~+gebrei'tet+~, see ~breiten~.

~+gebun'den+~, see ~binden~.

~+Gebuesch'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), thicket, underwood.

~+gedach'te; gedach'ten+~, see ~gedenken~.

~+Gedan'ke(n)+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Gedanken~), thought, idea, notion.

~+geden'ken+ (gedachte, gedacht)~, to be mindful (of, _genit._);
    to mind, to have a mind, to contemplate.

~+gedrun'gen+~, see ~dringen~.

~+Gefahr'+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), danger.

~+gefaehr'lich+~, dangerous.

~+gefal'tet+~, see ~falten~.

~+Gefan'gene(r)+~, _m._, _f._ (_pl._ ~Gefangene[n]~), prisoner.

~+Gefan'genschaft+~, _f._, captivity, imprisonment.

~+Gefil'de+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), fields.

~+gefrie'ren+ (gefror, gefroren)~, to freeze, to congeal.

~+gefro'ren+~, see ~frieren~ and ~gefrieren~.

~+Gefuehl'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), feeling, consciousness.

~+gefun'den+~, see ~finden~.

~+ge'gen+~ (_accus._), against, from, of; to, towards; compared
    (in comparison) with.

~+Ge'genbesuch+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), return-visit, visit in return.

~+gegenue'ber+~ (_dat._, _postpositive_), opposite, face to face.

~+gegenue'berstehen+ (stand, gestanden), sich~, to stand (to be standing)
    face to face of each other.

~+gehabt'+~, see _auxil. v._ ~haben~.

~+ge'he+ . . . +hinab'+~, see ~hinabgehen~.

~+ge'hen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to go, to come, to leave, to depart;
    to walk, to move about.

~+ge'hen+ . . . +an+~, see ~angehen~.

~+Gehoelz'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), thicket, copse.

~+gehoe'ren+~, to belong (to, _dat._).

~+gehoe'rig+~, required, appointed, necessary, due.

~+Gelaech'ter+~, _n._, laughing, laughter.

~+gelan'gen+~, to arrive (at, ~zu~), to come _or_ to get (to, ~zu~),
    to reach.

~+gelb+~, yellow.

~+gelb'haarig+~, yellow-haired.

~+Geld+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), money.

~+gele'gen+~, see ~liegen~.

~+geliebt'+~, see ~lieben~.

~+Gelieb'te(r)+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Geliebte[n]~), lover.

~+gelin'gen+ (gelang, gelungen)~, to be successful, to succeed;
  ~"es" gelingt mir~, I succeed (in, ~zu~).

~+gelit'ten+~, see ~leiden~.

~+Gemach'+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), room, apartment.

~+Gemahl'+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), consort, husband.

~+Gemetz'el+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), slaughter, butchery, carnage.

~+Gem'se+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), chamois.

~+Gems'jaeger+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), chamois-hunter.

~+gemuet'lich+~, easy (-ily), comfortable (-bly).

~+genau'+~, exact(ly), careful(ly), thorough(ly).

~+genug'+~, enough, sufficient(ly).

~+genue'gen+~, to suffice;
  ~sich genuegen lassen~, to be content _or_ satisfied (with, ~an~).

~+gera'de+~ (_adv._), just, directly, exactly, right.

~+gern+~, with pleasure, gladly, willingly;
  ~gern haben~, to like, to love;
  ~er vertrieb gern die Zeit~, he liked to make pass away (beguile)
    the time.

~+Geroell'+~, _n._ (_collect._), boulder-stones, rubble-stones.

~+Geruch'+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), smell, odor.

~+gesandt'+~, see ~senden~.

~+Gesang'+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), singing, song.

~+geschaeh'en+~ (_past subj._ of ~geschehen~).

~+gescheh'en+ (geschah, geschehen)~, to happen, to occur; to be done.

~+Geschenk'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), gift, present.

~+Geschich'te+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), tale, story; history.

~+Geschlecht'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), family, house, lineage.

~+geschlun'gen+~, see ~schlingen~.

~+geschnit'ten+~, see ~schneiden~.

~+geschwun'gen+~, see ~schwingen~.

~+Gesell'schaft+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), company, visitors, guests.

~+Gesicht'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), face.

~+geson'nen+~, see ~sinnen~.

~+Gespenst'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), spectre.

~+Gespinst'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), spinning, web, textile fabric.

~+Gespraech'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), talk, conversation.

~+Gestalt'+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), form, figure.

~+gestan'den+~, see ~stehen~.

~+gesteh'en+ (gestand, gestanden)~, to confess, to declare.

~+Gestein'+~, _n._ (_collect._), rocks.

~+ge'stern+~, yesterday.

~+gestreng'+~, strict, rigorous.

~+gestrit'ten+~, see ~streiten~.

~+Gestuet'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), stud, studdery.

~+gethan'+~, see ~thun~.

~+getrennt'+~, see ~trennen~.

~+gewah'ren+~, to become aware of, to catch sight of, to perceive.

~+gewaeh'ren+~, to allow, to give, to yield.

~+gewal'tig+~, mighty, stupendous, towering.

~+Gewand'+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), robe, dress, garment.

~+gewe'sen+~, see _auxil. v._ ~sein~.

~+gewin'nen+ (gewann, gewonnen)~, to win, to gain, to obtain;
  ~lieb gewinnen~, to become fond (of, _accus._).

~+gewiss'+~, certain(ly), doubtless(ly);
  ~ganz gewiss~, most assuredly, beyond doubt.

~+gewoehn'lich+~, ordinary (-ily), common(ly), customary (-ily);
    as a rule.

~+gewohnt'+~, wont, used, accustomed.

~+gewon'nen+~, see ~gewinnen~.

~+gezo'gen+~, see ~ziehen~.

~+ging (gin'gen)+ . . . +auf+~, see ~aufgehen~.

~+ging+ . . . +fort+~, see ~fortgehen~.

~+ging+ . . . +heim+~, see ~heimgehen~.

~+ging+ . . . +hinauf'+~, see ~hinaufgehen~.

~+ging+ . . . +un'ter+~, see ~untergehen~.

~+ging+ . . . +voran'+~, see ~vorangehen~.

~+ging+ . . . +wei'ter+~, see ~weitergehen~.

~+ging+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zugehen~.

~+gin'gen+ . . . +hinaus'+~, see ~hinausgehen~.

~+gin'gen+ . . . +umher'+~, see ~umhergehen~.

~+Gipf'el+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), top, peak.

~+Glanz+~, _m._, radiance, flash, lustre.

~+glaen'zen+~, to shine, to glitter.

~+glatt+~, smooth, slippery.

~+glaet'ten+~, to smooth.

~+glau'ben+~, to believe, to think.

~+gleich+~ (_colloq._) = ~sogleich~, directly, forthwith, offhand.

~+glei'chen+ (glich, geglichen)~, to equal _or_ to match (something,
    _dat._).

~+gleich'geartet+~, congenerous, congenial.

~+gleich'maessig+~, uniform, regular.

~+glich+~, see ~gleichen~.

~+Glied+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), limb.

~+Glied'massen+~, _pl._, limbs (of the body).

~+glim'men+~, to glimmer, to gleam.

~+glitz'ern+~, to glitter, to glisten.

~+Gloan'tza+~ (_Roumanian_), proper name.

~+Glo'cke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), bell.

~+glo'ckenhell+~, as clear as a bell.

~+Glo'rienschein+~, _m._, glory, halo; evening-red.

~+Glueck+~, _n._, good luck.

~+glueck'lich+~, fortunate; happy.

~+glueh'en+~, to glow.

~+Glut+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), glow, flame.

~+Gold+~, _n._, gold.

~+gol'den+~, golden, of gold, golden-yellow.

~+Gold'faden+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), gold-thread;
  (_pl._) spun-gold; bridal veil.

~+Gott+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-er), God, the Lord;
  ~der liebe Gott~, the good Lord; our heavenly father;
  ~die Mutter Gottes~, the mother of our Lord, the Holy Virgin;
  ~mein Gott!~ good gracious!

~+Got'teswillen+~, _m._, love of God;
  ~um Gotteswillen~ (_or_ ~um Gottes willen~), for God's sake,
    for Heaven's sake.

~+gottlob'!+~ (_interj._) = ~Gott Lob!~ thank God!

~+gott'los+~, godless, impious, wicked.

~+Grab+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), grave.

~+gra'ben+ (grub, gegraben)~, to dig.

~+Gras+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), grass.

~+graess'lich+~, horrible (-bly), awful(ly).

~+grau+~, gray.

~+grau'en+~, to dawn.

~+grau'sam+~, cruel, atrocious.

~+Grau'samkeit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), cruelty, atrocity.

~+grei'fen+ (griff, gegriffen)~, to grasp _or_ to catch (at, ~nach~),
    to raise one's hand (at, ~nach~), to stretch one's hand
    (at, ~nach~).

~+Gren'ze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), boundary, border(s), limit.

~+griff+~, see ~greifen~.

~+grin'sen+~, to grin.

~+gross+~, great, big, large; grand.

~+Gross'mutter+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-), grandmother.

~+Gross'vater+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), grandfather.

~+gruen+~, green, greenish-gray;
  ~das Gruen~, verdure; green fields.

~+Grund+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), ground, property; reason;
  ~Grund und Boden~, territory, premises, grounds;
  ~zu Grunde gehen~, to perish;
  ~im Grunde~, at (on) the bottom.

~+Grup'pe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), (mountain) group.

~+grue'ssen+~, to greet.

~+grue'ssten+ . . . +hinauf'+~, see ~hinaufgruessen~.

~+guen'stig+~, favorable; propitious.

~+Guer'tel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), girdle, belt.

~+gut+~ (_comparat._ ~besser~; _superl._ ~best~), good;
  (_adv._) well, fortunate;
  ~gutes~ (~Gutes~), good things;
  ~gutes wuenschen~, to wish some one well.

~+gue'tig+~, kind(ly), gracious(ly).


+H+

~+Haar+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), hair.

~+Haar'straehne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lock of hair.

~+ha'be; hast+~ (_pres. indic. of auxil. v._ ~haben~); have (I);
    hast (thou), have (you).

~+ha'be!+~ (_imperat._ of ~haben~).

~+ha'ben+ (hatte, gehabt)~, _auxil. verb_ to have; to possess.

~+Hab'gier+~, _f._, greediness.

~+Hahn+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), cock.

~+halb+~, (one, a) half, partly.

~+Haelf'te+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), half, middle;
  ~zur Haelfte~, to the middle.

~+Hal'le+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), vestibule, corridor.

~+Halm+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), blade (of grass).

~+Hals+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), neck, throat;
  ~es kostet ihm den Hals~, it costs his life.

~+Haels'chen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), (sweet _or_ pretty) little neck.

~+hal'ten+ (hielt, gehalten)~, to hold, to keep, to carry, to take for,
    to consider;
  ~fuer sicher halten~, to take for certain;
  ~zum besten halten~, to make sport _or_ fun of one.

~+Hal'tung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), attitude.

~+hae'misch+~, malicious(ly), spiteful(ly).

~+Hand+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), hand.

~+han'gen+ (hing, gehangen)~, to hang, to be suspended.

~+Haer'chen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), little hair, single hair.

~+hart+~, hard, severe, unrelenting; tough.

~+Ha'selnuss+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), hazel-nut.

~+has'peln+~, to wind up, to reel.

~+has'sen+~, to hate.

~+haess'lich+~, ugly, hideous.

~+hat'te; hat'ten+~, see ~haben~, _auxil. v._

~+haet'te; haet'ten+~ (_past subj._ of ~haben~).

~+hau'en+ (hieb, gehauen)~, to hew; to strike, to cut;
  ~der Baer hieb nach ihr~, the bear struck a blow with the paw at her.

~+Hau'fen+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), heap, pile.

~+Haupt+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), head.

~+Haus+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), house, home; cottage;
  ~nach Hause~, home (_adv._);
  ~von Hause~, from home;
  ~zu Hause~, at home.

~+Haut+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), skin, complexion.

~+he'ben+ (hob, gehoben)~, to raise, to throw up.

~+Heer+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), army.

~+Heft+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), haft, handle.

~+hef'tig+~, intense(ly), immense(ly), keen(ly).

~+Hei'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), heath.

~+Heim+~, _n._, home.

~+heim+~ (_adv._), home.

~+Hei'mat+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), home.

~+heim'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to go home.

~+heim'kehren+~, to return home.

~+heim'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come _or_ to return home.

~+heim'lich+~, secret(ly), private(ly); familiar(ly), intimate(ly);
    still, quiet.

~+Heim'suchung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), visitation; punishment.

~+hei'raten+~, to marry.

~+heiss+~, hot, fervid, vehement.

~+hei'ssen+ (hiess, geheissen)~, to call, to name; to be called _or_
    named; to bid, to request;
  ~wie heisst du?~ what is your name?

~+hei'ter+~, cheerful(ly), merry (-ily), serene(ly).

~+Hei'terkeit+~, _f._, merriment.

~+Held+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), hero.

~+Hel'denthat+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), heroic deed.

~+Hel'dentum+~, _n._, heroism.

~+hel'fen+~, (_pres. indic._ ~helfe, hilfst, hilft, helfen~, etc.),
    ~half, geholfen~, to help, to bring _or_ to render help.

~+hell+~, clear, bright, brilliant; silvery;
  ~immer heller~, more and more brilliant.

~+her+~, hither, this way, up;
  ~hin und her~, hither and thither, up and down;
  ~um . . . her~, round about;
  ~von . . . her~, from.

~+herab'+~, down (upon, ~auf~).

~+herab'rollen+~, to roll down.

~+herab'rufen+ (rief, gerufen)~, to call down (upon some one, ~auf~),
    to summon.

~+herab'stroemen+~, to flow down.

~+heran'kriechen+ (kroch, gekrochen)~, to creep _or_ to crawl near.

~+heran'ruecken+~, to advance (to, towards, ~zu~).

~+heran'sausen+~, to gallop up _or_ near.

~+heran'stuermen+~, to advance to the attack.

~+herauf'+~, up, upwards.

~+herauf'bringen+ (brachte, gebracht)~, to bring _or_ to carry up
    (from, ~aus~).

~+herauf'droehnen+~, to rumble up, to boom up.

~+herauf'eilen+~, to hurry up(wards).

~+herauf'geleiten+~, to lead (to accompany _or_ to take) up.

~+herauf'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come up.

~+herauf'steigen+ (stieg, gestiegen)~, to step up, to come up
    (to, ~zu~).

~+heraus'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come out (of the house).

~+heraus'nehmen+ (nahm, genommen)~, to take _or_ to draw out.

~+heraus'ziehen+ (zog, gezogen)~, to pull (to draw, to get) out.

~+herbei'rufen+ (rief, gerufen)~, to call (here _or_ near).

~+herbei'stroemen+~, to rush _or_ to flock near.

~+Her'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), herd, flock (of sheep).

~+herein'+ (zu)~, in, into.

~+herein'brechen+ (brach, gebrochen)~, to come on, to set in, to befall
    _or_ to overtake (some one, ~ueber~).

~+herein'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come in, to flow (_or_ to blow)
    in, to enter.

~+herein'lugen+~, to look _or_ to peep (into, ~zu~).

~+herein'stroemen+~, to stream _or_ to flow in.

~+herein'stuerzen+~, to rush in (to, ~zu~).

~+herein'treten+ (trat, getreten)~, to walk in, to enter.

~+her'geben+ (gab, gegeben)~, to give up, to deliver.

~+Herr+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), gentleman, Sire.

~+Her'rin+~, _f._ (_pl._ -nen), lady, mistress.

~+herr'lich+~, magnificent, stately.

~+herue'berkommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come over (to this side),
    to cross.

~+herue'berlassen+ (liess, gelassen)~, to allow to cross _or_ to come
    over (to this side).

~+herum'+~, round, about;
  ~drum herum~, all around (them), round about (them).

~+herun'ter+~, down.

~+herun'terheben+ (hob, gehoben)~, to heave _or_ to hand down;
    to help (some one, _dat._) down.

~+herun'terwaelzen+~, to roll down.

~+hervor'brachte+~, see ~hervorbringen~.

~+hervor'bringen+ (brachte, gebracht)~, to bring forth;
  ~ein Wort hervorbringen~, to utter a word.

~+hervor'quellen+ (quoll, gequollen)~, to flow forth, to ooze out.

~+hervor'quoll+~, see ~hervorquellen~.

~+hervor'sprudeln+~, to be sputtered forth _or_ out; to be rapidly
    spoken;
  ~hervorsprudelnde Worte~, deluge _or_ volley of words.

~+hervor'stehlen+ (stahl, gestohlen), sich~, to flow forth, to break
    forth.

~+hervor'treten+ (trat, getreten)~, to step forth, to come forward
    (from, ~aus~).

~+Herz+~, _n._ (_pl._ -en), heart;
  ~ums Herz~, at heart.

~+Her'zeleid+~, _n._, heart sore, grief, worry.

~+Heu+~, _n._, hay.

~+heu'len+~, to howl, to roar;
  ~die Heulende~ (howler, roarer), roaring torrent.

~+Heu'schrecke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), locust; grasshopper.

~+heu'te+~, to-day.

~+He'xe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), hag, witch.

~+He'xenburg+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), witch's castle.

~+hieb+~, see ~hauen~.

~+hielt+~, see ~halten~.

~+hielt+ . . . +an+~, see ~anhalten~.

~+hier+~, here;
  ~hier und da~, here and there, now and then, occasionally.

~+hierauf'+~ (emphat. ~hier'auf~), on (upon, to, for) this.

~+Hil'fe+~, _f._, help.

~+hilft+~, see ~helfen~.

~+Him'mel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), heaven; Heaven; sky.

~+Him'melsbewohner+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), inhabitant _or_ denizen of heaven.

~+hin+~, thither, one way, that way, down;
  ~hin und her~, hither and thither, up and down.

~+hinab'+~, down (to, ~zu~).

~+hinab'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to go down.

~+hinab'reichen+~, to reach down.

~+hinab'rollen+~, to roll down;
  ~das Hinabrollen~, rolling down.

~+hinab'sehen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to look down.

~+hinab'stuerzen+~, to fall (to shoot, to tumble) down.

~+hinab'toben+~, to storm _or_ to rage down (to, ~zu~).

~+hinab'waelzen+~, to roll down.

~+hinan'sprengen+~, to gallop up (to, ~zu~).

~+hinauf'+~, up (to, ~zu~);
  ~am . . . hinauf~, up . . . along the . . ., ~den Fluss hinauf~,
    up the river, up stream.

~+hinauf'blicken+~, to look up (to, ~zu~).

~+hinauf'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to go _or_ to walk upwards _or_ up
    the stream.

~+hinauf'gruessen+~, to send a salute up (to, ~zu~), to blow a kiss up
    (to, ~zu~).

~+hinauf'wandern+~, to wander up.

~+hinaus'+~, out (of, ~zu~).

~+hinaus'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to go out, to leave one's home.

~+hinaus'jagen+~, to turn out, to expel.

~+hinaus'sehen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to look out (of, ~zu~).

~+hinaus'treten+ (trat, getreten)~, to step (to go _or_ to come) out.

~+hinein'starren+~, to stare into; to stand out.

~+hinein'waten+~, to wade in.

~+hin'fallen+ (fiel, gefallen)~, to fall down.

~+hing+~, see ~hangen~.

~+hin'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come _or_ to get to a place (there);
  ~wo ist er hingekommen?~ what has become of him?

~+hink'ten+ . . . +umher'+~, see ~umherhinken~.

~+hin'sinken+ (sank, gesunken)~, to sink down, to fall to the ground.

~+hin'starren+~, to stare at (_or_ towards).

~+hin'ter+~ (_dat. accus._), behind.

~+Hin'terbein+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), hindleg.

~+hinterher'+~, behind, following.

~+hin'treten+ (trat, getreten)~, to step forth _or_ near, to make one's
    appearance.

~+hinue'berblicken+~, to look over (to, ~zu~).

~+hinzu'fuegen+~, to add.

~+Hirn'gespinst+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), fancy, phantom.

~+Hir't(e)+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Hirten~), herdsman, shepherd.

~+Hi'tze+~, _f._, heat.

~+hob+~, see ~heben~.

~+hob+ . . . +herun'ter+~, see ~herunterheben~.

~+hoch+~ (_attrib._ ~hoher, hohe, hohes~), high; tall, stately.

~+hoch'klopfend+~, loud beating, palpitating.

~+Hoch'zeit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), wedding, nuptials.

~+Hoch'zeitstag+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), wedding-day.

~+Hof+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), yard, castle-yard; court;
  ~im Hofe~, in the yard (castle-yard);
  ~bei Hofe~ (~am Hofe~), at court.

~+hof'fen+~, to hope.

~+Hoff'nung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), hope.

~+hoef'lich+~, polite(ly), courteous(ly).

~+ho'he+~, see ~hoch~.

~+Hoe'he+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), height;
  ~in die Hoehe~, up;
  ~in die Hoehe sehen~, to look up.

~+ho'hem+~, see ~hoch~.

~+hoe'her+~, see ~hoch~.

~+hohl+~, hollow, sunken (eyes).

~+Hoeh'le+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), cave; den.

~+hold+~, sweet, charming, graceful.

~+ho'len+~, to haul; to fetch, to go for, to take (from, ~aus~).

~+Holz'stab+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), piece of (smoothed) wood, willow-stick.

~+Ho'ra+~, _f._ (_Roumanian_), dance, country-waltz.

~+hoer'bar+~, audible (-bly).

~+hor'chen+~, to hearken, to listen (to, ~auf~).

~+hoe'ren+~, to hear, to perceive, to notice;
  ~hoeren lassen~, to sound, to blow (an instrument).

~+Horn+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), horn.

~+hoert+ . . . +an+~, see ~anhoeren~.

~+hu!+~ (_interj._) ugh!

~+hub+ . . . +an+~, see ~anheben~.

~+huebsch+~, pretty.

~+Huf+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), hoof (of a horse).

~+Huf'schlag+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), foot-beat of a horse, clang
    (_or_ tramp) of a horse's feet.

~+Hue'gel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), hill, elevation.

~+Hund+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), dog.

~+hun'dert+~, (one) hundred.

~+Hun'ger+~, _m._, hunger.

~+hun'gern+~, to hunger, to be hungry;
  ~die Hungernden~, the starving.

~+Hun'gersnot+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), famine.

~+hue'ten+~, to guard, to tend.


+I+

~+ich+~, I.

~+ihm+~ (_pers. pron._), (to) him; (to) it.

~+ihn+~ (_pers. pron._), him (it).

~+ih'nen+~ (_pers. pron._), (to) them.

~+ihr, ih're, ihr+~ (_possess. pron._), her; their;
  (_pers. pron._) her.

~+Ihr+~ (_nominat. pl. of pers. pron._), you.

~+ih'rer+~ (_genit. pl. of pers. pron._), of them.

~+im+~ = ~in dem~.

~+im'mer+~, always, ever, for ever;
  ~immer heller~, brighter and brighter;
  ~immer noch~, still;
  ~noch immer~, still.

~+im'merfort+~, all the time, constantly, ever and ever.

~+in+~ (_dat. accus._), in, into, to.

~+in'bruenstig+~, ardent(ly), fervent(ly).

~+indem'+~ (_conj._), while _or by pres. partic._

~+inmit'ten+~, in the midst of, amidst.

~+ins+~ = ~in das~.

~+Iri'na+~ (_proper name_), Irene.

~+ir'r(e)+~, astray, wrong;
  ~irre fuehren~, to lead astray (wrong _or_ out of the way), to mislead.

~+Irr'tum+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-er), error, deception, erroneous notion.


+J+

~+ja+~ (_affirmative particle_), yes;
  (_explet. adv._) why! you know.

~+Jagd+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), hunt, chase; hunting-party;
  ~auf der Jagd~, hunting.

~+Jagd'frevel+~, _m._ poaching.

~+ja'gen+~, to hunt, to chase; to ride (to drive, to dash, to sweep)
    along _or_ forth;
  ~ohne Erlaubnis jagen~, to poach.

~+Jae'ger+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), hunter, huntsman;
  (for ~die Jaegerin~) huntress.

~+jag'ten dahin'+~, see ~dahinjagen~.

~+jag'ten+ . . . +davon'+~, see ~davonjagen~.

~+Jahr+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), year.

~+jaem'merlich+~, miserable (-bly), deplorable (-bly).

~+jam'mern+~, to wail, to moan;
  ~das Jammern~, wailing, moaning.

~+jauch'zen+~, to shout exultingly, to exult.

~+je+~, ever;
  ~je . . . (desto) um so~, the . . . the.

~+je'der, je'de, je'des+~, each (one); every (one); either.

~+je'ner, je'ne, je'nes+~, that (one);
  ~dieser und jener~, one and another.

~+jetzt+~, now;
  ~noch jetzt~, even now, still.

~+ju'gendlich+~, youthful, juvenile.

~+jung+~, young.

~+Jun'ge+~, _n._ (_pl._ -n), young, a young one; chicken (chick).

~+Jung'frau+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), maiden, virgin.

~+Jueng'ling+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), youth, lad.

~+juengst+~ (_adv._), of late, lately, the other day.

~+Juwel'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -en), jewel, gem;
  (_pl._) jewelry.


+K+

~+kahl+~, bald, bare, leafless, smooth.

~+Kai'ser+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), emperor.

~+kam+~, see ~kommen~.

~+kam+ . . . +ab+~, see ~abkommen~.

~+kam+ . . . +herauf'+~, see ~heraufkommen~.

~+kam+ . . . +herein'+~, see ~hereinkommen~.

~+kam (ka'men)+ . . . +vor+~, see ~vorkommen~.

~+kam+ . . . +zuvor'+~, see ~zuvorkommen~.

~+Kamin'+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), fire-place, fireside, open fire.

~+kaem'men+~, to comb.

~+Kam'mer+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), (side-) chamber, (adjoining) apartment,
    closet.

~+Kampf+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), struggle, fight(ing).

~+kaem'pfen+~, to fight (for, ~um~).

~+kann, kannst+~, see ~koennen~.

~+kann'te+~, see ~kennen~.

~+Kano'ne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), cannon.

~+kau'fen+~, to buy.

~+kaum+~, hardly, with difficulty.

~+Ke'gel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), cone.

~+kehr'te+ . . . +zurueck'+~, see ~zurueckkehren~.

~+keim'te+ . . . +auf+~, see ~aufkeimen~.

~+kein, kei'ne, kein+~, no;
  ~gar keinen Schlaf~, no sleep whatever.

~+kei'ner, kei'ne, kei'n(e)s+~, no one, not any one; nothing,
    not anything; neither.

~+Kel'ler+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), cellar, cavern.

~+ken'nen+ (kannte, gekannt)~, to know.

~+Kerl+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), fellow (chap), wretch.

~+Kern+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), kernel, nucleus; pupil (of the eye).

~+Ker'ze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), candle, votive candle.

~+Kind+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), child.

~+Kinn+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), chin.

~+Kir'che+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), church, chapel.

~+Kis'sen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), cushion; pillow.

~+Kla'ge+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lamentation, complaint.

~+klang+~, see ~klingen~.

~+klar+~, clear, bright, transparent.

~+klat'schen+~, to pop, to clack, to clap;
  ~in die Haende klatschen~, to clap hands.

~+Kleid+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), dress, garment.

~+klein+~, small, little.

~+klem'men+~, to squeeze, to jam.

~+klin'gen+ (klang, geklungen)~, to sound; to be heard.

~+klo'pfen+~, to knock; to beat, to palpitate.

~+klug+~, wise, prudent, smart.

~+Kna'be+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), boy.

~+Knie+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), knee.

~+knie'en+~, to kneel.

~+knie'te+ . . . +nie'der+~, see ~niederknieen~.

~+Koh'le+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), (piece of) coal.

~+ko'misch+~, comic, funny, droll.

~+komm+ . . . +herauf'+~, see ~heraufkommen~.

~+komm+ . . . +heraus'+~, see ~herauskommen~.

~+kom'me+ . . . +heim+~, see ~heimkommen~.

~+kom'me+ . . . +wie'der+~, see ~wiederkommen~.

~+kom'men+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come, to arrive, to get to;
  ~wieder zu sich kommen~, to recover.

~+kommst wie'der+~, see ~wiederkommen~.

~+Koe'nig+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), king.

~+Koe'nigin+~, _f._ (_pl._ -nen), queen.

~+Koe'nigreich+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), kingdom, realm.

~+Koe'nigskind+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), child of a king, (prince _or_)
    princess.

~+Koe'nigsschloss+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), royal castle.

~+Koe'nigssohn+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), son of a king.

~+koen'nen+~ (_pres. indic._ ~kann, kannst, kann; koennen~, etc.),
    ~konnte, gekonnt~, can, to be able; to be allowed; (= ~moegen~) may.

~+konn'te+~, see ~koennen~.

~+Kopf+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), head.

~+Korn+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), (seed-) corn, (seed-) grain; rye.

~+Koern'chen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), little grain, granule; little bit.

~+Koer'per+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), body.

~+ko'sten+~, to cost;
  ~es kostet ihm den Hals~, it costs his life.

~+Kraft+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), strength, power, force;
  ~aus aller Kraft~, to the best of one's ability, with might and main.

~+krae'hen+~, to crow.

~+Kranz+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), wreath, garland.

~+kraus+~, curly.

~+Kreis+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), circle;
  ~im Kreise~, in a circle;
  ~rings im Kreise~, all around.

~+Kreuz+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), cross;
  ~das Zeichen des Kreuzes machen~, to cross (_or_ to bless) one's self.

~+Krieg+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), war.

~+Kriegs'laerm+~, _m._, tumult of war.

~+kroch+ . . . +heran'+~, see ~herankriechen~.

~+Kro'ne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), crown, diadem.

~+Krug+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), pitcher, jug.

~+krumm+~, bent, crooked.

~+Kruep'pel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), cripple;
  ~bis ich ein Krueppel bin~, until I am crippled (_or_ maimed).

~+kuehl+~, cool.

~+kueh'len+~, to cool, to refresh.

~+kuehn+~, bold(ly), daring(ly).

~+Kun'de+~, _f._, news, intelligence.

~+Kun'kel+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), _obsol._ for ~der Spinnrocken~, the staff
    to which a bundle of flax is tied; distaff.

~+Kuer'bis+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), pumpkin.

~+kurz+~, short(ly), curt(ly), brief(ly), abrupt(ly).

~+kues'sen+~, to kiss.


+L+

~+Lab'sal+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), comfort.

~+lae'cheln+~, to smile;
  ~das Laecheln~, smiling, smile.

~+lae'chelte+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zulaecheln~.

~+la'chen+~, to laugh (at, ~ueber~), to smile.

~+lach'te+ . . . +auf+~, see ~auflachen~.

~+lag, la'gen+~, see ~liegen~.

~+lag+ . . . +da+~, see ~daliegen~.

~+La'ger+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), couch, bed, sick-bed;
  (_mil._) camp, encampment.

~+la'gern+~, to be encamped.

~+lamm'fromm+~, as gentle as a lamb, lamb-like; exceedingly tame _or_
    mild.

~+Land+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), land, country.

~+lan'g(e)+~ (_adv._), long; through; (for) a long time.

~+laen'ger+~, longer.

~+lang'sam+~, slow(ly), gradual(ly); by degrees.

~+Lan'ze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lance, spear.

~+Laerm+~, _m._, noise.

~+las'sen+ (liess, gelassen)~, to let, to make, to have, to allow,
    to cause; to leave;
  ~sich wieder sehen lassen~ (to let one's self be seen again, to appear
    once more), to be seen again;
  ~von Einem lassen~, to abandon some one.

~+Last+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), load, burden, charge;
  ~zur Last sein~, to be burdensome, to be a dead weight (upon some one,
    _dat._).

~+lau'fen+ (lief, gelaufen)~, to run, to move, to be in motion;
    to run at full speed;
  ~weit laufen~, to make a long way.

~+lau'schen+~, to listen, to lend an ear.

~+laut+~, loud, aloud, in a loud voice _or_ tone (of voice); noisy;
  ~die Hunde wurden laut~, the dogs gave tongue.

~+laeu'ten+~, to ring, to peal, to toll.

~+lau'ter+~, pure, clear, (_adv._) clearly; (= ~nichts als~) mere,
    nothing but;
  ~vor lauter Denken~, out of sheer pondering.

~+Le'ben+~, _n._, life;
  ~am Leben sein~, to be alive.

~+le'ben+~, to live, to be alive; to reside.

~+leben'dig+~, alive, living;
  ~wieder lebendig machen~, to restore to life.

~+le'bensgefaehrlich+~, perilous, mortal.

~+Le'bensmittel+~, _pl._, victuals, provisions.

~+Le'bensretter+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), life-saver.

~+le'cken+~, to lick.

~+le'gen+~, to lay, to put, to place;
  ~sich legen~, to be put (_or_ placed); to lie, to rest.

~+Lehm+~, _m._, loam, clay.

~+leh'nen+~, to lean (against, ~an~);
  ~sich lehnen~, to lean.

~+leh'ren+~, to teach.

~+Lei'che+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), corpse.

~+leicht+~, light (of weight); easy (-ily), quick, brisk(ly).

~+Leid+~, _n._, woe, affliction.

~+leid+~ (_adj._, _adv._), sorry, grieved, weary, sick;
  ~das Leben ist mir leid~, I am tired (have become tired) of life.

~+lei'den+ (litt, gelitten)~, to suffer; to bear, to abide, to like;
  ~wohl gelitten sein~, to be in favor (with, ~von~), to be in some
    one's good books.

~+lei'se+~ (_adv._), lowly, softly, gently; slightly, imperceptibly.

~+lenk'te+ . . . +dahin'+~, see ~dahinlenken~.

~+letz'te+ (der)~, last.

~+leuch'ten+~, to shine, to beam, to gleam.

~+Leu'te+~, _pl._, people; men.

~+Licht+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), light; lamp.

~+lieb+~, dear, beloved;
  ~lieb haben~, (to love), to like.

~+Lie'be+~, _f._, love (for, ~zu~);
  ~zu liebe~ _or_ ~zuliebe~ (= ~zu Liebe~), for love of; to please
    (some one, _dat._).

~+lie'be+ (der)~, dear, beloved.

~+lie'ben+~, to love;
  ~der Liebende~, lover;
  ~geliebt~, beloved, dear;
  ~der Geliebte~, beloved one, lover.

~+Lie'bende+~, _m._, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lover.

~+lie'ber+~ (see ~lieb~), rather, sooner, better;
  ~er wollte lieber~, he preferred.

~+lieb'lich+~, delightful, charming, pleasing.

~+Lied+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), song, lay; ballad.

~+lief+~, see ~laufen~.

~+lie'gen+ (lag, gelegen)~, to lie, to rest; to be placed.

~+liess+~, see ~lassen~.

~+liess+ . . . +nach+~, see ~nachlassen~.

~+Lip'pe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lip.

~+Lo'cke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lock (of hair), curl.

~+Lo'ckenhaupt+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), curly head.

~+Lo'ckenkopf+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), curly head.

~+lo'ckern+~, to loosen, to make loose.

~+Lohn+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), reward;
  ~zum Lohn~, as a reward.

~+los'brechen+ (brach, gebrochen)~, to break _or_ to burst forth
    _or_ out.

~+loe'schen+~, to extinguish.

~+loe'sen+~, to loosen, to untie.

~+los'loesen+~, to loosen, to detach, to separate.

~+los'machen+~, to loosen, to unfasten.

~+Loe'wenmaehne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lion's mane.

~+lud+ . . . +ein+~, see ~einladen~.

~+Luft+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), air.

~+Lue'ge+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), lie, invention.

~+Lun'go+~ (_Roumanian_), long.

~+lu'stig+~, merry (-ily), cheerful(ly).


+M+

~+ma'chen+~, to make, to render, to create, to shape; to do; to act.

~+maech'tig+~, mighty, large, huge.

~+Maed'chen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), girl, maid; maid-servant.

~+Maegd'lein+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), young girl _or_ lass.

~+ma'ger+~, meagre; thin, ill-conditioned.

~+Mahl'zeit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), meal, repast.

~+Maid+~, _f._ (_pl._ -e), maid, maiden.

~+Mais+~, _m._, maize, Indian corn.

~+Mais'korn+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), seed of a corn-cob.

~+Mal+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), time;
  ~mit +einem+ Mal~, all at once, suddenly;
  ~zum zweiten Male~, for a second time.

~+Mamali'ga+~, _f._, cornmeal-mush.

~+man+~, one, they, people; _or by passive_.

~+man'cher, man'che, man'ches+~, many a one, many a thing.

~+manch'mal+~, sometimes, at times.

~+Mann+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-er), man; husband;
  (_pl._ ~Mannen~, warriors, vassals).

~+Man'nen+~, _pl._, see ~Mann~.

~+Man'tel+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), mantle, cloak.

~+Mas'se+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), mass, bulk, quantity, multitude;
  ~in Massen~, in great numbers.

~+Mass+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), measure, quantity.

~+mae'ssig+~, moderate(ly; in moderation).

~+matt+~, exhausted, feeble.

~+Mau'er+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), wall.

~+Maul'wurf+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), mole.

~+mehr+~, more, longer.

~+meh'rere+~, several.

~+mein, mei'ne, mein+~, my.

~+mei'nen+~, to mean, to think; to remark.

~+meist+~, most;
  ~die meisten~, most, the most part.

~+Mensch+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), man, person, human being;
  (_pl._) people;
  ~alle Menschen~, every one.

~+Men'schengedenken+~, _n._, memory of man;
  ~seit Menschengedenken~, since time immemorial, in (within) the
    memory of man.

~+Men'schenkind+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), human being.

~+mer'ken+~, to perceive, to notice, to be aware.

~+merk'wuerdig+~, strange, remarkable.

~+Mes'ser+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), knife; hunting-knife _or_ hanger.

~+mich+~ (_pers. pron._), me.

~+min'der+~ (= ~weniger~), less.

~+Minu'te+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), minute.

~+mir+~ (_person. pron._), (to, for) me.

~+Mir'ea+~ (_Roumanian_), proper name.

~+mi'schen+~, to mix;
  ~sich mischen~, to mix (_intrans._) = to be mixed.

~+Miss'trauen+~, _n._, distrust, suspicion.

~+mit+~ (_dat._), with.

~+mit'braechten+~, see ~mitbringen~.

~+mit'bringen+ (brachte, gebracht)~, to bring along (with one).

~+mit'geben+ (gab, gegeben)~, to give as a portion.

~+mit'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come along (with one).

~+Mit'leid+~, _n._, compassion (for, ~fuer~), pity (on, ~fuer~).

~+mit'nehmen+ (nahm, genommen)~, to take along.

~+Mit'tagsmahl+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), midday-meal, dinner.

~+moech'te, moech'ten+~ (see ~moegen~), might, should like.

~+moe'gen+~ (_pres. indic._ ~mag, magst, mag; moegen~, etc.), ~mochte,
    gemocht~, can, may;
  ~sich moegen~ (_colloq._), to like one another;
  ~moege er~ (may he), let him.

~+moeg'lich+~, possible;
  ~moeglichst viele~, as many as possible.

~+Mol'dau+~, _f._ (_proper name_) Moldavia.

~+Mond+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), moon.

~+Mond'licht+~, _n._, moon-light.

~+Mond'schein+~, _m._, moon-light.

~+Moos+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), moss.

~+moer'derisch+~, murderous, bloody.

~+mor'gen+~, to-morrow.

~+Mor'gen+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), morning.

~+Mor'genluft+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), morning-air, morning-breeze.

~+Mosch+~ (_Roumanian_), old, old man.

~+mue'de+~, tired, fatigued, weary.

~+Mueh'e+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), trouble;
  ~alle Muehe~, a great amount of trouble, considerable pains.

~+mueh'sam+~, troublesome, hard.

~+mueh'selig+~, laborious, toilsome.

~+Mund+~, _m._, mouth;
  ~wie aus einem Munde~ (= ~einstimmig~), with one accord, as one man.

~+mun'den+~, to be acceptable _or_ palatable;
  ~die Mahlzeit mundet mir~, I relish the meal.

~+Muen'dung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), mouth (of a river).

~+Muen'ze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), coin, medal; amulet.

~+mur'meln+~, to murmur, to whisper.

~+Muse'um+~, _n._ (_pl._ ~Museen~), (national) museum.

~+mues'sen+~ (_pres. indic._ ~muss, musst, muss; muessen~ etc.), ~musste,
    gemusst~, must, to have to, to be forced _or_ compelled to.

~+muss; muss'te; muss'ten+~, see ~muessen~.

~+Mut+~, _m._, courage.

~+Mut'ter+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-), mother;
  ~die Mutter Gottes~, mother of our Lord, Holy Virgin.

~+Muttergot'tesbild+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), image of the Holy Virgin.

~+Mue'tze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), cap, bonnet.


+N+

~+nach+~ (_dat._), after; to, towards; according to.

~+Nach'barhaus+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), adjoining (next door) house.

~+nachdem'+~, (_conj._), after.

~+nach'denken+ (dachte, gedacht)~, to reflect, to ponder, to muse
    (on _or_ upon, ~ueber~).

~+nach'geben+ (gab, gegeben)~, to relax, to slacken.

~+nachher'+~, after(wards), later.

~+nach'lassen+ (liess, gelassen)~, to slacken, to relax; to yield the
    hand.

~+Nach'richt+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), news, intelligence, information.

~+nach'schicken+~, to send (_or_ to call) after (one, _dat._).

~+nach'sehen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to look after, to follow with one's eyes.

~+naech'ste+ (der)~, next, following; nearest.

~+nach'stuerzen+~, to rush after (some one, _dat._); to fall _or_ to
    follow afterwards.

~+Nacht+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), night;
  ~bei Nacht~ (= ~nachts~), at night, in the night(-time).

~+nackt+~, naked, bare, leafless.

~+na'geln+~, to nail (to _or_ on, ~an~), to fasten with nails.

~+na'h(e)+~, close _or_ near (to, ~bei~); next _or_ hard (by, ~bei~);
  ~ganz nahe (bei)~, very near.

~+na'he+ (der)~, neighboring, nearby.

~+Naeh'e+~, _f._, nearness, presence; neighborhood, vicinity;
  ~in der Naehe betrachten~, to look closely at, to examine closely.

~+naeh'ern+, sich~, to approach (someone, _dat._).

~+nahm+~, see ~nehmen~.

~+nahm+ . . . +ab+~, see ~abnehmen~.

~+nahm+ . . . +mit+~, see ~mitnehmen~.

~+Na'me(n)+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Namen~), name.

~+naem'liche+, (der)~, the same, the very.

~+Na'se+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), nose.

~+nass+~, wet;
  ~so nass~, wet through, wring-wet.

~+Natur'+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), nature, character, disposition.

~+natuer'lich+~, naturally, of course.

~+Ne'bel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), fog, mist.

~+ne'ben+~ (_dat.-accus._), by, by the side of, beside, alongside,
    near; next to, adjoining.

~+ne'cken+~, to tease (about, ~mit~).

~+Neck'wort+~, _n._, (_pl._ -e), teasing remark, raillery.

~+neh'men+ (nahm, genommen)~, to take, to accept; to marry;
  ~bei Seite (beiseite) nehmen~, to take aside.

~+nei'gen+~, to bend, to bow.

~+nein+~, no.

~+nen'nen+ (nannte, genannt)~, to name, to call.

~+neu+~, new;
  ~von neuem~, anew.

~+Neu'gier+~, _f._, curiosity.

~+neu'lich+~, a short time ago, the other day.

~+nicht+~, not.

~+nichts+~, nothing, not anything;
  ~nichts als~, nothing but.

~+nie+~, never;
  ~noch nie~, never before.

~+nie'derknieen+~, to kneel down.

~+nie'derlassen+ (liess, gelassen) sich~, to let down; to alight,
    to settle.

~+nie'derlegen+~, to lay down.

~+nie'derschuetten+~, to pour down.

~+nie'derstroemen+~, to pour down (upon, ~auf~).

~+nie'derwerfen+ (warf, geworfen)~, to throw down, to prostrate.

~+nie'derziehen+ (zog, gezogen)~, to draw _or_ to pull down.

~+nie'mals+~, never (and never).

~+nie'mand+~, no one, nobody, not anybody.

~+ni'sten+~, to nest, to build a nest.

~+noch+~, still, yet, as yet;
  ~noch nie~, never before;
  ~immer noch~, still;
  ~noch immer~, still.

~+Nor'den+~, _m._, North;
  ~von Norden her~, from the North.

~+Not+~, _f._, (_pl._ "-e), need, distress, calamity.

~+nun+~, now, henceforth;
  (_explet._) well! why!

~+nur+~, only, solely, simply; nothing but; just.


+O+

~+o!+~ oh!

~+ob+~, if, whether.

~+o'ben+~, up, high up, on height;
  ~dort oben~, up there.

~+Och'se+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), ox.

~+o'der+~, or.

~+O'fen+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), stove.

~+of'fen+~ (_attrib._ ~offner, offne, offnes~), open;
  ~mit offnem Munde~, open-mouthed.

~+offenbar'+~ (_or_ ~of'fenbar~), evident(ly), apparent(ly).

~+oeff'nen+~, to open, to force open.

~+oft+~, often, frequently.

~+oft'mals+~, often, frequently.

~+oh'ne+~, (_accus._), without;
  ~ohne zu wissen~, without knowing.

~+ohn'maechtig+~, fainting, unconscious;
  ~ohnmaechtig werden~, to faint.

~+Ohr+~, _n._ (_pl._ -en), ear;
  ~taube Ohren machen~, to turn a deaf ear.

~+Opf'er+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), offering, sacrifice;
  ~ein Opfer bringen~, to make a sacrifice.

~+opf'erfreudig+~, self-sacrificing.

~+orienta'lisch+~, Oriental.

~+Ost'wind+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), East-wind.


+P+

~+Paar+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), pair, couple.

~+Pein+~, _f._, pain, torment, agony.

~+Pelz'muetze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), fur-cap, fur-bonnet.

~+per'len+~, to rise (_or_ to shine) like pearls.

~+Per'lenkette+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), chain of pearls.

~+Per'lenreihe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), set of pearls.

~+Per'lenschnur+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), string of pearls.

~+Person'+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), person;
  ~in eigner Person~, in person.

~+Pest'hauch+~, _m._, pestilential miasma.

~+Petro'leum+~, _n._, petroleum, mineral oil, naphtha.

~+Pfad+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), (mountain-) path, trail.

~+Pfei'fe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), pipe.

~+Pfeil+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), arrow.

~+Pferd+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), horse.

~+Pferd'chen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), small horse, (poor) little horse, naggy.

~+pfle'gen+~, to tend, to nurse.

~+pflue'cken+~, to pick.

~+pflue'gen+~, to plough;
  ~zum Pfluegen~, for ploughing.

~+Pia'tra Ar'sa+~ (_Roumanian_), "Burnt Rock."

~+Platz+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), place; room, space; swing, play.

~+Plauderei'+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), chat, chattering, gossip, gossipping.

~+ploetz'lich+~, suddenly, all at once.

~+pluen'dern+~, to plunder, to rob, to strip.

~+Po'le+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), Pole, Polander, inhabitant of Poland.

~+Porfi'rie+~ (_Roumanian_), proper name "Porphyrius."

~+Portal'+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), portal, entrance.

~+praech'tig+~, costly.

~+pran'gen+~, to shine, to make a splendid show.

~+Preis+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), price;
  ~um jeden Preis~, at any price _or_ rate, at any sacrifice.

~+Praho'va+~, _f._ (_proper name_), a tributary of the Lower Danube.

~+Praho'vathal+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), valley of the Prahova (river).

~+prophezei'en+~, to prophesy, to predict, to foretell.

~+Pu'delmuetze+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n) = ~Pelzmuetze~, fur-cap, fur-bonnet.

+Pu'i de Imparat'+ (_Roumanian_), "Emperor's Chick."

~+Pur'purmantel+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), purple-mantle.


+Q+

~+Qual+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), agony, affliction.

~+Quel'le+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), source, well.


+R+

~+Ra'be+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), raven.

~+Ra'chedurst+~, _m._, thirst for (desire of) revenge, revengefulness;
    vindictiveness.

~+Rad+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), wheel; spinning-wheel.

~+ra'gen+~, to rise, to tower (up).

~+ra'gen+ . . . +empor'+~, see ~emporragen~.

~+ragt+ (ragten) . . . +empor'+~, see ~emporragen~.

~+rasch+~, quick(ly), swift(ly), prompt(ly), without delay, off-hand.

~+ra'sen+~, to rave, to rage;
  ~rasend~, furious, frantic.

~+Rat+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), counsel, consultation, deliberation;
  ~(mit sich) zu Rate gehen~, to consider the advisability.

~+rau'ben+~, to rob, to take away.

~+rau'chen+~, to smoke.

~+rau'fen+, sich~, to fight, to scuffle.

~+rauh+~, rough(ly), harsh(ly), severe(ly).

~+Raum+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), room; space, compass.

~+raeu'men+~, to remove;
  ~aus dem Wege raeumen~, to make away with.

~+rau'schen+~, to rush.

~+Recht+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), right, claim.

~+Re'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), speech, talk, words;
  ~es ist die Rede von etwas~, the topic of the day is (about) . . .;
  ~bei dieser Rede~, at these words.

~+re'den+~, to speak _or_ to talk (to, ~mit~).

~+re'ge+~, stirred up, lively;
  ~rege machen~, to awaken, to arouse.

~+Re'gen+~, _m._, rain.

~+re'gen+, sich~, to be _or_ to become stirring _or_ alive, to show
    one's self, to appear.

~+reg'nen+~, to rain.

~+Reh+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), roe, doe.

~+reich+~, rich.

~+rei'chen+~, to reach, to hand, to offer, to present, to give.

~+Rei'he+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), row, line, series.

~+rein+~, pure.

~+rei'ssen+ (riss, gerissen)~, to tear;
  ~in Stuecke reissen~, to tear to pieces.

~+rei'ten+ (ritt, geritten)~, to ride (to go) on horseback.

~+rei'ten+ . . . +ein+~, see ~einreiten~.

~+Rei'ter+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), rider, horseman.

~+rei'zen+~, to stimulate, to incite, to provoke, to charm.

~+ret'ten+~, to save.

~+rich'ten+~, to arrange; to serve _or_ to dish up; to make ready.

~+rich'tete+ . . . +auf+~, see ~aufrichten~.

~+rief+~, see ~rufen~.

~+rief+ . . . +entge'gen+~, see ~entgegenrufen~.

~+rief+ . . . +herbei'+~, see ~herbeirufen~.

~+rie'fen+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zurufen~.

~+rie'seln+~, to drizzle.

~+Rie'senzahn+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), gigantic tooth (dent) _or_ tine
    _or_ prong.

~+Rin'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), bark.

~+Ring+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), ring.

~+rin'gen+ (rang, gerungen)~, to wring (one's hands).

~+Ring'lein+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), (plain) little ring, ringlet.

~+rings+~, around, in a circle;
  ~rings im Kreise~, all around.

~+ringsum'+~ (= ~ringsherum~), round about.

~+Rin'ne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), channel, furrow.

~+Ritt+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), ride, riding.

~+ritt; rit'ten+~, see ~reiten~.

~+ritt+ . . . +empor'+~, see ~emporreiten~.

~+Riul+~ (_Roumanian_), "the" brook.

~+roll'te+ . . . +herab'+~, see ~herabrollen~.

~+rot+~, red;
  ~das Rot~, red color, blush; blood.

~+ru'fen+ (rief, gerufen)~, to shout, to cry, to call, to say.

~+rufst+ . . . +herab'+~, see ~herabrufen~.

~+ru'hen+~, to rest, to be placed.

~+rueh'ren+~, to move;
  ~sich ruehren~, to move (freely).

~+Rui'ne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), ruin(s).

~+Rumae'ne+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), Roumanian, inhabitant of Roumania.

~+Rumae'nenland+~, _n._, land (country) of the Roumanians, Roumania.

~+rumae'nisch+~, Roumanian, of the Roumanians.

~+run'zelig+~, wrinkled, puckered.

~+run'zeln+~, to wrinkle, to knit (the brows).


+S+

~+Saal+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Saele~), hall, drawing-room, saloon.

~+Sae'belhieb+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), sword-cut.

~+Sa'che+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), thing, pretty little thing.

~+Sae'chelchen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), little thing;
  (_pl._) gimcracks.

~+Sack+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), sack; bag.

~+sae'en+~, to sow;
  ~zum Saeen~, for sowing.

~+sa'gen+~, to say.

~+sah+~, see ~sehen~.

~+sah+ . . . +hinaus'+~, see ~hinaussehen~.

~+sah+ . . . +nach+~, see ~nachsehen~.

~+sah+ . . . +um+~, see ~umsehen~.

~+sah+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zusehen~.

~+sae'he+~ (_past subj._) of ~sehen~.

~+sa'hen+ . . . +aus+~, see ~aussehen~.

~+Samen+~, _m._, seed (-corn _or_ -grain).

~+sam'meln+~, to collect, to gather, to pick up;
  ~sich sammeln~, to assemble, to rally.

~+Samt+~, _m._, velvet.

~+samt+~ (_dat._), together with.

~+Samt'kleid+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), velvet-dress.

~+saemt'liche+~, all, each and every (one), in a body.

~+Samt'mantel+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), velvet-cloak.

~+Sanda'le+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), sandal.

~+sanft+~, soft; gentle, sweet.

~+Sanft'mut+~, _f._, gentleness, meekness.

~+sank+ . . . +hin+~, see ~hinsinken~.

~+Sarg+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), coffin.

~+sass+~, see ~sitzen~.

~+Sat'tel+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), saddle;
  ~auf den (dem) Sattel~, in the saddle.

~+saet'tigen+~, to satisfy;
  ~sich saettigen~, to satisfy one's appetite.

~+Scha'de(n)+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Schaeden~), wrong, loss;
  ~wie schade!~ it is a pity! what a pity!

~+Schae'del+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), skull.

~+Schaf+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), sheep.

~+Schae'fer+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), shepherd.

~+schaf'fen+~, to do;
  (_colloq._) to work;
  ~etwas mit Einem zu schaffen haben~, to have something to do with
    one, to have dealings with one.

~+Scha'le+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), shell.

~+schal'len+ (scholl, geschollen)~, to sound, to resound; to be heard.

~+Scham+~, _f._, shame, disgrace.

~+Schan'de+~, _f._, shame, disgrace.

~+Schar+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), score, crowd; troop, host.

~+scharf+~, sharp, acute; harsh, cutting, pungent, severe, piquante.

~+Schat'ten+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), shade, shadow;
  ~in den Schatten stellen~, to place in the shade.

~+Schatz+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), treasure; love, lover, darling.

~+schaeu'men+~, to foam;
  ~schaeumend~, foamy, frothy.

~+schau'mig+~, foamy, frothy.

~+schau'rig+~, dreadful, dismal.

~+Schein+~, _m._, shine, light, brightness.

~+schei'nen+ (schien, geschienen)~, to seem, to appear.

~+Schei'tel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), top (crown of the) head.

~+schel'ten+ (schalt, gescholten)~, to scold, to reproach.

~+schen'ken+~, to give, to present.

~+scher'zen+~, to joke;
  ~scherzend~, joking(ly).

~+scherz'weise+~, by way of jest, in jest.

~+scheu+~, shy(ly), timid(ly), faint-hearted(ly).

~+scheu'chen+~, to scare, to frighten; to dispel, to drive away.

~+schich'ten+~, to stow, to pile up, to put into rows _or_ layers.

~+schi'cken+~, to send.

~+schien+~, see ~scheinen~.

~+schie'ssen+ (schoss, geschossen)~, to shoot; to rush, to flush.

~+schil'dern+~, to picture.

~+schim'mern+~, to glisten, to glitter, to shine.

~+Schlacht+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), battle; fighting.

~+Schlacht'feld+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), battle-field.

~+Schlaf+~, _m._, sleep.

~+schla'gen+ (schlug, geschlagen)~, to beat, to strike;
  ~eine Schlacht schlagen~, to fight a battle;
  ~das Herz schlug ihm~, his heart was throbbing _or_ palpitating.

~+schlang+~, see ~schlingen~.

~+schlank+~, slender, slack and slim.

~+schlau+~, sly, cunning.

~+schlecht+~, bad(ly), poor(ly), inferior.

~+schlei'chen+ (schlich, geschlichen)~, to sneak, to skulk, to prowl,
    to creep.

~+Schlei'er+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), veil, bridal veil.

~+schlei'fen+~, to drag along.

~+schleu'dern+~, to throw, to hurl, to dash.

~+schlich+~, see ~schleichen~.

~+schlich+ (schlichen) . . . +umher'+~, see ~umherschleichen~.

~+schlief+ . . . +ein+~, see ~einschlafen~.

~+schlimm+~, bad, ill; harmful, pernicious, fatal.

~+Schlin'ge+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), loop, noose.

~+schlin'gen+ (schlang, geschlungen)~, to wind, to twine, to twist;
  ~sich schlingen~, to be wound _or_ twined _or_ twisted.

~+Schloss+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), castle.

~+schlug+~, see ~schlagen~.

~+schlug+ . . . +ein+~, see ~einschlagen~.

~+schlug+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zuschlagen~.

~+schlu'gen+ . . . +ab+~, see ~abschlagen~.

~+Schlum'mer+~, _m._, slumber, sleep.

~+Schlum'merlied+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), lullaby, hushaby.

~+Schmerz+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), pain, grief.

~+schmue'cken+~, to adorn, to attire, to trim.

~+Schnee+~, _m._, snow.

~+Schnee'flaeche+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), snow-field.

~+Schnee'flocke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), flake (of snow).

~+schnee'gekroent+~, snow-capped.

~+schnee'weiss+~, snow-white.

~+schnei'den+ (schnitt, geschnitten)~, to cut, to carve, to chisel.

~+schnell+~, quick, fast; soon.

~+schnue'ren+~, to pack _or_ to truss up.

~+schnur'ren+~, to hum, to buzz;
  ~das Schnurren~, humming, buzzing.

~+schob+ . . . +zurueck'+~, see ~zurueckschieben~.

~+scholl+~, see ~schallen~.

~+schon+~, already, instantly;
  (_explet._) without that, in itself.

~+schoen+~, beautiful(ly), fair(ly); fine(ly), handsome(ly).

~+scho'nen+~, to be regardful of, to take care of.

~+schoss+~, see ~schiessen~.

~+schoss+ . . . +tot+~, see ~totschiessen~.

~+Schreck+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), terror, fright.

~+Schreck'bild+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), frightful image, terrific vision.

~+Schre'cken+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), horror, terror.

~+schre'cken+~, to frighten, to terrify.

~+schreck'lich+~, terrible.

~+Schrei+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), cry, outcry.

~+schrei'ben+ (schrieb, geschrieben)~, to write; to scratch.

~+schrei'en+ (schrie, geschrieen)~, to cry.

~+schrie'ben+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zuschreiben~.

~+Schritt+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), step, pace, stride, stalk;
  ~im Schritt reiten~, to pace, to amble.

~+schritt+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zuschreiten~.

~+schuech'tern+~, shy(ly), timid(ly), diffident(ly).

~+schul'dig+~, guilty;
  ~der Schuldige~, culprit.

~+Schul'ter+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), shoulder.

~+schuer'zen+~, to tuck (to pin _or_ to truss) up.

~+Schutt+~, _m._, dust, dirt, ruins.

~+schuet'teln+~, to shake;
  ~von Frost geschuettelt~, shivering with cold.

~+schuet'tete+ . . . +nie'der+~, see ~niederschuetten~.

~+schue'tzen+~, to guard (against, ~vor~); to protect.

~+schwach+~, weak, feeble.

~+Schwae'che+~, _f._, weakness, fatigue.

~+schwan'ken+~, to stagger.

~+Schwarm+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), swarm; host.

~+schwarz+~, black, dark.

~+schwe'ben+~, to float (in the air), to hover; to glide along.

~+Schweif+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), tail.

~+schwei'gen+ (schwieg, geschwiegen)~, to be silent;
  ~zum Schweigen bringen~, to silence.

~+schweig'sam+~, silent, without a word.

~+Schweiss'tropfen+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), bead of perspiration.

~+schwel'len+ (schwoll, geschwollen)~, to swell, to rise.

~+schwen'ken+~, to wave;
  ~das Schwenken~, waving.

~+schwer+~, heavy, onerous; difficult, hard.

~+Schwe'ster+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), sister.

~+Schwie'rigkeit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), difficulty, hardship.

~+schwin'deln+~, to be (_or_ to feel) dizzy;
  ~schwindelnd steil~, so steep as to cause giddiness.

~+schwind'lig+~, dizzy, giddy; making giddy;
  ~ein schwindliger Pfad~, a path that causes giddiness;
  ~es wird mir schwindlig~, I feel dizzy.

~+schwin'gen+ (schwang, geschwungen)~, to bend, to curve, to inflect,
    to arch.

~+schwir'ren+~, to whir, to flit;
  ~durch einander schwirren~, to cross each other.

~+schwoe'ren+ (schwor [schwur], geschworen)~, to swear, to take an oath,
    to vow.

~+See+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), lake.

~+Se'gen+~, _m._, blessing.

~+seg'nen+~, to bless.

~+se'hen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to see, to behold;
  ~sieh(e)!~ behold!

~+seh'nen+, sich~, to long (for, ~nach~).

~+sehr+~, very, very much, extremely;
  ~sehr zur Last~, very burdensome, a great burden.

~+sei; seist; sei'en+~ (_pres. subj._) _of auxil. v._ ~sein~.

~+Sei'de+~, _f._, silk.

~+Sei'dengespinst+~, _n._, silk spun, silk web.

~+sei'dig+~, silky, as soft as silk.

1. ~+sein, sei'ne, sein+~ (_posses. pron._), his (its);
  ~die Seinen~, his people; his folks.

2. ~+sein+~, _auxil. v._ (~war, gewesen~), to be.

~+sei'ne+, (der)~ = ~seinige~, his (friend _or_ comrade);
  ~die Seinen~, his people _or_ folks.

~+sei'nige+, (der)~ = ~seine~, his.

~+seit+~ (_dat._), since, within, in.

~+seitdem'+~ (_adv._), since that time, since then, ever since;
  (_conj._) since.

~+Sei'te+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), side, slope (of a mountain); direction;
  ~an der Seite~, by the side.

~+seit'waerts+~, sideways, sidelong, aside.

~+sel'ber+~ = ~selbst~.

~+selbst+~ (my-, your-, him-, her)self; (our-, your-, them)selves.

~+sen'den+ (sandte, gesandt)~, to send; to give.

~+sen'ken+~, to sink, to lower, to hang;
  ~sich senken~, to let one's self down, to sink.

~+Ses'sel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), arm-chair.

~+se'tzen+~, to put, to place;
  ~sich setzen~, to seat one's self, to be seated;
  ~gefangen setzen~, to imprison, to detain in custody.

~+Seu'che+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), epidemic disease, epidemy.

~+seuf'zen+~, to sob, to sigh, to groan;
  ~seufzend~, with a sigh.

~+sich+~ (_reflex. pron._), him-, herself, your-, themselves;
  (_reciproc. pron._) each other, one another.

~+si'cher+~, certain(ly), sure(ly), positive(ly), confident(ly);
    safe(ly), secure(ly).

~+sie+~ (_person. pron._), she, they; her, them.

~+sie'he!+~ see ~sehen~.

~+Sil'berfaden+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), silver-thread;
  ~Silberfaeden im Haar~, gray hair.

~+sil'bern+~, of silver, silver;
  ~eine silberne Stimme~, silvery voice.

~+Sil'berzeug+~, _n._, silver ware, plate.

~+sin'gen+ (sang, gesungen)~, to sing, to chant.

~+sin'nen+ (sann, gesonnen)~, to reflect, to plot.

~+Sit'te+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), custom;
  ~es ist Sitte~, it is the custom.

~+si'tzen+ (sass, gesessen)~, to sit, to be seated.

~+si'tzest+ . . . +da+~, see ~dasitzen~.

~+Smaragd'+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), emerald.

~+so+~, so, such;
  ~so?~ is that so? ~so ein . . .~, such a . . .

~+sobald'+~, as soon as.

~+soe'ben+~, just now.

~+sog+ . . . +auf+~, see ~aufsaugen~.

~+sog+ . . . +ein+~, see ~einsaugen~.

~+sogar'+~, even (_adv._).

~+sogleich'+~, at once, immediately.

~+Sohn+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), son, boy.

~+sol'cher, sol'che, sol'ches+ (ein . . .)~, such, (so large) as large
    as that.

~+Solda'tenmantel+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), soldier's (military) mantle
    _or_ cloak.

~+sol'len+~, shall.

~+Som'mer+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), summer.

~+Som'merglut+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), glow of summer;
  ~heisse Sommerglut~, fervid heat of summer.

~+son'dern+~, but.

~+Son'ne+~, _f._, sun.

~+Son'nenschein+~, _m._, sun-shine.

~+Son'nenstrahl+~, _m._ (_pl._ -en), sun-beam.

~+Sonn'tag+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), Sunday.

~+sonn'verbrannt+~, sun-burnt.

~+sonst+~, else, otherwise; formerly, at other times.

~+Sor'ge+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), sorrow, care; apprehension, misgiving.

~+sorg'sam+~, careful(ly), solicitous(ly).

~+soviel'+~, so much.

~+sowie'+~ (_manner_) as well as;
  (_time_) as soon as.

~+spann+~, see ~spinnen~.

~+spaer'lich+~, slender, arid, poorly watered.

~+spar'sam+~, sparing, economical;
  ~sparsamer~, less productive.

~+spaet; spae'ter+~, late; later.

~+Speer+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), spear.

~+spei'sen+~, to feed.

~+Spei'sesaal+~, _m._ (_pl._ -saele), dining-hall.

~+Spekta'kel+~, _m._, noise, hubbub.

~+spen'den+~, to spend, to give.

~+sper'ren+~, to shut up _or_ in, to lock up.

~+Spie'gel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), glass, mirror.

~+Spiel'zeug+~, _n._ (_collect._), play-things, knickknacks.

~+spie'ssen+~, to pierce (with a spear).

~+Spin'del+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), a piece of wood for twisting and winding
    the fibres drawn from the distaff; spindle.

~+Spin'ne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), spider.

~+spin'nen+ (spann, gesponnen)~, to spin;
  ~das Spinnen~, spinning.

~+spitz+~, pointed.

~+Sporn+~, _m._ (_pl._ ~Spornen~ _or_ ~Sporen~), spur;
  ~dem Pferde die Sporen geben~, to set spurs to one's horse.

~+spoet'tisch+~, scoffing(ly), scornful(ly).

~+sprach+~, see ~sprechen~.

~+spra'chen+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zusprechen~.

~+sprang+ . . . +auf+~, see ~aufspringen~.

~+spre'chen+ (sprach, gesprochen)~, to speak, to talk (to some one,
    ~mit, zu~).

~+sprin'gen+ (sprang, gesprungen)~, to spring, to jump, to leap.

~+Spruch+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), saying; decree.

~+sprue'hen+~, to emit, to shoot forth.

~+Spur+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), track, mark, footprints.

~+spue'ren+~, to perceive, to feel.

~+Stadt+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-e), city, town.

~+Stamm+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), trunk.

~+stand+~, see ~stehen~.

~+stand+ . . . +auf+~, see ~aufstehen~.

~+stan'den+ . . . +gegenue'ber+~, see ~gegenueberstehen~.

~+stark+~, strong, vigorous, robust.

~+star'ren+~, to stare, to fix one's eyes.

~+star'ren+ . . . +an+~, see ~anstarren~.

~+starr'ten+ . . . +hinein'+~, see ~hineinstarren~.

~+statt+~ (_genit._), instead of.

~+Staet'te+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), place; scene.

~+statt'lich+~, stately, splendid, noble.

~+Staub+~, _m._, dust.

~+staeu'ben+~ (_or_ ~stauben~), to fall down in spray.

~+stau'nen+~, to marvel, to wonder;
  ~voll staunender Freude~, full of amazement and pleasure;
  ~in staunender Bewunderung~, full of amazement and admiration.

~+ste'cken+~, to put, to place, to set;
  ~in Brand stecken~, to set on fire.

~+ste'hen+ (stand, gestanden)~, to stand, to be standing;
  ~stehen bleiben~, to remain standing; to stand still, to stop.

~+steif+~, stiff, rigid, benumbed.

~+stei'gen+ (stieg, gestiegen)~, to step;
  ~zu Thal steigen~, to descend.

~+steil+~, steep, abrupt, precipitous;
  ~schwindelnd steil~, so steep as to cause giddiness.

~+Stein+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), stone, rock.

~+stei'nern+~, of stone, stone.

~+Stein'stufe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), stone-step, marble-step.

~+Stel'le+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), place, spot.

~+stel'len+~, to put, to place;
  ~in den Schatten stellen~, to throw into the shade.

~+ster'ben+ (starb, gestorben)~, to die (of _or_ from something, ~vor~);
  ~der Sterbende~, dying man.

~+Stern+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), star, spark.

~+stern'los+~, starless, without stars _or_ starlight.

~+sti'cken+~, to embroider.

~+stieg+~, see ~steigen~.

~+stieg+ . . . +empor'+~, see ~emporsteigen~.

~+stiess+~, see ~stossen~.

~+stiess+ . . . +aus+~, see ~ausstossen~.

~+still+~, still, quiet(ly);
  ~still sein~, to pause, to have finished.

~+stil'len+~, to quench (thirst), to satisfy.

~+Stim'me+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), voice.

~+stim'men+~, to move, to dispose;
  ~guenstig stimmen~, to move (to dispose) in some one's favor.

~+Stirn(e)+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), forehead, brow.

~+stoeh'nen+~, to groan;
  ~das Stoehnen~, groaning, groans.

~+Stolz+~, _m._, pride.

~+stolz+~, proud, haughty, vain; lofty, magnificent.

~+sto'pfen+~, to stuff, to fill.

~+sto'ssen+ (stiess, gestossen)~, to push, to hit, to kick, to strike;
  ~auf Einen stossen~, to encounter, to come across, to hit upon.

~+Stra'fe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), punishment, penalty.

~+stra'fen+~, to punish, to chastise, to rebuke.

~+strah'len+~, to radiate, to beam.

~+Stra'sse+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), street, road; way, path, trail.

~+Stre'cke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), (stretch) tract of land; part of the
    way, distance;
  ~eine Strecke weit~, (for) some distance.

~+strei'cheln+~, to stroke; to caress.

~+strei'chen+ (strich, gestrichen)~, to stroke, to smooth.

~+streif'ten+ . . . +entlang'+~, see ~entlangstreifen~.

~+Streit+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), fray, fight.

~+strei'ten+ (stritt, gestritten)~, to contend, to struggle;
  ~sich streiten~, to quarrel, to wrangle (about, ~um~).

~+strich+~, see ~streichen~.

~+stroem'ten+ . . . +herbei'+~, see ~herbeistroemen~.

~+Stueck+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), piece.

~+Stuhl+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), chair.

~+Stun'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), hour; meeting.

~+Sturm+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), storm; hurricane.

~+stuer'men+~, to storm, to rush.

~+stuer'misch+~, stormy; impetuous, uproarious.

~+stuer'zen+~, to rush, to dash; to fall (down), to tumble;
  ~im Stuerzen~, in (while) falling down.

~+stuerz'te+ . . . +herein'+~, see ~hereinstuerzen~.

~+stuerz'te+ . . . +zusam'men+~, see ~zusammenstuerzen~.

~+stue'tzen+~, to prop, to support.

~+su'chen+~, to seek, to search.

~+Sue'den+~, _m._, South.

~+Suen'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), sin, wrong.

~+suen'digen+~, to sin, to commit a sin.

~+suess+~, sweet, lovely.


+T+

~+Ta'bak+~, _m._, tobacco, tobacco-pouch.

~+Tag+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), day;
  ~gute Tage~, good time;
  ~eines Tages~, one day (_adv._), once;
  ~von dem Tage an~, from that day.

~+Takt+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), time, measure;
  ~Takt halten~, to keep time.

~+Tan'nas+~ (_Roumanian_), man's name, _abbrev._ of Athanasius.

~+Tannas'se+~ (_endearing form_ of Tannas, _proper name_), (my) dear
    Tannas.

~+tan'zen+~, to dance, to spin (a waltz);
  ~eine Hora tanzen~, to have a dance.

~+tap'fer+~, brave, gallant;
  ~der Tapfere~, brave man, hero.

~+taub+~, _deaf_;
  ~taube Ohren machen~, to turn a deaf ear.

~+Tau'be+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), dove, pigeon.

~+Tau'benei+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), pigeon's egg.

~+tau'melte+ . . . +zurueck'+~, see ~zuruecktaumeln~.

~+tau'send+~ (_pl._ -e), (a) thousand.

~+Teil+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), part, share;
  ~zu teil werden~, to fall to some one's lot, to be granted _or_
    bestowed.

~+tei'len+~, to divide, to share.

~+Ten'ne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), barn-floor, plaster-floor.

~+Tep'pich+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), carpet, rug.

~+teu'er+~, dear, beloved;
  ~meine Teuern!~ my dear friends!

~+Thal+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), dale, valley;
  ~zu Thal~, down the mountain.

~+that+~, see ~thun~.

~+thoe'richt+~, foolish, silly.

~+Thrae'ne+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), tear.

~+thro'nen+~, to be enthroned, to reign.

~+thun+ (that, gethan)~, to do, to make, to perform; to act, to behave;
  ~es war ihm nicht um ihre Schaetze zu thun~, her treasures it was not
    what he cared for, her treasures were not involved;
  ~sich weh thun~, to hurt one's self.

~+Thue're+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), door.

~+Thuer'klinke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), door-latch.

~+tief+~, deep, profound.

~+Tie'fe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), deep, pit, abyss.

~+Tier+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), animal, beast.

~+Tisch+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), table;
  ~nach Tisch~, after the meal.

~+to'ben+~, to rage, to rave.

~+tobt+ . . . +hinab'+~, see ~hinabtoben~.

~+Toch'ter+~, _f._ (_pl._ "-), daughter.

~+Tod+~, _m._, death;
  ~in den Tod gehen~, to die.

~+Ton+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), tone, note, strain.

~+tot+~, dead, deceased, late;
  ~der Tote~, dead person, dead body, corpse.

~+toe'ten+~, to kill, to slay.

~+to'tenblass+~, deadly pale, as pale as death.

~+to'tenstill+~, still as death, silent as the grave.

~+tot'schiessen+ (schoss, geschossen)~, to shoot (dead), to kill.

~+tra'gen+ (trug, getragen)~, to carry, to bear, to wear.

~+trat+ . . . +herein'+~, see ~hereintreten~.

~+trat+ . . . +hervor'+~, see ~hervortreten~.

~+trat+ . . . +hin+~, see ~hintreten~.

~+tra'ten+~, see ~treten~.

~+traeu'men+~, to dream;
  ~es hat mir getraeumt~, I have dreamt (_or_ thought) of (~dass~).

~+traeu'merisch+~, dreamy, absent-minded, visionary.

~+trau'rig+~, dreary(-ily), sad(ly), dejected(ly); melancholy.

~+traut+~, dear, cosy.

~+treff'lich+~, excellent, admirable.

~+trei'ben+ (trieb, getrieben)~, to drive; to urge, to incite.

~+tren'nen+~, to separate;
  ~sich trennen~, to separate (from one another);
  ~getrennt~, separate.

~+tre'ten+ (trat, getreten)~, to step, to come forth;
  ~Thraenen traten in ihre Augen~, tears appeared in her eyes.

~+tre'tet+ . . . +hinaus'+~, see ~hinaustreten~.

~+treu+~, true, faithful.

~+trip'peln+~, to trot (with short steps).

~+Trop'fen+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), (rain-)drop.

~+troe'sten+~, to console, to comfort.

~+tro'tzig+~, defiant(ly), daring(ly).

~+trueb+~, gloomy(-ily), sad(ly); melancholy.

~+trug+~, see ~tragen~.

~+true'ge+~, see ~tragen~.

~+tru'gen+ . . . +zusam'men+~, see ~zusammentragen~.

~+Truem'mer+~, _pl._, ruins.

~+Trunk+~, _m._, drink, draught, potion.

~+trun'ken+~, intoxicated, elated.

~+Tschach'lau+~, _m._ (_proper name_), a mountain in the Carpathians.

~+Tuch+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), cloth, kerchief, napkin.

~+Tuer'ke+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), Turk.

~+Turm+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), tower.


+U+

~+ue'bel+~ (_attrib._ ~uebler, ueble, uebles~), ill, bad;
  ~Einem uebles (Uebles) thun~, to do some one ill _or_ wrong, to treat
    some one badly.

~+ue'ber+~ (_dat.-accus._), over, above; across; beyond; on, about.

~+ueberbie'ten+ (ueberbot, ueberboten)~, to outbid, to outdo;
  ~sie liess sich nicht ueberbieten~, she could not be outdone.

~+ueberflie'gen+ (ueberflog, ueberflogen)~, to fly over; to spread.

~+ue'berirdisch+~, supernatural(ly), heavenly.

~+ueberkom'men+ (ueberkam, ueberkommen)~, to come over; to seize,
    to attack.

~+ue'bermuetig+~, insolent(ly), wanton(ly);
  ~der Uebermuetige~, insolent person.

~+ueberra'gen+~, to overtop, to overpeer.

~+ueberra'schen+~, to surprise.

~+ueberschuet'ten+~, to heap (to shower) upon.

~+ueberstroe'men+~, to overflow, to cover.

~+ueberzie'hen+ (ueberzog, ueberzogen)~, to cover;
  ~mit Krieg ueberziehen~, to invade, to wage war against (a country).

~+ueberzo'gen+~, see ~ueberziehen~.

~+ue'brige+ (der)~, remaining, rest, other part;
  (_pl._) the others.

~+U'fer+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), bank (of a river).

~+um+~ (_accus._), around, about; for the sake of . . .
  (_conj._) ~um . . . zu~, to, in order to.

~+Umarm'ung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), embrace, hug.

~+um'blasen+ (blies, geblasen)~, to blow down.

~+umfas'sen+~, to clasp round, to embrace.

~+umge'ben+ (umgab, umgeben)~, to surround, to stand by the side
    (of, _accus._).

~+umge'hen+ (umging, umgangen)~, to go _or_ to walk round (about).

~+umher'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to walk about.

~+umher'gestreut+~, see ~umherstreuen~.

~+umher'hinken+~, to halt _or_ to limp about.

~+umher'schleichen+ (schlich, geschlichen)~, to move _or_ to rove about.

~+umher'streuen+~, to strew _or_ to scatter about.

~+um'kehren+~, to return, to turn back.

~+umklam'mern+~, to clasp (in one's arms).

~+Um'kreis+~, _m._, circle, compass;
  ~zehn Meilen im Umkreise~, (for) ten miles round.

~+ums+~ = ~um das~.

~+um'sehen+ (sah, gesehen), sich~, to look round _or_ back;
  ~im Umsehen~, in a twinkling, in a trice.

~+umsonst'+~, in vain, vainly, to no profit; for nothing.

~+umwi'ckeln+~, to wrap up, to wind round.

~+umwo'gen+~, to stream (to flow) round, to float around.

~+umzin'geln+~, to enclose, to block up, to surround.

~+unaufhalt'sam+~ (= ~unaufhoerlich~), incessant(ly), continual(ly).

~+un'barmherzig+~, unmerciful(ly), cruel(ly).

~+un'bedeutend+~, insignificant.

~+un'bemerkt+~, unobserved.

~+unbeschreib'lich+~, indescribable, inexpressible.

~+un'bewacht+~, unguarded, unprotected.

~+un'bewaldet+~, without (growth of) trees, bare.

~+unbezwing'bar+~, insuperable, indomitable.

~+und+~, and.

~+unend'lich+~, immense(ly), boundless(ly).

~+unermess'lich+~, immeasurable; bottomless, fathomless.

~+unermued'lich+~, indefatigable (-bly).

~+unerreich'bar+~, inaccessible, out of reach.

~+Un'gar+~, _m._ (_pl._ -n), Hungarian, Hun.

~+Un'gemach+~, _n._, adversity, trouble.

~+ungezaehlt'+~, uncounted, boundless.

~+unglaub'lich+~, incredible;
  ~noch unglaublicheres~, still more incredible stories _or_ things.

~+Un'glueck+~, _n._, misfortune, adversity, calamity; unhappiness.

~+un'gluecklich+~, unfortunate, miserable; ill-fated;
  ~Du Ungluecklicher!~ you wretch!

~+Un'heil+~, _n._, mischief, harm;
  ~Unheil anrichten~, to do (to cause) mischief.

~+un'heimlich+~, dismal; deterrent.

~+unmoeg'lich+~, impossible.

~+Un'mut+~, _m._, ill-humor; depression of spirits.

~+un'nuetz+~, useless, idle, foolish, absurd.

~+uns+~ (to, with, for), us;
  ~fuer uns beide~, for both of us.

~+Un'schuld+~, _f._, innocence; innocent girl.

~+un'schuldig+~, innocent.

~+un'schuldsvoll+~, innocent, blameless.

~+un'ser, un'sere, un'ser+~ (often ~unsrer, unsre, unser~), our.

~+un'ten+~, down, beneath;
  ~da unten~, down there.

~+un'ter+~ (_dat.-accus._), (_place_) under, beneath;
  (_number_) among.

~+unterdes'+~, in the meantime.

~+Un'tergang+~, _m._, destruction, ruin;
  ~Einem den Untergang bereiten~, to work some one's ruin.

~+un'tergehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to go down, to set.

~+un'terirdisch+~, underground, subterranean.

~+Un'terlippe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), underlip.

~+un'verstaendig+~, imprudent, foolish.

~+unverwandt'+~, immovable (-bly), fixed(ly);
  ~Einen unverwandt anschielen~, to rivet one's eyes on some one.

~+un'weit+~ (_genit._ [_dat._]), not far from, near.

~+uep'pig+~, luxuriant(ly).

~+ur'alt+~, very old _or_ ancient.

~+Urlatoa're+~, _f._ (_Roumanian_), "Roaring River."


+V+

~+Va'ter+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), father.

~+verach'ten+~, to despise.

~+veraen'dern+~, to change.

~+veran'lassen+~, to cause.

~+verber'gen+ (verbarg, verborgen)~, to conceal, to hide;
  ~verbirg!~ hide!

~+verbin'den+ (verband, verbunden)~, to bind up, to dress.

~+verbrannt'+~, see ~verbrennen~.

~+verbrei'ten+, sich~, to spread (_intrans._), to extend.

~+verbren'nen+ (verbrannte, verbrannt)~, to burn, to consume by fire.

~+verbuen'den+, sich~, to ally one's self; to enter into a confederacy.

~+verdan'ken+~, to be indebted (to some one [_dat._] for something
    [_accus._]).

~+Verder'ben+~, _n._, destruction, ruin.

~+verder'ben+ (verdarb, verdorben)~, to ruin, to undo; to spoil.

~+verdun'keln+~, to darken, to obscure, to cloud.

~+verei'nen+~, to unite.

~+verfol'gen+~, to pursue.

~+Verfol'ger+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), pursuer; persecutor.

~+verge'bens+~, vainly, in vain.

~+verges'sen+ (vergass, vergessen)~, to forget.

~+vergie'ssen+ (vergoss, vergossen)~, to spill; to shed (tears).

~+vergif'ten+~, to poison.

~+vergos'sen+~, see ~vergiessen~.

~+verhal'ten+ (verhielt, verhalten)~, to keep back; to suppress.

~+verhee'ren+~, to devastate; to lay waste.

~+verhin'dern+~, to hinder, to prevent (from, ~an~).

~+verhuel'len+~, to cover, to shroud, to hide.

~+verhun'gern+~, to die of starvation, to starve to death.

~+verkap'pen+~, to mask, to disguise.

~+verkau'fen+~, to sell.

~+Verklae'rung+~, _f._, glorification.

~+verkoh'len+~, to burn to coal; to get charred.

~+verkuen'den+~ (= ~verkuendigen~), to announce.

~+verkuer'zen+~, to cut short _or_ off, to shorten.

~+verlas'sen+ (verliess, verlassen)~, to leave; to forsake, to abandon.

~+verlau'fen+ (verlief, verlaufen)~, to pass (by).

~+verlie'ren+ (verlor, verloren)~, to lose.

~+verlo'ben+, sich~, to become (to get) engaged (to some one, _dat._).

~+Verlo'bung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), engagement (to be married).

~+verma'chen+~, to bequeath; to leave something (to some one, _dat._).

~+vermeh'ren+~, to increase, to enlarge.

~+vernich'ten+~, to ruin, to destroy.

~+verre'cken+~, to die (of animals).

~+versam'meln+~, to assemble.

~+verschar'ren+~, to hide in the ground, to rake up.

~+verschlu'cken+~, to swallow, to gulp down;
  ~die Thraenen verschlucken~, to suppress one's tears.

~+verscho'nen+~, to spare; to exempt, to excuse.

~+verschwei'gen+ (verschwieg, verschwiegen)~, to conceal (from, _dat._).

~+verschwin'den+ (verschwand, verschwunden)~, to disappear.

~+verse'hen+ (versah, versehen), sich~, to look for something;
  ~sich einer Sache versehen~, to be aware (of something, _genit._).

~+versin'ken+ (versank, versunken)~, to be sunk _or_ plunged;
  ~in Schlummer versunken~, wrapped in slumber.

~+verspre'chen+, (versprach, versprochen)~, to promise.

~+verstand'+~, see ~verstehen~.

~+verste'cken+~, to hide, to conceal (from, ~vor~);
  ~sich verstecken~, to be hidden.

~+verste'hen+ (verstand, verstanden)~, to understand, to know.

~+verstei'nern+~, to petrify.

~+verstrei'chen+ (verstrich, verstrichen)~, to pass (by).

~+vertei'digen+~, to defend.

~+Vertrau'en+~, _n._, faith, confidence.

~+vertrei'ben+ (vertrieb, vertrieben)~, to make pass away (the time);
  ~er vertrieb gern die Zeit~, he liked to make pass away (beguile)
    the time.

~+verwan'deln+, sich~, to change (= to be changed), to be converted
    _or_ transformed.

~+verwandt'+~, related, kin;
  ~der Verwandte~, relative, kinsman.

~+verwech'seln+~, to mistake, to confound;
  ~zum Verwechseln aehnlich~, so much alike that the one might be easily
    taken for the other _or_ that one cannot tell the one from the
    other.

~+verwun'dern+~, to surprise, to amaze.

~+verzeh'ren+~ to consume; to eat up.

~+verzich'ten+~, to desist (from, ~auf~).

~+verzie'hen+ (verzog, verzogen), sich~, to be twisted _or_ contracted.

~+verzo'gen+~, see ~verziehen~.

~+Verzweif'lung+~, _f._, despair, desperation.

~+verzweif'lungsvoll+~, full of despair.

~+Vieh+~, _n._, cattle.

~+viel; vie'le+~, much; many.

~+vielleicht'+~, perhaps, may be.

~+vier+~, four.

~+Vo'gel+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), bird.

~+Volk+~, _n._ (_pl._ "-er), people; nation; subjects.

~+voll+~, full (of, ~von~ _or genit._), replete, crowded.

~+voel'lig+~, complete(ly);
  ~voellig Nacht~, dead night.

~+vom+~ = ~von dem~.

~+von+~ (_dat._), of, from; about; by (_in passive construction_).

~+vor+~ (_dat.-accus._), (_place_) before, in front of; in the
    presence of;
  (_time_) ago;
  (_cause_) of, from, with.

~+voran'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to go ahead, to take the lead.

~+vor'aus+ (im)~, beforehand, in advance.

~+vorbei'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to pass by.

~+Vor'berg+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), foot-hill.

~+vorher'+~, before, previously, the first time.

~+vor'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to seem, to appear, to be considered
    (by one's self, _dat._).

~+Vor'sicht+~, _f._, foresight, caution, precaution.

~+vor'stellen+~, to introduce, to present; to represent;
  ~sich vorstellen~, to imagine.

~+vor'stuermen+~, to advance, to push on.

~+vorue'bergehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to pass by;
  ~der Voruebergehende~, passer-by.

~+Vor'wand+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), pretext, pretence, subterfuge.


+W+

~+Wa'che+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), sentry, sentinel.

~+wa'chen+~, to be awake, to sit up.

~+Wachs+~, _n._, wax.

~+wach'sen+ (wuchs, gewaschsen)~, to grow;
  ~hoch gewachsen~, tall-grown.

~+Wachs'licht+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), wax-(candle) taper.

~+wach'te+ . . . +auf+~, see ~aufwachen~.

~+Wacht'feuer+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), camp-fire, bivouac-fire.

~+wa'gen+~, to dare, to risk, to venture.

~+waeh'len+~, to pick out, to select.

~+wahr+~, true, genuine, veritable;
  ~nicht wahr?~ is it not so?

~+waeh'rend+~ (_genit._), during;
  (_conj._) while.

~+Wahr'heit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), truth.

~+Wahr'zeichen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), sign, mark, landmark.

~+Wald'brand+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), fire in the forest.

~+Wal'desschatten+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), shade of the woods.

~+Wald'fee+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), wood-fairy, wood-nymph.

~+Wald'weg+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), wood-path.

~+Wall'fahrt+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), pilgrimage.

~+wael'zen+, sich~, to roll, to welter.

~+waelzt+ . . . +herun'ter+~, see ~herunterwaelzen~.

~+wand+ . . . +aus+~, see ~auswinden~.

~+wan'deln+~, to walk, to take a walk, to wander; to promenade.

~+Wan'derer+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), wanderer, pedestrian, traveller
    (on foot).

~+wan'dern+~, to wander, to travel (on foot).

~+wan'derte+ . . . +hinauf'+~, see ~hinaufwandern~.

~+Wan'derung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), wandering, journey, tour, travel
    (on foot).

~+Wand'lung+~, _f._ (_arch. and poetic. for_ ~Verwandlung~),
    (_pl._ -en), change.

~+wan'dte+~, see ~wenden~.

~+wan'dte+ . . . +zu+~, see ~zuwenden~.

~+Wan'ge+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), cheek.

~+wan'ken+~, to shake, to rock.

~+war; wa'ren+~, see _auxil. v._ ~sein~.

~+ward+~, see _auxil. v._ ~werden~.

~+wae're; wae'ren; waerst+~ (_past subj._ of ~sein~), was, were; would be.

~+warf+~, see ~werfen~.

~+warf+ (warfen) . . . +zu+~, see ~zuwerfen~.

~+war'nen+~, to warn, to caution.

~+war'ten+~, to wait (for, ~auf~ _or genit._).

~+warum'+~, why.

~+was+~, (that) what;
  (_colloq._) = ~etwas~, somewhat, something;
  ~was?~ what? ~was fuer ein?~ what a, what kind of a . . . ?

~+wa'schen+ (wusch, gewaschen)~, to wash.

~+Was'ser+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), water;
  (_pl._ = ~die Gewaesser~, rivers, streams).

~+Was'serfall+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), waterfall, cascade.

~+wa'tete+ . . . +hinein'+~, see ~hineinwaten~.

~+wech'seln+~, to exchange; to apply to each other.

~+Wech'selrede+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), dialogue; alternate eulogy _or_
    encomium.

~+Weg+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), way, road, direction;
  ~sich auf den Weg machen~, to set out, to start;
  ~sich Einem in den Weg werfen~, to throw one's self upon some one.

~+we'gen+~ (_genit._), on account of, for.

~+weg'kratzen+~, to scratch out _or_ aside, to work off.

~+weg'scharren+~, to rake away.

1. ~+we'h(e)+~, aching, painful;
  ~wehe thun~, to cause pain;
  ~sich weh thun~, to hurt one's self.

2. ~+we'he!+~ (_interj._), woe! alas! woe (to, _dat._)!
  ~ach und wehe schreien~, to sigh and cry, to groan and moan.

~+we'hen+~, to wave;
  ~ein Wehen~, breeze.

~+weh'muetig+~, sad(ly), doleful(ly).

~+weh'ren+, sich~, to defend one's self; to resist.

~+wehr'te+ . . . +ab+~, see ~abwehren~.

~+Weib+~, _n._ (_pl._ -er), wife; woman.

~+weich+~, soft.

~+Wei'che+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), flank, side; groin.

~+wei'chen+ (wich, gewichen)~, to give away, to retreat.

~+Wei'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), pasture.

~+weil+~, because, since.

~+Wein+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), wine.

~+wei'nen+~, to cry, to shed tears, to sob.

~+wei'se+ (der)~, wise.

1. ~+weiss+~ (_adj._), white, whitewashed;
  ~die Weisse~, white woman, white lady.

2. ~+weiss+~ (_verb_), see ~wissen~.

~+weit+~ (_adv._), far, distant, a great way;
  ~weit laufen~, to make a long way;
  ~weit und breit~, near and far.

~+weitauf'gerissen+~, see ~weitaufreissen~.

~+weitauf'reissen+ (riss, gerissen)~, to open wide.

~+Wei'te+~, _n._, distance;
  ~von weitem~, from afar.

~+wei'te+ (der)~, wide, spacious, large.

~+wei'ter+~ (see ~weit~), further, on, along.

~+wei'tergehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to move on, to proceed.

~+welch!+~ what a!

~+wel'cher, wel'che, wel'ches+~, who, which;
  ~welcher! welche! welches!~ what a . . . !
  ~welcher? welche? welches?~ which? what?

~+Welt+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), world;
  ~auf der Welt~, in this world.

~+wem+~, (to) whom.

~+wen'den+ (wandte, gewandt)~, to turn;
  ~sich wenden~, to turn.

~+we'nig; we'nige+~, little; a few.

~+we'niger+~ (see ~wenig~), less.

~+wenn+~, when, whenever, as, if.

~+wer+~ (= ~wer, der~, _correlat._), (he) who;
  ~wer?~ who?

~+wer'den+~ (_pres. indic._ ~werde, wirst, wird; werden~, etc.),
    ~wurde [ward], geworden~; to become, to come to be; _also auxil.
    verb, for the formation of the fut. act._ (shall, will) _and the
    whole pass._ (be).

~+wer'fen+ (warf, geworfen)~, to throw;
  ~sich Einem in den Weg werfen~, to throw one's self upon some one.

~+wert+~, worthy, equivalent, tantamount (to, _genit._);
  ~die Deiner wert ist~, who can compete (_or_ compares) with you.

~+We'sen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), (living) being; creature.

~+weshalb'+~, (emphat. ~wes'halb~)? why? what for?

~+We'sten+~, _m._, West.

~+wi'chen+ . . . +zurueck'+~, see ~zurueckweichen~.

~+wid'men+~, to devote, to give up (to, _dat._).

~+wie+~ (_adv._), as, like;
  (_conj._) when;
  ~wie?~ how?

~+wie'der+~, again, back.

~+wie'derkommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to come back, to return.

~+wie'dersehen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to see (to meet) again.

1. ~+wie'gen+~, to rock.

2. ~+wie'gen+ (wog, gewogen)~, to weigh (_intrans._), _colloq. used_
    for ~waegen (wog, gewogen)~, to weigh (_transit._), to balance,
    to poise.

~+Wie'se+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), meadow.

~+wild+~, wild, impetuous; loose; dishevelled (hair); ferocious.

~+Wild'fang+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), frolicsome girl, romp.

~+Wild'heit+~, _f._, exuberance, friskiness.

~+will; willst+~, see ~wollen~.

~+will'kommen+~, welcome, pleasing.

~+Wind+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), wind, storm.

~+win'det+ . . . +dahin'+~, see ~dahinwinden~.

~+Wink+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), wink, beckoning;
  ~einen Wink geben~, to give a sign, to beckon.

~+win'ken+~, to beckon.

~+Win'ter+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), winter.

~+wir'beln+~, to whirl.

~+Wir'belwind+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), whirlwind;
  ~wie ein Wirbelwind~, quick as lightning, swift as an arrow.

~+wirk'lich+~, real(ly), indeed; actual(ly), truly.

~+wirst+~, see ~werden~.

~+wisch'te+ . . . +fort+~, see ~fortwischen~.

~+wis'se+~ (_pres. subj._ of ~wissen~).

~+wis'sen+~ (_pres. indic._ ~weiss, weisst, weiss; wissen~, etc.),
    ~wusste, gewusst~, to know;
  ~ohne zu wissen~, without knowing.

~+wisst+~, see ~wissen~.

~+wo+~, where, when.

~+Wo'che+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), week.

~+wog+~, see ~wiegen~.

~+wo'gen+~, to wave, to shift.

~+wohin'+~, where, whither.

~+wohl+~, well, kindly, happy;
  (_explet._) perhaps, I think, I guess, probably, likely;
  ~es wird mir wohl~, I feel at ease.

~+wohl'gefaellig+~, pleased;
  (_adv._) with satisfaction.

~+Wohl'klang+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), harmony, sound (of words).

~+woh'nen+~, to dwell, to live, to reside.

~+Woh'nung+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), dwelling, house.

~+Wolf+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), wolf.

~+Wol'ke+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), cloud.

~+Wol'kenbruch+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), torrent of rain.

~+wol'len+~ (_pres. indic._ ~will, willst, will; wollen~, etc.),
    ~wollte, gewollt~; will, to want, to wish; to claim, to pretend;
    to be about _or_ at the point;
  ~nicht enden wollend~, endless, never ending.

~+wonach'+~ (_emphat._ ~wo'nach~), whereafter, wherefor; after which,
    for which.

~+worauf'+~ (_emphat._ ~wo'rauf~), whereupon.

~+wor'den+~ (= ~geworden~), see _auxil. v._ ~werden~.

~+Wort+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e ["-er]), word.

~+wovor'+~ (_emphat._ ~wo'vor~), whereof, of what.

~+wuchs+~, see ~wachsen~.

~+Wun'de+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), wound, sore, boil, tumor.

~+Wun'der+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), wonder, miracle.

~+wun'derbar+~, wondrous, miraculous.

~+Wun'derblume+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), enchanted flower; flower from
    fairy-land.

~+wun'derfein+~, exceedingly fine.

~+wun'dern+, sich~, to wonder, to marvel, to be surprised.

~+wun'derschoen+~, charming.

~+wun'dervoll+~, wondrously fair, charming, exquisite.

~+wuen'schen+~, to wish;
  ~gutes (Gutes) wuenschen~, to wish some one well.

~+wur'de; wur'den+~, see _auxil. v._ ~werden~.

~+Wuer'de+~, _f._, dignity.

~+wuer'de; wuer'den; wuer'dest+~ (_condit. of aux. v._ ~sein~), would,
    could.

~+Wurf'spiess+~, _m._ (_pl._ -e), javelin, dart.

~+wuss'te+~, see ~wissen~.

~+wuess'ten+~, see ~wissen~.

~+wue'ten+~, to rage, to rave;
  ~wuetend~, raging(ly), furious(ly), frantic(ally).


+Z+

~+zaeh'men+~, to tame, to restrict.

~+Zahn+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), tooth.

~+Zahn'reihe+~, _f._ (_pl._ -n), row of teeth.

~+zap'peln+~, to kick and strike about, to fidget about.

~+zart+~, tender, soft, delicate.

~+zaert'lich+~, tender(ly), fond(ly), loving(ly).

~+Zau'ber+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), charm, spell.

~+Zau'berin+~, _f._ (_pl._ -nen), sorceress, witch.

~+Zei'chen+~, _n._ (_pl._ -), sign, medal, decoration, mark of
    distinction; wonder, miraculous sign; signal.

~+zei'gen+~, to show.

~+Zeit+~, _f._ (_pl._ -en), time;
  ~vor Zeiten~, in former (_or_ olden) times.

~+Zeit'vertreib+~, _m._, pastime;
  ~zum Zeitvertreib~, as a (by way of) pastime, for amusement.

~+zerbei'ssen+ (zerbiss, zerbissen)~, to break with the teeth.

~+zerschmet'tern+~, to smash, to crush.

~+zerstaeu'ben+~, to turn into (dust _or_) spray.

~+zerstreu'en+~, to scatter;
  ~zerstreut~, absent-minded, inattentive.

~+Zie'genhaar+~, _n._ (_pl._ -e), goat's hair.

~+zie'hen+ (zog, gezogen)~, _trans._ to draw, to pull; _intrans._
    to move, to advance.

~+zie'men+~, to be becoming _or_ fit, to befit.

~+zit'tern+~, to tremble, to quiver, to waver.

~+zog; zo'gen+~, see ~ziehen~.

~+zog+ . . . +heraus'+~, see ~herausziehen~.

~+zog+ . . . +zusam'men+~, see ~zusammenziehen~.

~+zo'gen+ . . . +nie'der+~, see ~niederziehen~.

~+zoe'gern+~, to hesitate.

~+Zopf+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-e), plait of hair.

~+Zorn+~, _m._ ire, rage.

~+zu+~ (_dat._), to, at; for;
  (_adv._) too;
  (_conj._) to, in order to;
  ~um . . . zu~, to, in order to.

~+zu'bringen+ (brachte, gebracht)~, to spend (time), to pass.

~+zu'cken+~, to flash (quivering).

~+zu'druecken+~, to close (by pressure);
  ~Einem die Augen zudruecken~, to close some one's eyes.

~+zuerst'+~ (_adv._), first of all.

~+zu'fliegen+ (flog, geflogen)~, to fly (to _or_ towards, ~auf~);
    to close with a bang, to slam.

~+zu'gedrueckt+~, see ~zudruecken~.

~+zu'gehen+ (ging, gegangen)~, to happen, to come to pass, to be
    brought about;
  ~es geht emsig zu~, there is a busy time.

~+Zue'gel+~, _m._ (_pl._ -), rein, bridle.

~+zu'laecheln+~, to smile (to _or_ on some one, _dat._).

~+zuletzt+~, last, last of all.

~+zum+~ = ~zu dem~.

~+zu'neigen+, sich~, to incline (to _or_ towards, _dat._).

~+zur+~ = ~zu der~.

~+zurueck'+~, back, behind;
  ~zurueck!~ go back! withdraw!

~+zurueck'bleiben+ (blieb, geblieben)~, to remain behind; to be left
    over.

~+zurueck'gerissen+~, see ~zurueckreissen~.

~+zurueck'kehren+~, to return.

~+zurueck'lassen+ (liess, gelassen)~, to leave behind.

~+zurueck'reissen+ (riss, gerissen)~, to push (to pull, to tear) back.

~+zurueck'reiten+ (ritt, geritten)~, to ride back (to, ~nach~).

~+zurueck'rufen+ (rief, gerufen)~, to call back (to, ~zu~).

~+zurueck'schieben+ (schob, geschoben)~, to push back.

~+zurueck'taumeln+~, to reel back.

~+zurueck'treiben+ (trieb, getrieben)~, to force back; to induce,
    to return _or_ to come back.

~+zurueck'weichen+ (wich, gewichen)~, to retreat.

~+zurueck'ziehen+, sich~, to go back, to retreat.

~+zu'rufen+ (rief, gerufen)~, to call (to some one, _dat._).

~+zusam'men+~, together.

~+zusam'menbrechen+ (brach, gebrochen)~, to break down, to collapse.

~+zusam'menstuerzen+~, to fall _or_ to break down; to be struck all of
    a heap.

~+zusam'mentragen+ (trug, getragen)~, to bring _or_ to carry together;
    to collect.

~+zusam'menwachsen+ (wuchs, gewachsen)~, to grow together.

~+zusam'menziehen+ (zog, gezogen), sich~, to be drawn tighter,
    to contract, to shrink up; to gather (_said of clouds_).

~+zu'schlagen+ (schlug, geschlagen)~, to bang, to slam (a door).

~+zu'schreiben+ (schrieb, geschrieben)~, to ascribe, to impute.

~+zu'schreiten+ (schritt, geschritten)~, to walk (to _or_ towards,
    _dat._).

~+zu'sehen+ (sah, gesehen)~, to look at, on _or_ upon, to watch.

~+zu'sprechen+ (sprach, gesprochen)~, to do justice, to enjoy
    (something, _dat._).

~+zuvor'kommen+ (kam, gekommen)~, to anticipate (some one, _dat._).

~+zuwei'len+~, once in a while, at times.

~+zu'wenden+ (wandte, gewandt), sich~, to turn one's steps
    (towards, _dat._), to wend one's way (towards, _dat._).

~+zu'werfen+ (warf, geworfen)~, to throw _or_ to cast (to, _dat._);
  ~einen Blick zuwerfen~, to cast a glance (at, _dat._).

~+zuwi'der+~ (_dat._; _postpositive_), against, contrary;
  ~es ist mir zuwider~, I have an aversion to it, I dislike _or_
    hate it.

~+zwei+~, two.

~+zwei'te+ (der)~, second.

~+Zwil'lingsbruder+~, _m._ (_pl._ "-), twin-brother.

~+zwi'schen+~ (_dat.-accus._), between, amidst.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


Errors and Inconsistencies [original form shown in brackets]

In the German text, mechanical errors such as u for n or f for long s
are not noted unless absolutely unambiguous.

Throughout the Notes and Vocabulary, the river name Prahova is given as
Prohava. Corrections are not individually noted.

Introduction

  Slavic, Albanesian, Greek  [_unchanged_]

Notes

  [1.8] ~in die Wangen~  [Wangeu]
  [4.2] der Bucegi+ ... (pronounce ~Butschedsch'~)  [Butschdesch]
  [9.11] ~+Mirea+~ (pronounce ~ea~ = e (French))
    [_second ) missing_]
  [9.11] ... Eng. _Andrew_  [Andrews]
  [24.2] ... from Latin: +civitas+ ... Ital.: +cittadella+
    [_unchanged: Italian descendant of +civitas+ is +citta+_]
  [29.4] one of the prettiest and most highly priced alpine flowers
  [38.4] flowers are highly priced by the tourists
    [_both printed as shown: probably an error for "highly prized"_]

Vocabulary

The vocabulary includes some unusual or archaic forms that may be
mistaken for errors.

  beses'sen  [_connected with "besitzen", but a different word_]
  dahin'fluestern ... (to guggle _or_ to murmur) along.
    [_unchanged: error for "gurgle"?_]
  e'bensolcher  [ebenfolcher]
  han'gen  [_parallel form of "haengen"_]
  hinab'sehen ... to look down.  [_final . missing_]
  [hoeren] ... to sound, to blow (an instrument).  [_final . missing_]
  [je] ~je . . . (desto) um so~
    [~je -- (desto) um so~:
    _anomalous dash changed to . . . to match other entries_]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Aus meinem Koenigreich, by Carmen Sylva

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AUS MEINEM KOeNIGREICH ***

***** This file should be named 31731.txt or 31731.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/7/3/31731/

Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
