The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fourth Massachusetts Cavalry in the
Closing Scenes of the War for the Maintenance of the Union, from Richmond to Appomatox, by William B. Arnold and Edward T. Bouve and Lasalle Corbell Pickett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Fourth Massachusetts Cavalry in the Closing Scenes of the War for the Maintenance of the Union, from Richmond to Appomatox

Author: William B. Arnold
        Edward T. Bouve
        Lasalle Corbell Pickett

Release Date: April 13, 2010 [EBook #31977]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOURTH MASSACHUSETTS CAVALRY ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  The
  Fourth Massachusetts
  Cavalry
  in the
  Closing Scenes of the War
  for the Maintenance
  of the Union


  From Richmond
  to Appomattox




[Illustration: Col. Arnold A. Rand

4th Massachusetts Volunteer Cavalry]




  The Battle at High Bridge
  by
  Major Edward T. Bouve, U. S. V.


The life of the American Cavalry is almost coeval with that of the
American people. Laws were passed for the formation of a mounted force in
1648, when the colony of Massachusetts Bay had not yet attained its
majority. Twenty-seven years later, in 1675, when the war with Metacomet
(King Philip) broke out there were five troops of cavalry, which in point
of equipment, discipline and appearance, had received the commendation of
European officers who had seen them.

Captain Prentice's troop formed a part of Major-General Winslow's army,
which fought at Narrangansett Fort. It participated in the terrible march
and the awful battle which ensued. Of that battle, the latest and most
exhaustive of its historians says:

"This must be classed as one of the most glorious victories ever achieved
in our history, and considering conditions, as displaying heroism both in
stubborn patience and dashing intrepidity never excelled in American
warfare."

So much for the first great battle in which Massachusetts cavalry took an
honorable part. I may be pardoned for referring to it in this paper, on
account of the singular coincidence, that in one of the last, and
unquestionably one of the most brilliant actions ever fought in
America--the Battle at High Bridge--Massachusetts horsemen accomplished a
very difficult thing: they succeeded in adding a yet deeper lustre to the
laurels which have ever adorned the standards of the American Cavalry.

The story of the fight near High Bridge, Virginia, is but an account of an
obscure skirmish, if the numbers engaged and its duration be solely
considered; judged, however, by the fierce intensity of the struggle, and
the carnage, together with the results, which alone, yet amply, justified
the apparent madness of the attack, it is seen to be one of the most
notable of the achievements of those heroic days; for it led to the
culmination of the campaign and end of the war, at Appomattox. It was
called by Mr. Hay and Mr. Nicolay, in their history of Abraham Lincoln,
the most gallant and pathetic battle of the war.

The Fourth Regiment of Massachusetts Cavalry had been subjected to a
training and discipline which caused it to develop rapidly into one of the
finest cavalry regiments in the army. The officers were nearly all veteran
soldiers, educated in the hard school of war. A large proportion of the
men in the ranks had seen service, and the rank and file, as a whole,
proved to be such as any officer might be proud to lead.

The quality of the regiment is easily accounted for, when it is considered
that its first colonel left the lasting impress of himself upon it; that
colonel was Arnold A. Rand.

From the very beginning of its service in the field, the regiment had the
hard fortune to be cut up into detachments and details for special duty.
This was probably due to the good opinion entertained of it by the
general; but it was very trying and disappointing to the colonel, and to
all who had hoped to be serving, as earlier orders--too soon
countermanded--directed, with Sheridan.

At the opening of the last campaign, the first and third battalions were
in Virginia. Three squadrons, with the field and staff, were attached to
the headquarters of General Ord, commanding the Army of the James; two
were at the headquarters of the Twenty-fourth, and two at those of the
Twenty-fifth Army corps. One was at Fort Magruder, where it had been for
many months, doing outpost and picket duty and engaged in scouting and
raiding. The second battalion was in active service in South Carolina and
Florida.

Before the spring campaign opened, the command of the regiment had passed
to Francis Washburn of Lancaster, a member of a family distinguished for
its public services. This young gentleman was a patrician in the best
sense of the word. With the most brilliant prospects in life, he, like his
brother, left all to serve the Republic, and both drew "the gret prize o'
death in battle."

In physical proportions, in personal beauty, in superb daring, in
high-minded devotion to every duty, he was the ideal of a cavalry leader,
and a worthy successor to the first regimental commander.

One of the worst features of the internal economy of our armies during the
civil war, was the detailing of officers and men individually from
fighting regiments; the officers to serve on staff, the men for
orderlies, wagoners, hospital service and other special duties which
reduced the fighting strength to a minimum compared with what it should
have been. Probably the same custom would rule now.

Owing to this pernicious, although at the time unavoidable system, as well
as to the ordinary casualties of the service, the three squadrons of the
Fourth Cavalry under the immediate command of Colonel Washburn at the
beginning of active service, had been reduced to one hundred and fifty
men.

Orders were issued on the 27th of March to break camp, preparatory to the
resumption of movements against the lines of communication between the
besieged cities and their sources of supply.

Richmond and Petersburg were evacuated on the third of April, General Lee
moving swiftly toward Amelia. The Federal armies marched at once in hot
pursuit, the Army of the James taking the general direction of the
Lynchburg railroad, reaching Burkesville on the evening of April 5th. That
same evening, Lee left Amelia Court house, pushing rapidly in the
direction of High Bridge, a long trestle over the Appomattox near
Farmville. Could he reach this bridge, cross and destroy it, he might hope
to succeed in gaining the mountains beyond Lynchburg.

The Army of the James instantly changed direction in pursuit. Lee's
objective point became evident, and General Ord determined to destroy the
bridge, if it were possible to accomplish this, before Lee could reach it.
To this end, he detached Colonel Washburn, with the three squadrons of his
own cavalry, now reduced by further details to thirteen officers and
sixty-seven troopers, together with two small regiments of infantry, and
directed him to push on rapidly and burn the bridge.

Information had been received through scouts that the structure was not
defended by any fortifications whatever. Reports also came in that the
Confederates were badly demoralized. In consequence of these stories,
which would appear to have been accepted as fully reliable at
headquarters, Washburn was ordered to attack any force which he might
meet, as it would certainly fall away before him.

It was a perilous order to give Washburn, for his valor was ever the
better part of his discretion.

Some of our generals seem to have been strangely misled as to the spirit
of the Confederates remaining in arms. Never had they fought more
fiercely than in those last days of the struggle. Their skeleton
battalions threw themselves upon our heavy lines at Sailor's Creek as
desperately as they charged under Pickett and Edward Johnson at
Gettysburg, and their artillery was never more superbly served than when
they were attacked in flank by Gregg's brigade on the seventh of April,
when that general was made prisoner and his brigade driven in complete
discomfiture by the famous Washington Artillery of New Orleans.

On the morning of the sixth, before dawn, Washburn's little detachment
took up its route, the infantry, especially, being in poor condition for
the severe and peculiarly dangerous service to which they were called, for
they were exhausted by the forced marches which had been indispensable
during the preceding three days. The distance was sixteen miles to
Farmville. After having been two hours or so upon the road, Washburn
satisfied himself that the rebel army, moving diagonally toward the
Appomattox, had closed in upon his rear, cutting him off from the Army of
the James. There were also unmistakable indications that Confederate
columns were moving in front of his command, as well as on its flank. The
detachment was thus marching practically among divisions of the enemy, who
were evidently ignorant of its proximity.

Meanwhile, General Ord had learned of the movements of the Confederates,
and at once despatched Brevet Brigadier General Theodore Read, adjutant
general of the Army of the James, to overtake Washburn and cause him to
fall back to the main army. Read, with one orderly, contrived to elude the
various bodies of the enemy and finally joined Washburn, just before his
command reached the vicinity of the bridge.

Upon reconnoitering the country about the bridge, it was found that the
information as to its not being fortified was entirely false. A strong
redoubt mounting four guns protected it, and the ground around it was
open, with morasses in front rendering it almost impossible of access.
Washburn considered, however, that a sudden attack on its rear side by
cavalry, might be successful.

In pursuance of this plan, he left Read with the infantry in a narrow belt
of woodland near the Burkesville road, and moved away to make a detour in
order to come upon the rear of the fortification.


[Illustration: Col. Francis Washburn]


The column soon reached a small stream spanned by a bridge, the planks of
which had been torn up. Lieutenant Davis with the advanced guard,
dashed across the stream and laid the planks under sharp fire from a force
of dismounted cavalry which occupied low earthworks on the further side.
Washburn soon came up with the main body, and throwing out a line of
skirmishers, attacked so vigorously that after a fight of half an hour's
duration, the enemy retreated toward Farmville. Here they were reinforced,
and Washburn soon found their numbers so great and their artillery fire so
heavy, that they could not be driven. Moreover there was incessant
musketry firing from the place where he had left the infantry, indicating
an attack upon them, and he thought best to withdraw and go to their
support.

A sharp ride of a few moments brought the cavalry to the scene of action.
Had the Burkesville road been followed for a short distance farther the
column would have rounded a bend in the road, and come upon a strong body
of Confederate cavalry which was moving in the direction of the firing;
but at a point in rear of where the fighting was going on, Washburn left
the road and led his men through the woods and along the bed of a ravine,
then up a hill, where he halted to learn the state of affairs.

The little line of infantry, outflanked and outnumbered, was falling back
fighting, pushed by a brigade of dismounted cavalry, while regiments of
horse were galloping up on the flanks and forming for a charge. The
infantry were clearly exhausted and their ammunition was used up, but
Washburn, after a short consultation with Read, sent his adjutant to rally
them, and determined by a furious attack upon the dismounted troops of the
enemy, to throw them back on their cavalry and thus, supported by the
infantry, to wrest victory from the enemy. He then led the column along
the crest of the slope, and forming line, turned to his men and explained
his purpose, well knowing what he could expect from the splendid fellows.

Then Washburn ordered "Forward!" The line trotted down the slope. In a
moment came his clear call "Gallop, march! Charge!" And to the music from
the brazen throats of their own trumpets chiming with their fierce battle
shout, those seventy-eight Massachusetts horsemen hurled themselves upon
the heavy masses of the foe.

For a few moments the air was bright with the flashing of sabres, and
shattered by the explosion of carbine and pistol, while screams of rage
mingled with the cries of the wounded and all the hideous sounds of a
savage hand-to-hand fight. As all this died away, it was seen that the
immediate body of troops which the Fourth Cavalry had struck was
practically annihilated. Their dead and wounded were scattered thickly
over the field, while the crowd of prisoners taken was embarrassing to the
captors. Driving these before them back toward the hill, to which they
must retire to reform for attack upon the enemy's horse (for Washburn's
mere handful of men forbade his leaving any to form the reserve without
which cavalry almost never can charge without great risk) they were
astounded at the sight which presented itself on the Burkesville road. As
far as the eye could reach, it was filled with Confederate cavalry, and
lines of battle were forming as rapidly as possible and advancing swiftly
to the aid of their defeated van.

All hope of victory or of escape from such a field was now utterly gone,
but the colonel and his men were mad with the fury of battle, and wild
with exultation over the bloody triumph already achieved. But one thought
possessed them. The little battalion swept down the slope once more,
pressing close behind their knightly leader and their blue standard. They
crashed through three lines of their advancing enemies, tearing their
formation asunder as the tornado cuts its way through the forest. But now,
order and coherence were lost, and the troopers mingled with the
Confederates in a bitter hand-to-hand struggle. A few scattered fighters
were rallied from out this fearful melee by the gallant Captain Hodges,
than whom a more chivalrous soldier never drew sabre. He led them in a
last furious charge, in which he fell, as he would have wished, "amid the
battle's wildest tide."

By this time, all was lost. Eight of the officers lay dead or wounded upon
the field. Three were prisoners, their horses having been killed under
them. The surgeon and chaplain, being non-combatants, were captured while
in attendance upon the wounded.

The battle at High Bridge was finished, for General Read had been mortally
wounded at the first fire after the infantry had rallied in support of the
cavalry attack, and the two small regiments were overwhelmed and compelled
to surrender as soon as the cavalry had ceased to be a factor.

Colonel Washburn had been shot in the mouth and sabred as he fell from his
horse. He was found on the field with the other dead and wounded the next
day, when the advance of the Army of the James came up. He was taken to
the hospital at Point of Rocks but insisted upon being sent to his home
in Massachusetts, where he died in the arms of his mother. Before his
death, he was, at Grant's request, brevetted as Brigadier General.

Of the other officers, Lieutenant Colonel Jenkins was severely wounded, as
were Captain Caldwell and Lieutenants Belcher and Thompson. Captains
Hodges and Goddard were killed, and Lieutenant Davis shot after having
been made a prisoner, for resenting an insult offered him by a rebel
officer. The adjutant, Lieutenant Lathrop, after his horse had been killed
under him, was taken into the woods to be shot, because his captor
asserted that he had slain his brother in the fight. Fortunately a
Confederate staff-officer observed the proceeding, and rescued him from
his would-be murderer.

Happily, the casualties among the enlisted men were much less in
proportion than among the officers. They had to a man fought with the most
desperate valor, keeping up the struggle after all the officers were down,
until absolutely ingulfed in the masses of the enemy.

In telling of the practical annihilation of a body of troops, the
statement that their standard was saved from capture seems almost
incredible; yet such was the case in this instance. The color sergeant, a
gallant soldier from Hingham by the name of Thomas Hickey, had carried the
standard through the hottest of the battle. At the last moment, seeing
that it was impossible to save it from capture except by destroying it, he
managed to elude the enemies who were closing in upon him, and putting
spurs to his horse, flew toward a hut which he had observed in the woods,
and threw himself from his charger just as he reached it, with his foes
close upon him. Rushing it, he thrust his precious battle flag into a fire
which was blazing on the hearth. The painted silk flashed up in flame, and
by the time that his pursuers broke in, it was ashes!

His life was spared in consideration of his devoted bravery, and he
subsequently received a commission from the Governor of the Commonwealth,
in recognition of his heroic deed.

The losses of the Confederates in this action were at least a half greater
in number than Washburn's whole force. By their own report, there were a
hundred killed and wounded, among them a general, one colonel, three
majors and a number of officers of lower grade.

The Battle at High Bridge was at first thought to have been a useless
sacrifice. It was a sacrifice indeed, but it unquestionably hastened the
termination of the war, by days, and perhaps weeks.

After the surrender, Lee's Inspector General said to Ord,

"To the sharpness of that fight, the cutting off of Lee's army at
Appomattox was probably owing. So fierce were the charges of Colonel
Washburn and his men, and so determined their fighting, that General Lee
received the impression that they must be supported by a large part of the
army, and that his retreat was cut off."

Lee consequently halted and began to intrench; and this delay gave time
for Ord to come up, and enabled Sheridan to intercept the enemy at
Sailor's Creek.

The Confederate General Rosser said to a member of the regiment whom he
met after the war:

"You belonged to the Fourth Massachusetts Cavalry? Give me your hand! I
have been many a day in hot fights. I never saw anything approaching that
at High Bridge. While your colonel kept his saddle, everything went down
before him!"

The Confederate troops at High Bridge were Rosser's and a part of Fitz
Hugh Lee's divisions.

"Was your colonel drunk or crazy this morning, that he attacked with less
than one hundred men the best fighting division of the Confederate
cavalry?" asked a rebel officer of a wounded captain of the Fourth; "We
have seen hard fighting, but we never heard of anything like this before!"

The Confederate officers had at first utterly refused to credit the
stories of their prisoners, insisting that the small force would never
have fought so fiercely unless it had been the advance of a strong column.

Grant says in his memoirs.

"The Confederates took this to be only the advance of a larger column
which had headed them off, and so stopped to intrench; so that this
gallant band had checked the progress of a strong detachment of the
Confederate army. This stoppage of Lee's column no doubt saved to us the
trains following."




[Illustration: Major Atherton H. Stevens

4th Mass. Volunteer Cavalry]


  The First United States Flag Raised In Richmond After the War.
  By Mrs. Lasalle Corbell Pickett,
  Wife of Major-General George E. Pickett, C. S. A.


The first knell of the evacuation of Richmond sounded on Sunday morning
while we were on our knees in St. Paul's Church, invoking God's protecting
care for our absent loved ones, and blessings on our cause.

The intense excitement, the tolling of the bells, the hasty parting, the
knowledge that all communication would be cut off between us and our loved
ones, and the dread, undefined fear in our helplessness and desertion,
make a nightmare memory.

General Ewell had orders for the destruction of the public buildings,
which orders our Secretary of War, Gen. J. C. Breckenridge strove
earnestly but without avail to have countermanded. The order, alas! was
obeyed beyond the "letter of the law."

The terrible conflagration was kindled by the Confederate authorities, who
applied the torch to the Shockoe warehouse, it, too, being classed among
the public buildings because of the tobacco belonging to France and
England stored in it. A fresh breeze was blowing from the south; the fire
swept on in its haste and fury over a great area in an almost incredibly
short time, and by noon the flames had transformed into a desert waste all
the city bounded by Seventh and Fifteenth Streets, and Main Street and the
river. One thousand houses were destroyed. The streets were filled with
furniture and every description of wares, dashed down to be trampled in
the mud or buried where they lay.

At night a saturnalia began. About dark, the Government commissary began
the destruction of its stores. Soldiers and citizens gathered in front,
catching the liquor in basins and pitchers; some with their hats and some
with their boots. It took but a short time for this to make a
manifestation as dread as the flames. The crowd became a howling mob, so
frenzied that the officers of the law had to flee for their lives,
reviving memories of 1781, when the British under Arnold rode down
Richmond Hill, and, invading the city, broke open the stores and emptied
the provisions and liquors into the gutters, making even the uninitiated
cows and hogs drunk for days.

All through the night, crowds of men, women, and children traversed the
streets, loading themselves with supplies and plunder. At midnight,
soldiers drunk with vile liquor, followed by a reckless crowd as drunk as
themselves, dashed in the plate-glass windows of the stores, and made a
wreck of everything.

About nine o'clock on Monday morning, terrific shell explosions, rapid and
continuous, added to the terror of the scene, and gave the impression that
the city was being shelled by the retreating Confederate army from the
south side. But the explosions were soon found to proceed from the
Government arsenal and laboratory, then in flames. Later in the morning, a
merciful Providence caused a lull in the breeze. The terrific explosion of
the laboratory and of the arsenal caused every window in our home to
break. The old plate-glass mirrors, built in the walls, were cracked and
shattered.

Fort Darling was blown up, and later on the rams. It was eight o'clock
when the Federal troops entered the city. It required the greatest effort
to tame down the riotous, crazed mob, and induce them to take part in the
struggle to save their own. The firemen, afraid of the soldiers who had
obeyed the orders to light the torch, would not listen to any appeals or
entreaties, and so the flames were under full headway, fanned by a
southern breeze, when the Union soldiers came to the rescue.

The flouring mills caught fire from the tobacco houses, communicating it
to Cary and Main streets. Every bank was destroyed. The War Department
was a mass of ruins; the _Enquirer_ and _Dispatch_ offices were in ashes;
and the county court-house, the American Hotel, and most of the finest
stores of the city were ruined.

Libby Prison and the Presbyterian church escaped. Such a reign of terror
and pillage, fire and flame, fear and despair! The yelling and howling and
swearing and weeping and wailing beggar description. Families houseless
and homeless under the open sky!

I shall never forget General Weitzel's command, composed exclusively of
colored troops, as I saw them through the dense black columns of smoke.
General Weitzel had for some time been stationed on the north side of the
James River, but a few miles from Richmond, and he had only to march in
and take possession. He despatched Major A. H. Stevens of the Fourth
Massachusetts cavalry, and Major E. E. Graves of his staff, with about a
hundred mounted men, to reconnoitre the roads and works leading to
Richmond. They had gone but a little distance into the Confederate lines,
when they saw a shabby, old-fashioned carriage, drawn by a pair of lean,
lank horses, the occupants waving a white flag. They met this
flag-of-truce party at the line of fortifications, just beyond the
junction of the Osborne turnpike and New Market road. The carriage
contained the mayor of Richmond--Colonel Mayo--Judge Meredith of the
Supreme Court, and Judge Lyons. The fourth worthy I cannot recall. Judge
Lyons, our former minister to England, and one of the representative men
of Virginia, made the introductions in his own characteristic way, and
then Colonel Mayo, who was in command of the flag-of-truce party, handed
to Major Stevens a small slip of wall paper, on which was written the
following: "It is proper to formally surrender to the Federal authorities
the city of Richmond, hitherto capital of the Confederate States of
America, and the defenses protecting it up to this time." That was all.
The document was approved of, and Major Stevens most courteously accepted
the terms for his commanding general, to whom it was at once transmitted,
and moved his column upon the evacuated city, taking possession and saving
it from ashes.

His first order was to sound the alarm bells and to take command at once
of the fire department, which consisted of fourteen substitute men, those
who were exempt from service because of disease, two steam fire engines,
four worthless hand engines, and a large amount of hose, destroyed by the
retreating half-crazed Confederates. His next order was to raise the stars
and stripes over the Capitol. Quick as thought, two soldiers, one from
Company E and one from Company H of the Fourth Massachusetts cavalry,
crept to the summit and planted the flag of the nation. Two bright,
tasteful guidons were hoisted by the halyards in place of the red cross.
The living colors of the Union were greeted, while our "Warriors' banner
took its flight to meet the warrior's soul."

That flag, whose design has been accredited alike to both George
Washington and John Adams, was raised over Virginia by Massachusetts, in
place of the one whose kinship and likeness had not, even after renewed
effort, been entirely destroyed. For by the adoption of the stars and bars
(three horizontal bars of equal width--the middle one white, the others
red--with a blue union of nine stars in a circle) by the Confederate
Congress in March, 1861, the Confederate flag was made so akin and so
similar to that of the nation, as to cause confusion; so in 1863 the stars
and bars was supplanted by a flag with a white field, having the battle
flag (a red field charged with a blue saltier, on which were thirteen
stars) for a union. This, having been mistaken for a flag of truce, was
altered by covering the outer half of the field beyond the union with a
vertical red bar. This was the last flag of the Confederacy.

Richmond will testify that the soldiers of Massachusetts were worthy of
the honor of raising the first United States flag over her Capitol--the
Capitol of the Confederacy--and also to the unvarying courtesy of Major
Stevens, and the fidelity with which he kept his trust.




[Illustration: Capt. A. F. Ray]


  The Fourth Massachusetts Cavalry

  In the Closing Scenes of the War for the Maintenance of the Union, From
  Richmond to Appomattox.

  BY
  WM. B. ARNOLD,
  Formerly Company H 4th Massachusetts Cavalry.


During the winter and spring of 1864 and 1865 squadrons E and H of the 4th
Massachusetts cavalry were encamped near the headquarters of General
Weitzel commanding the Twenty-fifth Army Corps, then a part of the Army of
the James. Our command was detached from our regiment and doing duty as
orderlies and couriers at Division and Brigade headquarters and Artillery
Brigade headquarters, as well as performing Provost duty at corps
headquarters.

Our command numbered about eighty men in charge of Captain A. F. Ray of
Company H, 4th Massachusetts cavalry. He was an officer of unusual
ability. The Army of the James held possession north of the James, their
lines extending from Deep Bottom, a few miles below Dutch Gap to Fort
Harrison and around to the New Market road.

Our position was made very strong and withstood the attack of the
Confederates several times after it was taken from them in Sept. 1864.
Their defenses in our front were equally strong. In addition they had
several iron clads in the James River to assist in the defense of
Richmond. Our gunboats were down the river, none of them, up to this time,
having ventured above the Dutch Gap canal.

The afternoon and evening of April second, 1865 indicated that something
unusual was likely to occur. The Artillery firing in the direction of
Petersburg in the evening, and during the night of the second was heavy
and continuous, and in the night the sky was lighted up toward Richmond
which proved to be the Ram Virginia on fire. When the fire reached the
magazine there was a tremendous explosion. Soon after this it was reported
that the Confederates were evacuating the works in our front. An order
came from General Weitzel for a detail of fifty cavalry which was
immediately mounted, and reported at corps headquarters.

We were commanded by Captain A. F. Ray of H squadron, accompanied by
officers from Twenty-fifth army corps headquarters, and the entire command
in charge of Major Atherton H. Stevens of the 4th Massachusetts cavalry
and Provost Marshall of the 25th Army Corps.

We proceeded at once through our fortified line and approaching the
Confederate line found that the troops were gone. Working our way several
miles toward Richmond, we could see through the fog a body of Confederate
infantry. Major Stevens immediately ordered a charge, and Captain Ray
quickly responded with his men. At our near approach they surrendered. We
continued "on to Richmond," and were soon inside the inner works that were
impregnable when manned by a sufficient number for defence. With deep
ditches and fallen trees to entangle attacking parties, the Artillery and
Infantry commanded the approach in every direction without exposing
themselves.

The elaborate preparations for defense kept our armies at bay for months
around Petersburg, and Richmond was prepared for standing off superior
numbers by the best earthworks that our West Point engineers who were in
the Confederate army could devise. As we entered these works we saw a man
approaching with a flag of truce.

In the distance were mounted men and carriages. We halted and Major
Stevens and his officers went forward and conferred with the party, who
proved to be the Mayor of Richmond accompanied by Judge Medereth and other
prominent people of Richmond. The city was formally surrendered to Major
Stevens and we then went forward at a rapid pace, and coming round a turn
in the roadway at the Rockets, came in full view of Richmond.

We halted for a moment to contemplate the scene. A portion of the city
toward the James river was on fire. The black smoke was rolling up in
great volumes. Major Stevens said "everyone of us should feel as proud as
if we were promoted to be Brigadier Generals." We gave three cheers and
went on, and were soon in the streets of Richmond passing Libby Prison;
and we clattered up the paved street on the gallop to the Capitol, and
were soon in the space in front of the Capitol building.

Major Stevens, with some of the officers, rushed into the building, and
soon the guidons of Company E and H were fluttering from the top of the
building. We were formed around the equestrian statue of Washington, and
we gave three times three, and a Tiger, that indicated to spectators that
we were there. Richmond was ours, after four long years of tremendous
struggle and sacrifice. I, for one, thought of the splendid services of
thousands of the best troops ever rallied to maintain a just cause. That
our detail was privileged to land first in Richmond with the flags of
Massachusetts, was certainly appreciated by us.

But our work was not over. A large area of the city toward the river was
on fire. To add to the fury of the flames the Arsenals were blowing up and
the shells were continually exploding. Corporal Macy and myself went with
Captain Ray to ascertain if the bridges connecting Richmond with
Manchester were destroyed by the evacuating Confederates.

We went up Main street to Eighth street and then across to Cary street,
and turned to the South, and went by burning buildings until we obtained a
view of the bridges. The two bridges were on fire, and burning rapidly
from the Manchester side. Everything in front of us was on fire; buildings
blowing up and flames roaring in every direction.

We started back and observed on our left a fire in a building which was
stored with ammunition. We galloped past the building and turned the
corner toward Main street nearby when the building exploded. As we emerged
from the smoke and cinders, Captain Ray remarked that we had only five
seconds to spare and a close shave, even where we were when the building
went up. We returned to the Capitol and reported to Major Stevens. I was
sent with a detail to the Davis Mansion with instructions to leave a guard
on the house. I found everything unmolested.

The desk used by the Confederate President was in disorder and everything
indicated a hasty departure. I returned to my company, and we were kept
busy in restoring order. Soon our troops began to pour into the city and
order reigned. Energetic measures to stop the destruction of the city were
promptly taken. The blue lines looked good to me, and the people soon
realized that instead of destroyers they were saviors, for they saved the
city not already burned by the folly of the retreating Confederates.

When we arrived in Richmond there was disorder, frenzy and chaos on every
hand. Major Stevens restored order and confidence in a remarkably short
time under conditions that were most trying. The troops as they arrived,
were distributed where they could work effectively. Streets and residences
were immediately guarded. The soldiers did not leave their commands to
enrich themselves, and perfect order was restored before nightfall. Our
little band of cavalry was everywhere, and making good for lack of numbers
by energetic performance until the arrival of the infantry. And after they
came we were in the saddle till late at night.

We encamped for the night in the yard of the Female Institute building,
and we were a tired but happy band. The next day, April 4th, was quiet.
The infernal condition of fire, smoke and explosion and continuous
bursting of shells was changed to a scene of waste and ruin wrought in the
fire district, which covered about one third of the city. The day was made
eventful by the appearance of President Lincoln in the city. He came up
from City Point and walked up the street alone with his boy. General
Devens immediately received him. Mr. Lincoln met with a splendid ovation
from the troops and the colored people as he rode about the city. He rode
in a carriage accompanied by General Devens and other officers, escorted
by a detail of cavalry from E and H squadrons of the 4th Massachusetts
cavalry, commanded by Captain A. F. Ray.

On the morning of April 5th, the detachment that composed the detail that
first entered Richmond on the morning of April 3, 1865, started to join
its regiment, commanded by Colonel Washburn. They were with General Ord
commanding the army of the James in pursuit of General Lee's retreating
forces. We proceeded by way of Petersburg through Dinwiddie County and
Amelia Courthouse to Burkeville Junction, arriving there April 7th. There
we found that Colonel Washburn's command was engaged at High Bridge the
day before, meeting with heavy loss, but emerging from the conflict with
much honor and a splendid record of achievement.

The engagement is well described by our comrade, Captain Bouve of the 4th
Massachusetts cavalry and will interest surviving comrades of the
regiment, and all who love the defenders of their country. Colonel
Washburn and many others of our regiment were in the field hospital at
Burkeville Junction and Captain Ray and Lieutenant Miller visited them,
and returning to our camp, gave us a graphic description of the charges of
our comrades the day before. Colonel Washburn survived his injuries only
a few days. He told Captain Ray that "if I had the whole of the 4th
regiment with me I would have annihilated Fitz Hugh Lee and Rosser." This
was the marvelous courage and spirit of the man, "a gentleman and a
soldier."

We immediately started on to report to the headquarters of the army of the
Potomac. All the way from Petersburg there was evidence of conflict. At
Amelia Courthouse we found the remnants of Ewell's corps of the
Confederate army. Artillery, wagons and ammunition piled up in disorder;
from people along the way reports of fighting. The Confederate troops
hurriedly passed down the highway, to be immediately followed by the blue
lines of federal troops. On the morning of the ninth of April we began to
catch up with the army of the Potomac.

Through the lines of the sixth and ninth corps we rode, until early in the
afternoon came the report that Lee had surrendered. You ought to have seen
the faces of the soldiers of the army of the Potomac then. They looked
like heroes to me. When we reached the Confederate lines we kept on
through their camps and landed at General Meade's headquarters at
Appomattox C. H., where we were immediately put on duty to assist in the
work of paroling and disbanding the Confederate army.

A detail from my squadron went to Lynchburg one afternoon with General
Gibbons returning in the night. When the arrangements of paroling the
Confederate army were complete and General Lee was at liberty to depart
from his army, an order came from army headquarters for a detail of
cavalry to escort General Lee from his lines. The escort was made up from
the 4th Massachusetts cavalry and I was privileged to be one of them.
Sixteen men composed the platoon and Lieutenant Lovell of our regiment was
in command. I was right guide of the detail, and I thought at the time
that we were pretty good representatives of the Union cavalry.

We had H guidon with us which was one of the flags that was the first in
Richmond. We went to General Lee's headquarters and Lieutenant Lovell
reported to General Lee.

He was courteously received and asked to wait until General Lee and his
staff had breakfast and completed arrangements for their departure. We
dismounted a short distance away. General Lee seated himself at a table
made from a hard tack box and ate his last breakfast (consisting of hard
tack, fried pork and coffee without milk), with the army of Northern
Virginia. He was dressed in a neat, gray uniform and was a splendid
looking soldier. Commanding officers of corps and divisions of the
Confederate army and other officers then came to take leave of him. He was
a short distance from me and his conversation was evidently words of
encouragement and advice. Almost every one of the officers went away in
tears. Then we mounted, and General Lee's party started through the lines
of the remnant of the Army of Northern Virginia for his home in Richmond.

Then commenced an ovation that seemed to me a wonderful manifestation of
confidence and affection for this great military chieftain. From the time
we left his camp till we passed the last of his regiments the men seemed
to come from everywhere and the "Rebel Yell" was continuous. The little
guidon of our squadron fluttered in the breeze and seemed silently to
voice the sentiment of Webster, "Liberty and Union now and forever, one
and inseparable."

The war was truly over and General Lee was departing for his home to
devote the remainder of his life in peaceful pursuits. We continued with
him a short distance in Buckingham County where the party halted. General
Lee rode up to Lieutenant Lovell and thanked him for the escort, and
saluted as he went his way, while we returned to Appomattox. At night the
army of Northern Virginia was gone. The Union army was preparing to take
up the line of march for their homes. The years of achievement and
sacrifice have been commented on by eloquent orators. I have endeavored to
pen a simple narrative to mention events as they appeared to me.

When the army started from Appomattox they were rejoiced to contemplate
changed conditions. At night camp fires were burning. The dangerous duty
of picket and scouting and fighting was a thing of the past. Everybody
felt elated and happy.

The news of President Lincoln's assassination came, and quiet and sadness
reigned. It seemed a great pity that this should come to put a nation in
mourning, at a time when rejoicing for the Nation redeemed, was universal.
Our detachment returned to Richmond and we remained with our regiment,
doing duty in restoring order in and around Petersburg and Richmond until
late in the fall of 1865 when we were mustered out, the last Massachusetts
Volunteer Regiment to return home.




Death of the War Horse

The Death of the Old War Horse which Col Tilden of the Sixteenth Maine
rode during the war, prompted the Rev. Nathaniel Butler to write the
following lines.

The sentiment expressed naturally appeals to anyone and especially to a
soldier who rode a horse during the war to maintain the Union.


  Farewell, my horse! thy work is done,
    Thy splendid form lies low,
  Thy limbs of steel have lost their strength,
    Thy flashing eye its glow.

  No more thy quivering nostrils sniff
    The battle from afar,
  No more beneath thy flying feet
    The plains with thunder jar.

  For thou wert born a hero soul,
    In days when heroes fought,
  When men, borne by thy glorious strength,
    Immortal laurels sought.

  Seated upon thy nerve-strung form,
    Another life was mine,
  And well I knew the same high thrill
    Ran through my soul and thine.

  A throne thou wert to sit upon,
    And true as steel within,
  Whene'er I felt thy brave heart beat,
    My own has braver been.

  And when the bugle's call to Charge
    Over the column ran,
  Thy arching crest, "with thunder clothed,"
    Loved best to lead the van.

  Upon the march, with tireless feet,
    Through mountain, gorge and plain,
  When others strayed thy place was kept,
    Through all the long campaign.

  But now, thy last, long halt is made:
    Thy last campaign is o'er;
  The bugle call, the battle shout
    Shall thrill thee never more.

  Where art thou gone--old friend and true?
    What place hast thou to fill?
  For it may be thy spirit form
    Somewhere is marching still.

  Here there are those whom we call men,
    Whose souls full well I know
  Another life may not deserve
    One-half so well as thou.

  And natures such as thine has been
    Another life may claim,
  And God may have a place for them
    Within his wide domain.

  His armies tread their glorious march
    Over the eternal plain,
  Their leader rides a snow white steed,
    Who follow in his train?

  We may not ever meet again;
    But, wheresoe'er I go,
  A cherished place within my heart
    Thou'lt have, old friend, I know.

  God made us both, and we have marched
    Firm friends whilst thou wert here;
  I only know I shall not blush
    To meet thee anywhere.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "Brittish" corrected to "British" (page 20)
  "pickett" corrected to "picket" (page 32)






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fourth Massachusetts Cavalry in
the Closing Scenes of the War for the Maintenance of the Union, from Richmond to Appomatox, by William B. Arnold and Edward T. Bouve and Lasalle Corbell Pickett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOURTH MASSACHUSETTS CAVALRY ***

***** This file should be named 31977.txt or 31977.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/9/7/31977/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
