The Project Gutenberg EBook of A History of the Army Experience of William
A. Canfield, by William A. Canfield

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A History of the Army Experience of William A. Canfield

Author: William A. Canfield

Release Date: April 15, 2010 [EBook #31998]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARMY EXPERIENCE--WILLIAM A. CANFIELD ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  _OFFICE OF SECRETARY OF STATE,_
  _Concord, N. H., March, 1869._

  _This is to certify that the author has served the
  country faithfully; lost his arm at Petersburg; and
  is of good report by all who know him._

  (Signed,)      _J. D. Lyman_,
                         _Secretary of State_.




  A HISTORY
  OF
  WILLIAM A. CANFIELD.


  Sold only by Himself. Price 25 cents.


  MANCHESTER, N. H.:
  PRINTED BY CHARLES F. LIVINGSTON.
  1869.




  A HISTORY
  OF THE
  ARMY EXPERIENCE
  OF
  WILLIAM A. CANFIELD.


  BY HIMSELF.


  _PRICE TWENTY-FIVE CENTS._


  MANCHESTER, N. H.:
  C. F. LIVINGSTON, PRINTER.
  1869.




_PREFACE._


READERS: In writing this little book, I do not claim to issue a work of
choice language, nor to present any new facts or startling developements
concerning the general history of the war. My intention is simply to write
a short narrative of my life as a soldier in the Army of the Potomac and
South West, and in the Hospital.

Having lost my left arm from a wound received in front of Petersburg, I
have taken this method of procuring sufficient means to enable me to
engage in some business by which I may gain an honest livelihood for
myself and family.

Craving your kind indulgence, I bring my claim before you, hoping you will
grant it a favorable reception.

Yours respectfully,

WM. A. CANFIELD.




HISTORY.


I was born on the 10th of June, 1840, in Thornton, a small town in the
northern part of New Hampshire. I was the youngest of six children. Our
parents were poor in this world's goods, but rich in faith and in the
knowledge of God as it is in Christ Jesus. My early instructions were
limited to a common school, and I was deprived of this at the age of
twelve years. Had I improved even these few years, I might have been much
farther advanced than I now find myself. As it is, I have to regret many
misspent opportunities of my childhood.

My parents, as I have said before, were rich in faith, and it was first in
their thoughts to instill into the hearts of their children principles of
wisdom, virtue and love. Especially did our dear mother, both by precept
and example, endeavor to lead us in the right way.

The summer of 1853 I went to Franklin, N. H., to work in a hosiery mill. I
liked my work, had a good boarding place, and in a short time felt quite
at home.

I had been there several weeks, and there had been an unusual interest in
religious matters for some time; many had already sought and found God.
One after another of my associates had found peace in God through the
merits of Christ, yet I remained unmoved.

One evening several of the boarders invited me to go to the prayer
meeting. I went, little dreaming of the great blessing there was in store
for me that night. I felt no conviction of sin at this time, nor did I
until the invitation was given for those to arise who desired the prayers
of God's people. To my surprise the whole party that came with me
manifested a desire to be prayed for. Then for the first time in my life
did I feel an earnest consciousness of God's presence. My friends had left
me--God was with me, and I was afraid. Oh, how my poor heart shrank to
hide itself; how gladly would I have hid myself from the presence of God,
but I could not; the pure light of God's love was shining into my sinful
heart, making every plague-spot clearly visible to my spirit's vision.

We returned home. My sister, being one of Christ's little ones, invited
them to go into the sitting-room for a season of prayer. Thus was I again
left alone, but not long; for very soon I felt a gentle touch on my
shoulder, and heard sister's sweet voice saying: "Come, Will, and pray
with us."

I went, and in earnest prayer entreated God for Christ's sake to pardon my
sins. I did not plead long in vain, for Jesus was very near me, and when I
yielded my will to the Divine, how quickly He received me, and lovingly
sheltered me in His bosom. Thank God, I have found a hiding place there
ever since. When I came out of that room I was clothed and in my right
mind--I was no longer afraid. For was not God my father, Jesus my elder
brother, and Heaven my home?

I could hardly wait until Saturday night, I desired so much to tell my
dear parents of my new-found joy. But the week soon passed away, Saturday
night came, and I was home again.

I think my dear mother perceived the change almost as soon as she saw me.
I would here say that my father had for some time neglected family
worship, and was not enjoying much of spiritual life; but when I told them
of my new-found joy, father fell upon his knees praying fervently for
pardon for his neglect of duty, renewedly consecrating himself to the
Lord. Truly there was great rejoicing in that little cottage that night.
The family altar was again established, and we rejoiced greatly in the
love of God.

The time passed very quickly until the autumn of 1858, when I went to
Manchester to work for my brother in a hosiery mill, and boarded in his
family.

I soon connected myself with the M. E. Church in this place, and found
many warm friends. Among others, I became acquainted with Miss M. F.
Stewart, of New Hampton, N. H., and in due time married her. We had been
married about one year when the war broke out.

My parents always taught us to reverence the stars and stripes; I loved my
country's banner, and when rebel hands were raised to hurl it to the
ground, I felt as if I must go and bear a part in the great struggle. My
ancestors had fought bravely to establish the glorious liberty I had so
long enjoyed. It was hard, very hard, for me to leave those whom I loved
so dearly, but still harder to sit with folded hands here at home, while
others were dying for the aid I could render. Frequently, when about my
work, would my eye fall upon my hands (I have often thought it strange),
and they seemed to reproach me every time I looked at them. At last I
could bear it no longer; I felt sure it was my duty to go, and go I must.

I enlisted under H. D. Davis, at Manchester, N. H., July 12, 1862, in the
Ninth Regiment New Hampshire Volunteers. I went directly to Northfield, to
visit my parents and friends before going into camp. It is almost useless
for me to speak of the parting scene. I took leave of all my friends
except my wife and sister, with her husband. My aged parents were bowed
down with sorrow and grief. They had buried their oldest son and two
daughters; there were only three of us left--and now to lose me (for they
had little hope of ever seeing me again) was almost too much for them to
bear.

We went into camp the first of August. Spent the first night in the
barracks. I did not sleep much, I assure you, every thing was so
strange--so much noise and confusion of tongues. But I soon became
accustomed to my surroundings, and found real attractions in camp life.

I had always made it a rule to reprove sin whenever an opportunity
offered; but I soon found out what it meant to cast pearls before swine.

Then I adopted another plan; it was this: first, to watch every
opportunity of doing a good turn for my comrades. I interested myself in
the loved ones they had left at home--in a word, I tried to make them love
me; and I succeeded far beyond what I expected. I do not think there was
one in our company who would have seen any harm come to me if they could
have prevented it. Then, when occasion required, I could reprove sin
without being reproached and made to understand it was none of my
business.

Our time was mostly occupied in drilling, until the 24th of August, when
we were mustered into the United States' service. On the 29th, we struck
tents early in the morning and marched to the depot, where we took the
cars for the seat of war. It was a sad time with us that morning, as one
after another bid farewell to loved ones. Very few of those brave men ever
returned. I had previously taken leave of my friends and told them I
should return to them again.

We started from Concord about seven in the morning; large crowds were
gathered at the stations all along our route to encourage and cheer us.

We arrived in Washington on the first of September; laid in the barracks
near the station that night. The next morning, I got leave to look about
the city, and must confess I was sadly disappointed. I had expected to see
something grand, and perhaps I should if I had traveled far enough. As it
was, about all there were to be seen were cows and goats, with vast
numbers of swine running at large in the streets. I went back to the
barracks not very well pleased with our Capital.

In a very short time we had orders to fall in. We then crossed the long
bridge, and marched about three miles beyond, and camped for the night.
About midnight we received orders to turn out--the rebels were upon us. We
turned out in a hurry; formed a line across the road with bayonets fixed,
for we had as yet received no ammunition. We remained in line about twenty
minutes, and then started off on another road; marched about two miles at
double quick; were then ordered back to camp, without seeing or hearing a
single rebel. The next day, we marched about six miles up the Potomac.
Here we found work chopping down trees, and throwing up fortifications.

On the 4th of September, a part of the army of the Peninsula passed us on
their way to the second Bull Run battle. They were all worn out with
continual marching and fighting, and many looked as if they would fall by
the wayside. I said to myself as they were passing: Why are worn-out men
like these pressed to the front, while we are held back! Well, when the
order comes, we too shall have to go; until then, we must wait and shovel.
All I could do for them was to give them my ration of soft bread.

The 8th of September was my first night on picket duty in an enemy's
country. About nine o'clock it commenced raining very hard. I was relieved
about twelve; laid down near an old stump, and was soon fast asleep. When
I awoke, I found myself in a pond of water which nearly covered me. I
managed to get out of the water and back to camp. The result of this
ducking was the dysentery in its worst form. I was compelled to go
directly to the hospital, and receive such care as they had to give.

On the 10th, our regiment received orders to move. They joined the Second
Brigade, Second Division, Ninth Army Corps. Unable to walk I was carried
in an ambulance, until we came up with the regiment on the evening of the
11th, when I joined my company. My comrades soon made a good fire of rails
and did every thing they could for my comfort. J. W. Lathe got some green
corn and roasted it for me, and on the morning of the 12th, got me aboard
an ambulance again. I afterwards learned that he was reprimanded for
taking such an interest in me, and I shall ever remember his kindness with
gratitude.

On the 13th, we arrived at Frederick City, Md. During the day it was
rumored that an order from Gen. Lee had fallen into Gen. McClellan's
hands, which had so exposed the position of the enemy, that he soon gave
orders for the entire army to move forward.

Our column took the main pike road to Middletown. We arrived on the south
side of the town after dark, and went into a field that had been recently
plowed, where we bivouacked for the night.

On the 14th, at the battle of South Mountain, the enemy occupied the side
and top of the mountain on both sides of the road. I will not attempt to
describe the battle, for I did not participate in it; I was left by order
of the surgeon in the hospital just established in the village. It was a
large two story building, situated on the east side of the town. That
night I was put in the second story. The room was filled with the wounded
and dying.

At about three o'clock in the morning, I was obliged to go down. The moon
was still shining in all its beauty and loveliness over the western
hill-tops. As I turned the corner of the building a sight met my gaze
which baffles description.

There were about thirty dead bodies, mangled in every conceivable shape,
covered with blood, with eyes wide open glaring at me. My very blood run
cold with horror, and it was some minutes before I could pass them. Since
then, I have become accustomed to such scenes, but I can never recall that
sight without a feeling of dread.

On the 15th, the battle at South Mountain was still raging. All was
excitement. I had no thought of self now, but bent all my energies to the
task of caring for the wounded. There were two others with me, and we
tried in every possible way to alleviate their sufferings. We brought them
water, washed their wounds, and spoke words of comfort. We had no
experience in such things, but did the best we could.

The surgeon, who came round about nine o'clock, said we had done well.
After looking at some of the worst cases, he gave us orders, advising us
to do the best we could. For three days and nights I had neither sleep nor
rest, when I was compelled to give up and take my chance with the others.

The ladies here, I shall ever remember with gratitude; they were very kind
to us, bringing us many luxuries we should not otherwise have had.

I was now brought very low by the chronic diarrhea; I could hardly get up,
and still no help appeared in my case. True, the surgeon was very kind,
but I thought it rather hard when he told me "you must let it run. I
cannot help you, I have nothing to do with."

I had heard the ladies telling of one Polly Lincoln, who possessed much
skill. I thought perhaps she might cure me, so I made further inquiries in
regard to her, and learned that she lived most of the time alone in a hut
made of logs, not far from the hospital. She gathered her own herbs, made
her own medicine, and performed wonderful cures,--so they told me.

With the surgeon's permission, I soon found her out and told her my
complaint. "Oh!" said she, "I'll fix you all right in a week or two, only
keep up good courage." And to work she went, at once; made me a nice bed
on the floor, and fixed me a dose of herb tea in a very short time. I felt
very comfortable, I can assure you, that afternoon, as I lay there on the
floor, watching that good old Samaritan in her humble home; my heart was
filled with gratitude, and I felt safe in her hands.

There was only one room in the house, and that very poorly furnished;
still, every thing looked neat and home-like. There were two other
soldiers there at the same time; one from the 17th Michigan, with his leg
off, the other from Massachusetts, with his arm amputated at the
shoulder-joint. She took care of us all, and often assisted at the
hospital. I was with her two weeks, and then reported in person to the
surgeon in charge. He gave me leave to go back another week. At the end of
that time I was fit for duty. But I must not leave this good old mother
without saying a few more words. She was, in deed and in truth, a good
Samaritan to us all; and there are hundreds who can testify to the same
truth; hundreds who will remember her with heart-felt gratitude as long as
they live.

The soldier from Massachusetts died in a few days; the other was able to
go home in four weeks.

Some time after this, I received orders to report at Camp Convalescent,
Alexandria. I stayed there two weeks and then started off with a squad for
the front. We arrived at Aquia Creek, on Saturday, October 13. We were put
into camp there and told to wait until after the battle before proceeding
further. To wait there within sound of that terrible artillery-fire at
Fredericksburg, did not suit me. I longed to be with my comrades and share
their danger.

With these feelings I went to the Provost Marshal and stated my case. He
gave me a pass to report to General Fry, at Falmouth, but instead of
reporting to him, I found my regiment over in the city and took my place
in the ranks. The boys were glad to see me, but said I was a fool for
coming into that slaughter-yard, as they called it. It was my duty, and I
was willing to take my chances with the rest.

We went on picket Sunday night, but were ordered to fall back across the
river about four in the morning, and at day-light we were in our old
quarters, there to do picket duty on the Rappahannock, as the boys said.
This was the most discouraging place that I was in during my stay in the
army. Any soldier who was there could tell some pretty hard stories of
that place. Our troubles there are too well known to every one at all
conversant with the history of the war, to need any comment.

A few days after Burnside got stuck in the mud, we received orders to pack
up; this was good news for us; we felt sure we could get into no worse
place than this mud-hole.

We got aboard the cars at Falmouth; arrived at Aquia Creek about dark,
then took the transportation boat and landed at Newport News. This we
found to be a change for the better; it was a very pleasant place. Here
they gave us tents, and plenty to eat as good as the army could afford.
There were some who were not satisfied; and if you had found them in
private life, you would have heard them growling continually about
something.

Our regiment went into camp about one mile from the landing. Here we had
a good drill-ground; drilled six hours each day. I enjoyed my stay in this
place very much.

Our next move was to take a boat for Baltimore. The boat was an old
rickety craft, and came near sinking, during a slight gale going up the
bay. Arriving at Baltimore, we took the cars bound for the South-West;
this was a very pleasant ride, although we were somewhat crowded.

When we arrived at Pittsburg, we found a good supper awaiting us, and I
think those in charge of the tables can truly say that we did justice to
the hot coffee, ham, &c., that was set before us.

Thanks to those true and noble hearts that were so mindful of their
country's defenders. All along the route from Pittsburg to Cincinnati the
inhabitants threw into our cars baskets, boxes and pails, filled with good
things. This was a pleasant route, the scenery in some places being very
beautiful. I should like to go over it again, only under different
circumstances. I should be very glad to make the acquaintance of the
generous-hearted people of Ohio.

Leaving Cincinnati, we crossed the Ohio river into Covington, Kentucky.
Here we again got aboard of the cars, and arrived at Lexington. We went
into camp about one mile from the city, in a beautiful grove; the
fair-ground was only a short distance from us. I think I never saw a fence
come down more quickly, and, as if by magic, a village sprung up, with its
streets running north and south beneath those beautiful shade-trees. A
crystal stream of pure water ran along in the valley below, which supplied
us with water for every purpose. We stayed here two weeks.

On the 15th of April we packed up, and for nearly two months were marching
about from place to place. The people treated us kindly, but we could
easily discern where their sympathies were strongest. Now and then a slave
would come to us for protection. I remember, one Sabbath morning, a very
smart colored boy came to us, and about noon a constable came after him.
The colonel told him if "he could find him, to take him back to his
mistress;" this word was passed round in double-quick time. The boy was in
the first tent they came to, but as they were coming in he darted out past
them. Then a race commenced worth seeing; round and round the camp they
went; at last, the boy started for the woods, and the constable after him,
with four or five boys in blue following close upon the pursuer. Seeing
the boy was likely to escape, the constable drew a revolver and levelled
it at him, but before he could fire he was knocked down without ceremony,
and I think got the worst of that hunt. This happened near Lancaster,
Kentucky.

In a few days we recrossed the Ohio river, went aboard of the cars at
Cincinnati and in due time arrived at Cairo, Illinois, where there were
boats waiting for us; went on board at once; laid at the wharf that night,
and started down the Mississippi river early in the morning on our way to
Vicksburg. Our company had the upper deck, therefore we had a fine
opportunity to view the surrounding country. The rebels fired into us
once, but did no damage. We landed on the west shore, near Vicksburg, on
the 15th of June. We saw Grant's fireworks on that doomed city for two
nights.

On the 17th we took the boat and ran up the Yazoo river about twelve
miles, and landed again. We went into camp on the east shore, about two
miles from the landing; made our beds of cane-brake, which was very nice.
Here we found an abundance of blackberries. While we were awaiting the
appearance of Johnston, we saw a great many things of interest; but we
were annoyed greatly by snakes and lizards. Let us make our bed where we
would, they were sure to find us, and claim a part of our blankets for a
resting place. They were harmless, however, and we soon became accustomed
to them. The lizards varied in length from three to eight inches, and were
of various colors, gray, green, red, etc.

The morning of the 4th of July dawned on us with all its beauty and
loveliness, and the birds seemed to be giving praise to God in
commemoration of our National Independence; with it came the surrender of
Vicksburg. In the midst of our joy, and throwing up of hats, we received
orders to fall in, and were soon on our way after Johnston. He fell back
as for as Jackson, and made a stand; we soon came upon him and the battle
commenced. For eight days we had more or less skirmishing, but it was not
such fighting as we had been accustomed to having while with the Army of
the Potomac.

At last we made preparation for a general charge, but when we made it, we
found empty works. The bird had flown, and had set the business part of
the place on fire.

The second day after we entered the city we turned back again; this was a
very hard march; we started at the quickstep, and kept it up all day. Two
men fell dead by the roadside, while many others fell by the way; it was
very warm, and we could get no good water, but were obliged to drink red
mud as we passed through the low grounds and ravines along our route.

As we retraced our steps, I noticed an aged lady sitting where I had seen
her two weeks before, at her cottage door, smoking her pipe of cob with a
stem two feet long, as unconcerned and contented, apparently, as if the
rude hand of war had not laid its devastating touch upon the country about
her. I do not know but what she is there yet; she seemed to enjoy her pipe
very much.

In due time we reached our old camp-ground. After staying in camp about
one week, we again got aboard of the boat and started down the river. We
had not gone far before we run aground, and in backing off, broke the
rudder, and were obliged to lay there all night. In the morning a tug came
up and helped us off; they took on board a part of the Sixth New Hampshire
Volunteers, giving us more room. We were eleven days going up the
Mississippi river. I took up my quarters on the pilot deck, and enjoyed
myself much in looking at the scenery along the route; it was grand.

In due time we arrived at Cairo, Illinois; got aboard of the cattle train,
and were rolled away at railroad speed, till at length we arrived at
Cincinnati, and recrossed the river to Covington. Here we again got aboard
the cars, stopping next at or near Camp Nelson, Kentucky, where we had a
good camp-ground, and plenty of good water. The following day we were
ordered out for dress-parade; there were but twenty-five officers and men,
all told; the remainder had been excused by the surgeon in the morning, or
were sick with the "shakes;" so it will be seen that our regiment was very
badly used up.

We remained here about a week, and then our regiment was distributed along
the Kentucky Central railroad, a company or two at each bridge, with
headquarters at Paris. Companies A and F were stationed at Kimbrae's
bridge, so called, about one mile south of a pretty little village called
Cynthiana. There was a block-house on each side of the bridge, which made
us very good quarters. Our duty, which was to guard the bridge nights, was
very light, and gave us plenty of time to visit our neighbors.

The people here were very kind and generous, with the exception of a man
by the name of Smith, a union man, and because he was such he thought the
boys ought to work for him: cut up his tobacco, pick his apples, etc., and
take their pay in promises; but this soon played out, and I have no doubt
but what he lost ten times as much as it would have taken to fulfill all
his promises.

In October, I was detailed acting Sergeant of the provost guard at
Cynthiana. Here I had a chance to become more acquainted with the
inhabitants, and learn their views in regard to the war. It was a nigger
war to most of them; but for all that, they treated us well with but few
exceptions.

There were four churches in the place; two black and two white, so called.
I attended them all, but I liked best at one of the colored churches, as
they had the smartest preacher.

In December, 1863, the State of New Hampshire sent us about four hundred
substitutes gathered from all parts of the country. About one-half of them
deserted.

In January, 1864, we were ordered to Camp Nelson; went into camp on the
south-east side, near Daniel Boone's cave. On the 25th, we broke up camp,
and passed through the following places: Camp Dick Robertson, Lancaster,
Stanford, Hall's Gap, Cuba, Somerset, and arrived at Point Burnside on
the 30th, a distance of eighty-four miles February 1st, we were occupied
in fixing up our camp; while we remained here we drilled four hours per
day. On the 23d, we had orders to be in readiness to march. On the morning
of the 27th, struck tents, and took up our line of march; passed through
Somerset and Grundy, and forded Buck Creek, Church Valley.

It rained very hard the second day and snowed and rained the third day, so
there were three inches of snow on the ground that night, and we were wet
and cold and covered with mud; but on the 4th of March, we arrived near an
ancient village called London; a distance of sixty miles. We remained here
till the 6th, when we started on our journey again, passed through London,
and, tired and footsore, arrived on the north side of Cumberland Gap, a
distance of fifty-six miles, on the 10th, just as the sun was setting
behind the western hills; having for supper only the crumbs of our morning
meal.

On the 14, we again set out, passed through the Gap, Tazewell, Tennessee,
crossed Clinch river, Leonard's Village, and arrived near Knoxville, on
the 17th, a distance of sixty-five miles. Here we joined the Brigade
again, and on the 21st took the road that led us across the Wildcat
Mountain to Burnside Point; a distance of one hundred miles. We arrived
there on the 27th about noon, drew rations, and continued our march. We
arrived at Camp Nelson on the 31st; a distance of seventy-six miles.

This was a very hard march; I wore out three pair of army shoes, on this
tramp. We did not see an armed rebel on the whole route.

April 2d, marched to Nicholasville, and again took the cars, reaching
Annapolis, Maryland, on the 7th. General Grant reviewed us at this place.
We remained here until the 23d, drilling, &c., when we took up our line of
march, passed through Washington, D. C., crossed the Potomac, and went
into camp on the other side, on the 25th; a distance of forty-six miles.

On the 27th, we again started out and arrived on the plains of Manassas,
on the 28th; a distance of thirty-four miles. Here we remained till the
4th of May, when we again set out and arrived on the line of battle in the
Wilderness, on the 6th.

Our Brigade had been in all day, and at night were scattered all through
the woods. Colonel Walter Harriman, of the Eleventh New Hampshire
Volunteers, was taken prisoner.

The morning of the 7th, being the third day of the battle, was opened with
a terrible roar of musketry all along the line of seven miles. It was
impossible for our Commanding Chief to see but a small portion of the
army, so a great deal depended on the Corps Commanders. I cannot describe
the dreadful carnage of the Wilderness.

The killed and wounded were scattered through that vast forest of
underbrush, which, dry as tinder, and set on fire by the shells of the
enemy, was burning fiercely. The two lines charged back and forward; we
would gain a little ground in one place and lose in another. Just at dark,
we were ordered to the rear, and lay down to rest. But the next morning we
found ourselves on the old Chancelorsville battle-ground. Here we found
human bones strewn all over the ground.

On the 9th, we moved about five miles to the left, and in rear of
Fredericksburg. A battle raged at Spottsylvania. On the 10th, we went on
to the line on the left; hard fighting all along the line. On the 11th, we
were ordered to the rear to another part of the line; it rained hard all
night. About five o'clock on the morning of the 12th, we received orders
to advance.

On we went driving the rebel skirmishers before us. Now you might have
seen the gallant Hancock leading the second corps to victory; they came
upon the enemy unawares, and took two lines of works and seven thousand
prisoners.

We being the right of the Ninth Corps, formed on the left of the second.
We got in advance of the rest of the line while coming through the woods,
and formed on the left of the second just in season to receive the return
charge of the rebels. We opened on them as they came up in solid column in
front and on our left flank, and gave us a volley lengthwise which sent us
staggering back to the woods.

We lost two hundred and twelve men out of five hundred, in less than five
minutes. I received a slight wound in the leg, but I assure you, it did
not hinder me from making good time for the woods. We soon rallied, and
went back to the line with only one hundred men to guard the colors; the
rest were scattered but came up during the day and night. Hard fighting
every day till the 21st. Then Grant made one of his masterly movements
round their right flank. Our Brigade started direct for their extreme
right, struck them about five o'clock, and made preparations for a charge,
but darkness set in, and about ten o'clock we started for the rear;
marched all night, and took our breakfast on the bank of the Pamunkey
river; continued our march, and on the 24th crossed the North Anna river,
under a severe storm of shell bursting over our heads; we then entered the
line. On the 25th, advanced our line about five hundred yards; 26th, hard
fighting, but nothing gained. During the night we fell back across the
river and burned the bridge.

May 27th, we took up our line of march, crossed the Pamunkey river, and
went into camp; a distance of thirty-five miles. On the 30th, we started
out as rear guard for the brigade teams. May 31st, General Griffin ordered
our regiment alone into the woods to try the enemy's strength; we passed
down into the ravine and up a steep bluff under a galling fire, but at
last we reached the top and held our position till the reserves were sent
to support both of our flanks; hard fighting all day.

June 1st, 1864. All quiet till about ten o'clock; then the enemy charged
on our left and were driven back with heavy loss. They also charged on our
right in plain sight. Two lines came up on the double-quick till within
two hundred yards. Then you might have seen a line of dusty forms spring
up as if by magic, and a sheet of fire burst forth which sent them reeling
back to their cover in the woods. They soon rallied again and came on with
double the force that had first assailed us. Just then, one of our light
batteries, of six guns, was placed in position in the woods, and gave them
grape and canister.

On they came regardless of life and fearless as demons; but soon they met
a sheet of fire which seemed to consume them; they retreated to the woods
for the second time, and made no further attack on that part of our line.

On the 2d, we fell back and moved about five miles to the left. At four
o'clock, they came down on us and tried to get in our rear; but all to no
purpose. We fought hard during the following day, but rested that night.
On the 4th, we moved about four miles, and formed on the right of the line
at Coal Harbor. Every one knows about this place. It will be sufficient to
say that we had work to do, and I think all were glad when the order came
to fall back.

Just after dark, on the 11th, we started back and took our breakfast near
Whitehouse landing, and continued our march. Our next rest was near the
James river, where we remained until the 15th, when we took up our line of
march just at dusk, and marched all night and till four o'clock of the
following day. Forming on the line of battle near the Weldon railroad, we
went in on a charge, and fought more or less all night.

On the morning of the 17th, we charged all along the line, drove the enemy
back, took several pieces of artillery, and more or less prisoners.
Advanced about one mile on the 18th, and during the night threw up earth
works in an old oat field near a peach orchard. On the 19th, we dug our
pit eight feet wide and three deep, throwing all the earth in front. Hard
fighting on the left. On the 20th, hard fighting all along the line. I
received a slight wound across my left temple.

June 21st ended my term in the field. I was wounded in the left arm, and
had it amputated just above the elbow. Now for the hospital. I was carried
to City Point on the 23d. Thanks to the Christian and Sanitary
Commissions, which greatly relieved us, not only in furnishing so many
good things, but in sending to us those who always had a kind word for us
all.

On the 30th, I was carried on board the hospital boat, and arrived at
Washington, D. C., on the 1st of July, and was carried to Finley
Hospital. I was well cared for here, and my arm healed rapidly, while many
others sickened and died.

On the 22d of August, I received a furlough for sixty days. I arrived home
on the 24th. I cannot attempt to describe my feelings as I crossed the
threshold, and placed this good right arm around the aged form of my
beloved mother, who tottered to meet me, and throwing her arms around my
neck, kissed me again and again. Not less welcome was the fervent "God
bless you, my son," from father. My wife was absent at this time, at the
bedside of a sick sister, who died in about two weeks after I got home.
Then she returned to me, and entered into the general rejoicing at my safe
arrival.

Soon after I came home the stump of my arm began to trouble me very much.
Gangrene set in, the stump swelled up and turned black. They carried me to
my sister's, Mrs. Smith Hancock, in Franklin, where I was attended by Dr.
Knights of that town. For about three weeks my life was despaired of; then
I began to gain. Through the kind care of all and the skill of Dr.
Knights,--but more through the providence of God,--I was spared; for
what, I do not know. God knows, and he doeth all things well.

December 2d, I reported at Concord, and went into the Hospital there. On
the 8th, I was sent forward to Washington. Arrived there on the 11th, and
went into Finley Hospital. I was transferred to Manchester, N. H., on the
10th of January, 1865, and remained there till I received my discharge, on
the 29th of May.

My story is told.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "landen" corrected to "landed" (page 21)
  "Nighth" corrected to "Ninth" (page 29)






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A History of the Army Experience of
William A. Canfield, by William A. Canfield

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARMY EXPERIENCE--WILLIAM A. CANFIELD ***

***** This file should be named 31998.txt or 31998.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/9/9/31998/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
