Project Gutenberg's The Third Day at Stone's River, by Gilbert C. Kniffin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Third Day at Stone's River

Author: Gilbert C. Kniffin

Release Date: April 18, 2010 [EBook #32039]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THIRD DAY AT STONE'S RIVER ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  Military Order of the Loyal Legion
  Of the
  United States.


  COMMANDERY OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.


  WAR PAPERS.
  69

  The Third Day at Stone's River.


  PREPARED BY COMPANION
  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL
  GILBERT C. KNIFFIN,
  U. S. VOLUNTEERS,

  AND
  READ AT THE STATED MEETING OF MAY 1, 1907.




The Third Day at Stone's River.


While the heroic commander of the Union Army, with fearless confidence in
his remaining troops, was hurling the hard-hitting brigades of the left
and center upon Hardee's victorious advance during the first day of the
fight at Stones River, kindling anew the dying embers of hope in the
breasts of the retreating soldiers of the right, and by his exalted
courage snatching victory from the jaws of defeat; while Thomas calm and
brave, with perfect presence of mind, superintended every move in the
desperate game of battle, watchful of every point, a tower of strength to
his devoted men, and Crittenden, more cheerful than usual in the hell of
carnage that raged along his front, brought regiment after regiment and
battery after battery in support of the point where Hazen, and Hascall,
and Grose, and Cruft were clinging tenaciously to their position, and
beating back the desperate charges of Polk and Breckinridge, the cavalry
were performing prodigies of valor in the rear and on the right. General
Wheeler, on his return from his exploits at La Verne, to the rear of
Hardee's line on the morning of the 31st, found that the battle had
opened. He immediately joined in the pursuit of Johnson's retiring
division, while Wharton, in command of ten regiments of cavalry, and a
battery of artillery, moved over towards the Nashville pike and turned his
attention to the immense supply train of the army. A portion of this
train, six miles long when stretched out upon the road, was moving across
the country from the Wilkinson to the Nashville pike. The scene was one of
the most indescribable confusion. Urged by impending calamity the
canvas-covered wagons flew across the fields with the velocity of
four-mule power, each driver plying whip and spur; sutler wagons bounding
over the rocks, distributed their precious contents along the way.
Stanley's thin line of cavalry, stretching from the woods in the rear of
Negley to the right and left, rested its right flank upon the Wilkinson
pike, where Colonel Zahm, with the First, Third, and Fourth Ohio Cavalry
was stationed in rear of Overall's Creek.

Colonel Minty, in command of 950 cavalry, crossed Overall's Creek early in
the morning and took position parallel to and a mile distant from the
Nashville pike. The Fourth Michigan and First Tennessee dismounted, formed
a skirmish line with Jenning's Battalion of the Seventh Pennsylvania and
two companies of the Third Kentucky, under Captain Davis, supported by the
Anderson Troop in their rear. Wharton advanced at full charge, after a few
volleys from his artillery, but meeting with stubborn resistance drew off,
but in a few minutes rallied and bore down, two thousand strong, upon
Minty's little command. The Anderson Troop gave way and the Confederate
troopers swept past the left. Hastily remounting, the remainder of the
command fell back across an open field out of range of the artillery,
leaving the train, with fully a thousand fugitives from the battle-field,
in possession of the enemy. At daybreak Zahm's brigade was drawn up in
line of battle and two squadrons were sent to the right and front to
reconnoitre. Soon the cannons' opening roar upon his left announced the
beginning of battle. The rush of infantry to the rear gave token of
disaster. Now came the exultant shout of victory and the sweeping charge
of McCown's columns overlapping Johnson, and appearing on the right of the
cavalry. Falling back, Zahm formed in line of battle a mile in rear,
where the enemy opened upon him with artillery The first shell killed
Major Moore, of the First Ohio. Again he fell back, when Willich's old
regiment halted in its retreat and formed in support of the cavalry, when
the two repulsed a charge, but only for a moment. The torrent of fugitives
fled through the woods like leaves before the blast, and after them
pressed the charging regiments of Ector and Raines' Confederate cavalry in
resistless volume. Meanwhile, Wharton's Cavalry Brigade was moving rapidly
past Colonel Zahm's right, and the Confederate infantry pushing by his
left at a distance of two hundred yards. An aide to General McCook came
requesting succor for the supply train moving over toward the Nashville
pike. Col. Gates P. Thruston, one of McCook's aides, gave a graphic
picture of the capture and recapture of the precious supply train.
"McCook's baggage train, starting for the rear, was soon in the hands of
the enemy; our supply trains shared the same fate. Gen. Joe Wheeler's
command appeared in rear of our flank on the Murfreesboro pike, and all
soon became excitement and confusion there. Wharton, after a succession of
captures, charged over the fields in rear far down toward our infantry
lines, sweeping everything before him. By Rosecrans' orders Stanley's
Cavalry hastened to the rescue. There was a succession of conflicts over a
wide field, with varying fortunes. The whole area in rear between our
right and left was a scene of strife and confusion that beggars
description. Stragglers from the front, teamsters, couriers, negro
servants, hospital attendants, ambulances added to the turmoil. Wounded
and riderless horses and cattle, wild with fright, rushed frantically over
the field.

While in the open ground, moving our ammunition train rapidly to the left,
it was discovered by the enemy. In my anxiety for its safety I had
already reported the importance of the train to every cavalry officer
within reach, and appealed for protection. Colonel Zahm, of the Second
Ohio Cavalry as he states in his report (official record), promised me all
possible help, and promptly formed his regiment in line for that purpose.
Major Pugh, of the Fourth Ohio Cavalry, at my request also placed his
regiment on our flank, facing the enemy. The First Ohio and the Second
East Tennessee and a battalion of the Third Ohio Cavalry were near at
hand.

Alas, when the crisis came a few minutes later they were not in position
to successfully withstand the shock. They were unprepared, and not in
brigade line. Wharton's Confederates unexpectedly appeared in great force.
His artillery opened fire furiously upon the Fourth Ohio Cavalry, and
threw the regiment into some confusion. Soon apparently his entire command
charged down upon us like a tempest, his troopers yelling like a lot of
devils. They first struck the Fourth Ohio, which could make but little
resistance. Col. Minor Millikin, the gallant commander of the First Ohio,
led a portion of his regiment in a brilliant counter charge, but had to
retire with fearful losses. In the onslaught the dear, fearless colonel,
my intimate college friend, engaged in single combat with a Texas ranger,
and was slain.

"There was no staying the Confederates. They outnumbered and outflanked
us, and, to tell the melancholy truth, our defending cavalry finally
retired in confusion to the rear and left the ammunition train to its
fate--high and dry in a corn field. As may be imagined, our teamsters, the
train guards, and the ordnance officer (yes, I must admit it), were not
left far behind in the general stampede. We fired one volley from behind
the protection of our wagons and then hunted cover in the rear of a
friendly fence and in the nearest thicket. Our teamsters outran the
cavalry. Most of them never reappeared. The Confederates began to collect
and lead away our teams and wagons, and our condition seemed desperate,
indeed, hopeless.

"Happily, this appalling state of affairs did not last long. Some of our
cavalry rallied, other Union detachments came to the rescue. Wharton had
soon to look to his own flanks, and was kept too busy to carry off our
train. The conflict fortunately shifted. Capt. Elmer Otis, with six
companies of the Fourth Regular Cavalry, attacked Wharton's command with
great vigor and success. Soon two battalions of the Third Ohio Cavalry
came up from the rear. I hastened to appeal to the commander to aid our
train guard in saving the train, and he at once covered our front and held
the enemy in check until our badly-wrecked train, with its disabled wagons
and scattered animals was reorganized and put in moving order. We repaired
and patched up the breaks. Everybody, even officers and stragglers helped,
and nearly every wagon was finally recovered."

The third attack referred to by General Thruston came from a force that
Wharton had not yet met. Before they had time to take advantage of their
success, Kennett was upon them. Col. Eli H. Murray, at the head of his
gallant regiment, the Third Kentucky, charged down upon the train,
sweeping Wharton's cavalry before him. Here the brave Captain Wolfley,
with eighty men, and Captain Breathitt, with his battalion, charged with
such velocity as to turn the tide of battle, driving the rear forward upon
the front, where the Fourth Cavalry struck it with drawn sabers. The rout
of the Confederates was complete. The entire train, with 250 prisoners,
were recaptured. The hospital of Palmer's division, which had fallen into
their hands, as well as the Fifth Wisconsin Battery, and one section of
the First Ohio, were recaptured, and Wharton's Brigade routed and driven
back two miles. The Third Ohio easily rallied and took part in the fray.
Captain Otis' saber charge was brilliantly executed. Dashing forward with
the velocity of a locomotive, the trained battalions fell upon the
undisciplined mob huddled together at the head of the train where Murray
had swept them in his irresistible onslaught. The train was moved close up
in the rear of the left wing, where it remained unmolested during the
remainder of the day. In a battle such as that at Stones River, where a
long line of troops is engaged simultaneously, it is impossible to give
due credit to each regiment that deserves it. The writer witnessed scenes
of personal daring which to recount would occupy the night in the
description. There were many instances in which officers, casting aside
their swords, seized the muskets of their fallen soldiers, and fought side
by side with their men. Entire companies fought without officers. In great
emergencies such as this there is positively no rank except that which
valor bestows. Orders to fall back were in several cases unheeded, and the
men held their places in line under the leaden hail, obstinately refusing
to retreat. It was not merely a line of battle, but a Nation in arms,
repelling, with a Nation's pride, this bold assault of its rebellious sons
upon its life.

Darkness covered the battle-field. The roar of artillery, the rattle of
musketry, the hoarse shouts of command had ceased, and in the silence that
followed there fell upon the ears of the soldiers on picket the groans of
men in mortal agony lying within the space that separated the lines. In
rear of the pickets men sank upon the ground where they stood and shivered
through the night without fires, for the faintest flash of light on either
side became a target for alert artillerists. A cup of hot coffee, that
_Dominus donari_ to the weary soldier, on this night of all nights when he
needed it most, was denied him. All through the night the ambulances
passed to and fro on the road to the hospitals, where further torture
awaited the wounded, unless the angel of death kindly relieved them of the
ministrations of the surgeons. A space twenty yards in front of the White
House, near Overall's Creek, was covered with the mangled forms of men
awaiting their turn upon the operating tables. Inside were groups of
surgeons with sleeves rolled up to the elbows, their brawny arms red with
blood, one handling the saw, another the knife, another the probe, while
others bound up the bleeding stumps and turned the patient, henceforth the
Nation's ward, over to nurses, who bore them tenderly away. In a corner
lay a ghastly heap of arms and legs and hands and feet, useless
forevermore. The busy fingers which had indited the last fond message to
the anxious wife or mother would never caress them more. Does this
horrible recital grate upon the ear? It is as much a part of the history
of a battle as is the furious charge and repulse from which it resulted.
Forty years have passed since that awful scene was witnessed. The stalwart
young men left upon the firing line are old men now, and, in the judgment
of some chiefs of bureaus, too old to longer serve the Government.

The writer, returning from a ride along the lines, where he had been under
orders to see that all fires were extinguished, came upon a regular
battery, in the rear of which, at the bottom of a trench of glowing coals,
the artillerists were cooking supper. The savory smell of broiling steak
and steaming pots of coffee saluted his nostrils. Dismounting, he was at
once invited to partake of a soldier's hospitality. His tired horse was
fed, and in a moment he received at the hands of a grizzly veteran a cup
of coffee and a cake of hard bread, covered with juicy steak, tender and
succulent. His meal dispatched, he was about to remount and ride back to
headquarters, when he was asked if he knew where the steak came from. He
said he did not, but that it was the best he ever ate. "Come here, and I
will show you," said the sergeant. He led the way a few yards distant
where an artillery horse lay dead, killed by a cannon ball. His flank had
been stripped of the skin, and the tender, juicy steak that had
contributed to the enjoyment of the writer had been cut from the flesh.

At army headquarters a strange scene, revealing the characteristics of the
prominent commanding officers, was presented. With prudent regard for the
safety of his supplies, General Rosecrans had ordered the subsistence
train back to Nashville, thus enabling him to manoeuver his army without
regard to front or rear. There was no indication that Bragg contemplated
withdrawal, and the prevailing impression was that a heavy assault would
be made upon some point of the Union line early in the morning. Where
would the blow fall? Would the line at that point be strong enough to
resist it? Has Bragg any troops that have not been engaged? Are
reinforcements for him on the way? were questions more easily asked than
answered.

Mounting his horse, the commanding general rode to the rear, accompanied
by General Stanley and a few staff officers. Past the hospital, to
Overall's Creek, the group of horsemen pursued their way. In the fields on
both sides of the road the darkness was dispelled by bivouac fires lighted
by the straggling soldiery of the right wing. Along the pike the long
supply train moved slowly and steadily toward Nashville, while here and
there a few wagons were cut out of it by a faithful commissary, the
contents of which, after a hard night's work, he would succeed in
transferring to the soldiers' haversacks.

Walker's and Starkweather's brigades had already passed to the front,
where the former bivouacked in close column in reserve in rear of McCook's
left, and the latter, posted on the left of Sheridan, next morning
relieved Van Cleve's division, now commanded by Col. Sam Beatty, which
resumed its position in the left wing. Generals Van Cleve and Wood, each
suffering from wounds in the foot, were sent in ambulances back to
Nashville.

Headquarters were located in a double log house, which then stood on the
east side of the turnpike about opposite the lower ford of Stones River.
In a room on the left hand, General Thomas sat before a fire, asleep; the
officers of his staff, stretched upon the floor, with their feet to the
fire, were also asleep. Ready at a moment's warning to obey any order that
might be given him, the old soldier was snatching a brief respite from
care, in the friendly arms of Morpheus. To a question of General
Rosecrans, earlier in the evening, he had made the characteristic reply:
"The question of retiring from the battle-field is one of such delicacy
that I am quite willing to leave it to the judgment of the commanding
general." On the right of the passageway a far different scene was
presented. General Crittenden paced the floor with quick, impatient
stride. "Communication is cut off," said one. "We must fall back," said
another, and the words were deliberately uttered by a brave man. "My corps
is not whipped," shouted Crittenden, "and we must not fall back." At this
moment General Rosecrans entered the room and caught the expression as it
fell from the lips of his heroic commander. "Gentlemen, we fight or die
right here," said the chief as he passed them and took a seat by the fire.

The sun of the New Year rose bright and fair; an occasional gun gave token
of the proximity of the two contending armies. During the night Rosecrans
retired his left to a more advantageous position, the extreme left resting
on Stones River above the lower ford and extending to Stokes' Battery,
posted on a knoll on Rousseau's right. Beatty's division was posted across
Stones River on the margin of the woodland that covered a gentle slope
from the river to an open field in their front. Across the field, the
Lebanon road, running nearly at right angles with the front of Beatty's
line, was nearly in sight. Off to their right and front an elevation still
held by Hanson's Brigade of Breckinridge's division, was crowned by Cobb's
Battery of Artillery. The Confederate line, formed by Polk and
Breckinridge on the right and Hardee on the left, extended from the point
on Stones River where Chalmer's Brigade had bivouacked since the 28th, in
a direction almost at right angles with its original line.

The body of the brave General Sill was found where it had fallen, and sent
to Murfreesboro, where it was buried. At dawn on the 1st of January the
right flank of General Polk was advanced to occupy the ground vacated by
the left flank of the Union Army. Neither commander deemed it advisable to
attack, but each was watchful of every movement of the other. The picket
lines of either side were thrust forward within sight of the main lines of
the opposing force, on the alert to notify their commanders of any
movement in their front. As two gladiators of equal strength, who, having
fought until nature is exhausted, stretch their herculean forms upon the
earth, each confident that his antagonist is as unable as himself to renew
the contest, rise when refreshed and glare upon each other, watchful for
advantage, so were these contending armies, drawn up in firm array, weaker
in numerical strength, but more compact and infinitely stronger in
indomitable will, on the morning of the New Year, each awaiting the order
to advance and close in a final struggle. It was the crouching of tigers
before the death grapple.

The rest afforded the weary troops of both armies, many of whom were
smarting with wounds which were not sufficiently serious to render their
removal to the hospital necessary, fell with the grace of a benediction
upon the scene of strife. As the ponderous bells of a great city, at
stated periods, rising above the hum of traffic fill the air with the
uproar of deep, sonorous strokes, and smaller ones fill with their clangor
the intervals of sound, so did the artillery ever and anon break upon the
silence with sullen roar, while the sharp rattle of picket firing, now on
the right, then on the left, recall the terrible strife of yesterday and
foretell the impending conflict.

Night came, and the contending hosts sank to rest in the mud, upon their
arms, in the rear of the stout picket lines, lulled to sleep by the
booming of an occasional gun or the report of an exploding shell. The sun
arose upon the second morning of the new year and glowed pleasantly upon
Union and Confederate alike. The exercises of the day commenced as usual
by picket firing along the lines, and was followed by an artillery duel
between Estepp's Battery of Wood's division and Scott's Battery of
Cheatham's division, in front of the Round Forrest, in which Estepp was
worsted. Bradley took up the gauntlet and was fast getting the best of it
when one of the batteries in his rear undertook to throw grape over his
head, when he was forced to retire.

Reinforcements now came to both sides and a spirited contest ensued.
Stokes, Loomis, and Guenther each in succession took part in the fight,
which was confined exclusively to artillery. Robertson's Battery of
Wither's division, from its position near the Burnt Brick House, and
Semple's Battery on the left, had accurate range of the Union batteries,
and their guns were handled with skill. But the artillery fire soon
ceased. Chalmer's Brigade had advanced early on New Year's morning, and
his skirmishers now occupied the ground which Hazen had so stubbornly
contended for on the first day of the battle. Price's Brigade, which
assumed its position in Van Cleve's division, now commanded by Col. Samuel
Beatty, was on the right of the division.

The line as thus formed was at right angles with the river, upon which its
right flank rested, and nearly parallel to Breckinridge's original line.
Below the right of the line the river suddenly changes direction, flowing
about a half a mile in rear and nearly parallel with the line. The gently
sloping ground was woodland on the right and open field on the left.

To strengthen the left flank, Colonel Grose's Brigade of Palmer's
division, reduced by hard fighting on the 31st to 1,000 effectives, was
ordered by General Crittenden to cross the river on the morning of the 2d
of January. These dispositions were barely completed and temporary
breastworks constructed when, at four o'clock, a magnificent sight
presented itself. General Bragg confidently expected to find the Union
Army gone from his front on the morning of the 2d of January. His cavalry
had reported the Nashville pike full of troops and wagons moving toward
Nashville. On the return of the cavalry expedition he sent Wharton to
assume command of the cavalry on the Lebanon road, consisting of his own
and Pegram's Brigade, while Wheeler, with his brigade, returned to the
vicinity of the Nashville pike to observe the movements of the Union Army
in that direction. Before Wharton had taken his position, the force east
of Stones River had attracted Bragg's attention, and reconnaissances by
staff officers revealed the line of battle formed by Beatty's division and
Grose's Brigade. From the position occupied by this force, Polk's line,
which, it will be remembered, had advanced as far as the position vacated
by Rosecrans' left on the night of the 31st, was enfiladed. Bragg says:
"The dislodgement of this force, or the withdrawal of Polk's line, was an
evident necessity. The latter involved consequences not to be entertained.
Orders were accordingly given for the concentration of the whole of
General Breckinridge's division in front of the position to be taken, the
addition to his command of ten Napoleon guns (12-pounders), under Captain
Robertson, an able and accomplished artillery officer, and for the cavalry
forces of Wharton and Pegram to join in the attack on his right." General
Breckinridge was sent for and the object of the movement explained to him.
He was ordered to drive the Union line back, crown the hill, entrench the
artillery, and hold the position. General Breckinridge was opposed to the
attack as ordered by General Bragg, and tried to dissuade him from it,
predicting disaster, as the ground occupied by the main portion of the
Union troops on the bluff on the opposite bank of the river was
considerably higher than that over which the attacking force must march,
and it was possible for Rosecrans to mass artillery and sweep the whole
field. In urging his opinions he drew, with a stick, on the ground the
position of the contending forces. Considerable time was occupied in the
discussion, but Bragg remained firm, and finally ended the discussion by
an imperative command to move at once to the attack. As General
Breckinridge rode forward to his command he met General Preston,
commanding his Third Brigade, and said: "This attack is made against my
judgment and by the special orders of General Bragg. Of course we must all
do our duty and fight the best we can. If it should result in disaster,
and I be among the slain, I want you to do justice to my memory, and tell
the people that I believed this movement to be very unwise, and that I
tried to prevent it."

To distract the attention from the real point of attack a heavy artillery
fire was ordered to be opened from Polk's front at the exact hour at which
the movement was to begin. At other points along both lines all was quiet,
and at half-past three General Breckinridge reported that he would advance
at four o'clock. The effective strength of Breckinridge's division on the
morning of the 31st was 7,053. Adding two batteries and deducting 730 men
disabled in the three brigades of Palmer, Preston, and Adams, in the
assault of the 31st in front of the Round Forrest, left 6,576 infantry and
artillery, 3,000 cavalry, and seven batteries of artillery with which to
make the attack. Hanson's fine brigade of Kentuckians, who had signalized
their valor at Shiloh and Baton Rouge, 1,000 strong, had up to this time
been disengaged.

The movement of Breckinridge's command was observed by General Crittenden
from the bluff on the opposite bank of Stones River, above the lower ford,
from the moment that the advance commenced. To reach Beatty's line it was
necessary to cross an open space six or seven hundred yards in width, with
a gentle ascent, in full view from the opposite shore, as well as from the
front line of Beatty's division. In the assault that followed a brief
cannonade, Hanson's left was thrown forward close to the river bank, with
guns loaded and bayonets fixed, under orders to fire once, then charge
with the bayonet. This charge of General Breckinridge will live in the
memories of those who witnessed it, coupled in precision of formation, in
rapidity of movement, and in grandeur of execution, if not in results,
with the charge of the armies of the Cumberland and Tennessee at Mission
Ridge, the storming of Lookout Mountain by Geary's division of Hooker's
Corps, and the no less thrilling spectacle in front of Kenesaw, when the
brave and lamented Harker and McCook, with 2,000 men, were launched
against a fortified position, bristling with artillery, between the two
contending armies. On the right of Price's Brigade the Eighth Kentucky,
commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel May, received the first attack, made by
Colonel Lewis' Sixth Kentucky, Confederate, followed in quick succession
by a charge from Hanson's and Pillow's Brigades; then in successive
strokes from right to left the blows fell all along Beatty's line.
Overborne by the numerical strength of the Confederate brigades, the
gallant men of this veteran division, 2,500 strong fighting bravely, were
hammered back by overwhelming force. For full ten minutes they stood in
line, pouring a galling fire upon the oncoming line, which, leaving its
course marked by the writhing forms of its fallen braves, pressed forward,
overlapping the right, where they were met by Lieutenant-Colonel Evans
with the reserves of the Twenty-first Kentucky, and by Colonel Swayne,
with the Ninety-ninth Ohio. These regiments, changing front to the right,
held their ground firmly and administered volley after volley upon the
skirmishers of the Confederate Sixth Kentucky, who pushed forward toward
the ford. The front line falling back, followed rapidly by the entire
Confederate line, loading as they retired, and turning to fire upon their
assailants, became intermingled with the reserves, when, in a confused
mass, assailants and assailed, fighting hand to hand, moved in a
resistless volume toward the river. The reserve regiments, the Ninth
Kentucky, Lieutenant-Colonel Cram; Nineteenth Ohio, Lieutenant-Colonel
Manderson, and the Eleventh Kentucky, Major Mottley, undaunted by the
disaster upon the right, advanced through a thick undergrowth of wild
briars, and came suddenly upon Adam's and Preston's Brigades, which,
driving Fyffe's Brigade and the Seventy-ninth Indiana before them, were
moving with rapid strides toward Grose's position on the extreme left.
Meanwhile the brigades of Hanson and Pillow had gained positions to their
right and the movement toward the ford threatened to cut these regiments
still remaining on the left off from retreat. At Colonel Manderson's
suggestion, Colonel Grider now ordered his brigade to fall back to the
river. Colonel Grider, bearing his regimental flag in his hand, rallied
his brigade three times in succession while retiring, and checked the
advance of the Confederate line by volleys of musketry. The pursuit of
Beatty's three brigades led the Confederate columns to the right of Grose,
and as soon as it could be done with safety Livingston opened upon the
advance with his artillery, but in obedience to an order from General
Rosecrans crossed the river and reopened from the opposite shore.

The space between the river bank and the ridge occupied by Grose's Brigade
was now a scene of the wildest disorder. Instances of the most exalted
courage were displayed. It was here that Corporal Hochersmith, color guard
of the Twenty-first Kentucky, and Sergeant Gunn, of the same regiment, won
the gold medals voted them by the legislature of their native State. When
confronted by a squad of Lewis' skirmishers, who demanded his flag, the
brave corporal said: "You can take me but not my colors," and threw the
flag over their heads into the river, where it was seized by Sergeant Gunn
and borne in safety through a shower of balls to the opposite shore, where
the regiment immediately rallied around it.

It may well be understood that General Crittenden, under whose observation
his old division had been driven from its position back across the river,
was by no means an uninterested spectator of the scene. It had all passed
so rapidly as to afford no time to reinforce the line when first
assaulted, and when it had commenced falling back the west side of the
river was evidently the best position to reform and reinforce it. His men
had no sooner gained the low ground near the river than, turning to his
chief of artillery, he said: "Now, Mendenhall, you must cover my men with
your cannon." Never was a more tremendous response to so simple a request.
In his report, Captain Mendenhall says: "Captain Swallow had already
opened with his battery. I ordered Lieutenant Parsons to move a little
forward and open with his guns, then rode back to bring up Lieutenant
Estepp with his Eighth Indiana Battery. Meeting Captain Morton, with his
brigade of Pioneers, he asked for advice, and I told him to move briskly
forward with his brigade and send his battery to the crest of the hill
near the batteries already engaged. The Eighth Indiana Battery took
position on the right of Lieutenant Parsons. Seeing that Lieutenant
Osborne was in position between Parsons and Estepp, I rode to Lieutenant
Stevens, Twenty-sixth Pennsylvania Battery, and ordered him to change
front to the left and open fire; then to Captain Standart, and directed
him to move to the left with his guns, and he took position covering the
ford. I found that Captain Bradley had anticipated my wishes, and had
changed front to fire to the left, and opened upon the enemy. This battery
was near the railroad. Lieutenant Livingston crossed the river and opened
fire again. During this terrible encounter, of little more than an hour in
duration, forty-three pieces belonging to the left wing; the 'Board of
Trade' Battery, and nine guns from General Negley's division--fifty-eight
pieces of artillery--played upon the enemy." The effect of the storm of
iron that swept the front of these batteries is indescribable. It tore
through the mass of men as they swarmed down the slope, mowing down scores
at each discharge. Not less than one hundred shots per minute were fired
with unerring aim. Branches of trees, lopped off by cannon balls,
pinioned men to the earth. For a few minutes they held their ground; then
a wild terror seized upon them and bore them away. General Hanson fell
among the first. His brigade lost over 400 in killed and wounded; the loss
in the division was 1,400. There was no thought now of attacking Grose;
there was but one thought paramount in the hearts of all, and that was to
get to a place of safety. They no sooner turned than Beatty's men were
upon them, pouring in volley after volley upon the retreating enemy.
Hazen's Brigade crossed further down the stream; Jeff C. Davis on his
left, Miller and Morton at the ford, and moving rapidly forward the line
swept up the slope. The artillery fire ceased, and the minnie rifles,
taking up the refrain continued it until darkness closed the scene. Three
guns of Wright's Battery, abandoned by Breckinridge, to whose division it
belonged, stood upon the crest of the hill. The horses, killed by the
tempest of iron that had fallen here, lay heaped together; the gunners,
mangled by exploded shells, dotted the ground around the battery. As the
Union line pressed forward on each side a boy clad in Confederate gray
(Private Wright), mounted upon one of the guns, stood guard over the
wreck. Swinging a hatchet above his head he shouted: "The first Yankee
that touches one of these guns dies." Saluting him with a rousing cheer
the line pressed on, leaving this second Cassabianca master of the
situation.

Although the Confederate forces, yielding to the irresistible logic of
Mendenhall's guns, had considered not so much upon the order of going as
upon its rapidity, until beyond the range of the artillery, many of them
rallied behind Robinson's Battery and Anderson's Brigade in the narrow
skirt of timber, from which they emerged to the assault. The Union line
advanced and took position upon the ground from which Beatty had been
driven an hour before. The picket lines of both armies occupied opposite
sides of the open field, over which Breckinridge had advanced, and
darkness covered the battle-field. During the night General Cleburne moved
his division over to its original position on the right, in support of
Breckinridge, and General Hardee resumed command of that portion of the
line.

Apprehending the possible success of a flank attack upon his left, Bragg
had caused all the tents and baggage to be loaded on wagons and sent to
the rear. On Saturday morning, the 3d of January, the soldiers of both
armies had been in battle for four days and nights; their provisions, if
cooked at all, were scanty and unfit to eat; their clothing soaked with
rain and stiff with mud, with no fires to dry them and to warm their
chilled bodies, they had responded with a will to every command. With
death beckoning them to his clammy embrace they had advanced with
unfaltering tread, leaving their trail marked by the dead forms of their
comrades. Even now there was no word of complaint. It rested with the
generals in command of the contending armies whether another holocaust of
lives should be offered before either would acknowledge himself
vanquished. No thought of retreat had at any time entered the minds of
Rosecrans, Thomas, or Crittenden. With one exception, neither of the
division commanders in the center or on the left wings had favored it.
McCook, after his bloody repulse on the 31st, had advised falling back
upon Nashville upon purely military grounds, but had readily acquiesced in
the decision of the commanding general to "fight or die right here." The
fugitives in his command who had not pursued their shameless way to
Nashville had rallied to their standards and were anxious to restore their
tarnished laurels. The losses during the three days of battle were nearly
evenly divided. General Bragg acknowledged a loss of 9,000 in killed and
wounded, 25 per cent of his army of 38,250, while General Rosecrans'
report shows a loss of 8,778, over 20 per cent of killed and wounded of
his force of 43,400. It is impossible to do full justice to the heroic
constancy of the soldiers of the Union, whose valor wrung victory from
defeat on the morning of the 31st of December, and who all through that
terrible day bared their breasts to the storm of battle. To the living the
great wealth of a Nation's gratitude is due, but to those to whom death
came in the cause of National unity, his

  "Voice sounds like a prophet's word
  And in its solemn tones are heard
  The thanks of millions yet to be."

It came like a paean of victory to the ears of the long suffering President
and to the sorely taxed patience of the loyal people of the United States.
It fell with the dull thud of a mortal wound upon the hearts of the
Southern people. Gone and forever dispelled were the fond delusions that
one Confederate was equal to three Yankees. Henceforth it was known by
each that victory would perch upon the banner of the strongest force, and
that the god of battle was on the side of the heaviest artillery. As the
blood of the martyr is the seed of the church, so was that spilled at
Stones River the inspiration by which the magnificent Army of the
Cumberland bore its banners through two years more of carnage to final
victory. They renewed their vows of fidelity to the flag of their country
upon the field of Chickamauga and upon the bloody slope of Mission Ridge,
and through a hundred days of battle to Atlanta, at Franklin, and
Nashville. Marching through Georgia with Sherman to the sea, the devoted
soldiery followed their leaders with unfaltering courage, billowing every
battle-field with the graves of their fallen comrades.




Transcriber's Notes:

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "atacked" corrected to "attacked" (page 7)
  "impresssion" corrected to "impression" (page 10)
  "atack" corrected to "attack" (page 15)

"Stones" (rather than "Stone's") is used consistently throughout the
original text.

The lone quotation mark on page 5 appears in this text as it is presented
in the original.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Third Day at Stone's River, by
Gilbert C. Kniffin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THIRD DAY AT STONE'S RIVER ***

***** This file should be named 32039.txt or 32039.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/3/32039/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
