The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hand, by Gerald Allan Sohl

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hand

Author: Gerald Allan Sohl

Release Date: April 19, 2010 [EBook #32055]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAND ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Imagination Stories of Science and
    Fantasy January 1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


                               THE HAND


                                  by

                              Jerry Sohl


     Alice knew that Dobie was a good dog, even if he did have an
     alarming habit of hunting down rabbits and gophers. But one
     day he brought her--

       *       *       *       *       *




Alice McNearby was washing breakfast dishes and looking out the
kitchen window at the November sky when she first spied Dobie. The way
he was sneaking up to the house she knew he had killed something.

She dried her hands on her apron and tried to put down the suspicion
that gnawed at the edge of her mind as she went to the door. During
the past month Dobie had killed a cat, a pheasant, two rabbits and a
field mouse and it seemed it would be only a question of time until he
got one of the chickens or even one of the suckling pigs. That would
be all Mac would need to throw one of his wild spells and he'd
probably take a gun to Dobie as he had threatened to do. To make it
worse, Dobie seemed to know how Mac felt and often growled at him. Mac
didn't growl back but the look in her husband's eyes was enough to
convince her Dobie's continued existence was in doubt.

It was a wonder to Alice that Mac hadn't done away with him already,
judging from the comfort she derived from the dog. Dobie never
fretted, never whined and seemed so appreciative of everything she did
for him. She had scolded him for his killing but found herself unable
to put her heart in it because he seemed to love it so. Instead, she
always managed to clear any bones away before Mac returned from town
or came up from the barn and she was thankful he seemed as yet unaware
of the brown dog's hunting nature.

Now it appeared she'd have to cover up for the dog once again and she
opened the door. Dobie was under a bush half way across the barn yard,
his kill still in his mouth. He was circling around, and she knew
he'd soon be on his stomach enjoying his feast.

[Illustration]

"Dobie!" she called in a low voice, hoping it would not carry to the
barn.

Dobie's ears came up. He looked her way.

"Dobie!... Come here, Dobie!"

The dog was undecided, looking at her, unmoving for a moment. Then his
tail started flicking, he lowered his head and came up to her.

Then she saw what he had in his mouth and her blood stopped and only a
great effort on the part of her heart started it going again.

It was a human hand, blood still oozing from the severed wrist.

"_Dobie!_"

The way she said it, the way she looked--something made the dog drop
the hand. It fell to the ground, limp, palm down.

Dobie, head hung, tail down, ventured forward, nuzzled her hand. But
Alice could not tear her eyes from the thing on the cold ground. She
had cared for Dobie like a baby ever since someone dropped him off
out in the country and she had adopted the name Dobie because a
passing child had called him that and it seemed like a good name ...
and she loved him.

But this, this hand. That was too much.

She looked around, saw a milk pail, put it open end down over the hand
and carried two large rocks from the garden border to put on top to
secure it. She didn't want it to be gone when she brought Mac back to
see it.

She heard her ring on the telephone--rather early for Mrs. Swearingen
or Mrs. Abbey wasn't it?--but ignored it. There was something else she
had to do and do quickly. For the first time in months she felt
thankful for Mac's presence. Surely he would know what to do. Though
it was cold, she was unmindful of the fact that she did not wear a
coat as she hurried to the barn; she was thinking instead that perhaps
she should have answered the phone in case it might have been someone
other than her women friends, possibly something in connection with
the severed hand. She shuddered as she remembered how it had looked.

Alice found Mac in the loft. He had a forkful of hay over the opening
when he saw her below. He stopped, narrowed his eyes before he slowly
brought the hay back to the loft floor and leaned on the pitchfork.

"Dobie's found something," she said and wished her voice hadn't
quavered so.

Mac spat a blob of tobacco on the floor above her. "He's a no-good
dog," he said. "Scares the pigs. Always sneakin' around. Ought to be
rid of him. Should have got 'round to it before this. What did he
find?"

"A hand." She swallowed ... and shivered.

"A what?"

"A hand. A human hand." She suddenly took pride in the fact that she
was telling him something he didn't know and that he was interested.
"I don't know where he got it."

Mac put down the fork and lowered his burly frame over the edge of the
opening and came down the ladder without a word. He followed her up to
the house and she was thankful Dobie was nowhere around. When he
kicked over the pail she was gratified to hear his sharp intake of
breath.

"By God!" he said, staring down at it. Then he flicked it over with
his boot. "By God!" he said again. Alice had never seen him so
agitated.

He turned to her, his eyes narrower than she had ever seen them. "You
take a good look at it?"

She nodded, looked down at the way the fingers were bent upward as if
the hand were holding an invisible ball. She heard Mac spit, looked at
him running his fingers along his stubbled jaw.

"It ain't human," he said. "Anybody with any sense could see that.
It's got six fingers."

       *       *       *       *       *

Just then the phone rang again. It seemed to come from a long way off
and Alice hadn't consciously noticed it until her husband said. "Ain't
you goin' to answer the phone?" And then she went to the door, dazed
and wondering. She turned before she went in.

"What are you going to do with it?" she asked.

"You just go in and gab with those women folks," he said. "I'll take
care of it."

"Shouldn't we call the sheriff?"

His eyes came up level with hers. "We ain't goin' to call nobody. I
don't want no trouble. And don't you go talkin' about it with _them_
either."

The phone was Mrs. Swearingen who told her that she had been trying to
get her for the last half hour ever since she heard about that ship
that crashed and wasn't it awful and that a person wasn't safe in his
bed asleep any more with these planes flying around and crashing--and
so far from an airport, too. Mrs. Swearingen was surprised that Alice
had noticed no smoke and didn't she know the wreck was closer to the
McNearby place than it was to the Swearingens?

"It's right south of your lower forty on the old Carnahan land, Alice.
I'd figure it at about a mile from your place. Lots of people down
there."

And then there was the call from Mrs. Abbey who told her she'd come
from the crash site and wasn't it a peculiar plane with those funny
windows and that once-broken-one somebody had patched up from the
inside.

"The sheriff won't let anybody go near it," Mrs. Abbey said. "He says
it's a space ship and the army ought to have a look at it first. But I
saw him trying to find where to get in. Except for that broken window
and that crumpled nose it don't look too bad off. Big clouds of smoke
were shooting out the tail when I first got there but it's not smoking
any more. Really, you ought to go down and see it, Alice."

Alice told her husband about it. He had gone back to the barn and she
didn't see the severed hand anywhere on the way there.

"So that's where it come from," he said. "Good thing it didn't land
on my place." He spat and wiped his mouth with the sleeve of his
overalls. It always bothered Alice when he did this because the stain
was so difficult to get out but she had long ceased trying to change
him. "If it'd landed here I'd of blown it up like a stump."

"Shouldn't we go down and see it?" Alice asked, knowing too late she
had phrased the question the wrong way.

"Curiosity killed the cat," he said, and there was the faintest
glimmer of a smile on his face but it was only fleeting. "Let
everybody else go down and I'll get my work done while they're
standin' around with their mouths hangin' open. I'm runnin' a farm and
I aim to run it right."

"I think I'll go down." She tried to make it have resolve but didn't
quite succeed.

He glared at her and spat again. "Then git," he said. He threw down a
large forkful of hay and she had to jump out of the way. She went
right after dinner.

She saw a silver cylinder that looked ever so much like pictures of
guided missiles she had seen in the newspapers except that this one
was bigger than any of them. Its nose was dug she could not tell how
far into the earth and some of the metal on the sides was battered and
bent and the tail was she guessed about a hundred and fifty feet in
the air. It was about twenty-five feet across.

There were clusters of people about and she recognized many of them
she hadn't seen for a long time and she was glad she had come because
it gave her a rare chance to visit; Mac seldom cared for just
visiting. She talked to the Blaines, the Purveses, to the Gordon
children whose parents had let them remain at the wreck site even
after they had gone home for chores, to the Barfords and Hocholters
and many others. They asked about Mac and she offered her usual
excuses for him.

While she was there she saw an army car driven up. She watched while
some men got out and went through the roped-off area and pounded and
scraped on the cylinder and then stood off looking at the tail of it,
scratching their heads.

       *       *       *       *       *

When she went home she was surprised to see how far the sun had moved
across the sky and hoped Mac wouldn't be upset by her prolonged
absence. She was gratified to see that he wasn't in the house. She
petted Dobie for a while before she went in to stir up the stove and
prepare supper.

During the meal Alice tried to tell her husband something of what she
had seen at the wreck site but if he paid any attention to her he
didn't reveal it. He had propped up a farm equipment catalogue against
the sugar bowl and studied the pages without saying a word. She
resigned herself to eating in silence with this great hulk of a man
before her and reflected that this night was no different from most of
the others. She wondered what it was that made him the way he was, so
intent on his farm to the exclusion of everything else, including
humanity. It was a fetish, an obsession that didn't pay off because
she couldn't see that they were better off than the Swearingens or the
Abbeys or any of the others in the neighborhood.

When he was through he simply got up, put on his overcoat and went
outside. In a few minutes she could hear the car start and knew it
would be another lonely evening. Mac would be home when he felt like
it, reeking of liquor but handling it well. She did not begrudge him
these absences because the man obviously needed something to take his
mind off his work. But she wished she had some comparable escape.

She had got out her writing board, had settled herself comfortably
with pen in hand in Mac's big chair and had even put the date on the
letter to her mother who lived in Canada when she heard Dobie's
excited bark.

She picked up a shawl on the way to the kitchen, turned on the big
light on the windmill and looked out the window. Dobie was in the
middle of the yard barking at something she couldn't see. She went
out.

"Dobie," she called. "What is it?"

The dog whined and moved about nervously, looking first at her and
then at the darkness between the big barn and the machine shed. As she
sought to pierce the blackness there, a shape moved out from between
the buildings and the sudden move caused her to step back. Dobie at
once set up loud and ferocious barking.

"Quiet, Dobie," she managed to say, laying a hand aside the dog's head
and viewing the figure before her. It was a man--at least a man
_shape_--with hands (she thanked God the creature had both its hands),
a head, neck, shoulders and legs. But the head was a lot larger than a
man's, there was no hair on it and the eyes were smaller, the nose
longer and the mouth a narrow slash across the face. The neck was
short, the shoulders thin and the legs and arms were spindling. She
saw that each hand had six fingers. Across the narrow shoulders had
been flung what looked like a carpet and from beneath this fell a
skirt that went to the knees, held to the body with a metal rope belt
just under his ribs. The shoes were enormous things for such pipestem
legs--until she saw they were soft and furry and that this gave them
their size. For a moment she almost laughed because he presented such
a grotesque figure, but she did not dare. The creature spoke.

"Good evening, Mrs. McNearby," it said in a not unpleasant, whistling
voice and Alice wondered how it could talk so well to her.

"I come from the crashed ship. You know of it, of course. You were
there this afternoon."

Alice was on the point of asking how he knew she had been at the wreck
site when he started in again.

"We have traced the severed hand of one of our crew to your place
here. We came down at considerable velocity when our ship went out of
control. We were lucky to escape with our lives. But one of us was
thrown from the ship with such force that his hand was cut off by an
obstruction on the ship. Your dog happened on the scene before we
could find the hand."

The chill of the November night air was beginning to penetrate her
shawl and Alice could feel a stirring of air on her legs. Dobie moved
restlessly at her side but she did not let go of his neck hair for
fear of what he might do.

"We need that hand, Mrs. McNearby. Without it the man who lost it will
be at a tragic disadvantage among us. That is why we were looking so
hard for it this morning after the crash. If we can return the hand to
him in time it can, through proper treatment, be made as good as new.
Would you be so good as to return it to me, now, please?"

The eyes, though tiny, seemed not unkind, and the alien stood silent.
She was moved by his pleas.

"Mac--that's my husband--has it," Alice said. "I saw Dobie here with
it and put it under a milk pail and when Mac saw it he said he'd take
care of it." She hoped she was making sense.

"Do you know where it is?"

"I don't know where Mac put it."

"Would you find it for me, please? I'll wait."

       *       *       *       *       *

Alice agreed and, wondering what Mac would say if he came home and
found the hand gone, started looking for it. But surely Mac would
understand about the hand, she thought. I'll explain to him the
urgency of it, that one of the aliens needs it to live and be useful.

She looked in the obvious places, in the storeroom just off the
kitchen, in the cellar, then in the house itself, in Mac's room and
through his things, and even in the attic, though she knew it couldn't
be there. She became frantic then, paced by the alien's necessity for
his hand, and did not bother to straighten things up after she looked.
It simply couldn't be in the house. But where else? She went out and
told the alien she could not find it but that she would look in the
barn.

In the end she could find it nowhere and when she told the alien he
seemed as disappointed as she.

"I have seen you searching," he said. "I want to thank you for your
trouble."

"I'm awfully sorry," she said. "I don't know where Mac could have hid
it. When he comes home I'll ask him."

"I'll wait for him," the alien said. "It's imperative we have the
hand. It is the only thing standing in the way of our leaving your
planet. Your husband will know where it is and return it to us."

"I'm sure he will," she said, hoping she was right but knowing how
stubborn Mac could be. Then she got to worrying about what would
happen if he would refuse and as she went back to the house with Dobie
at her side she was overcome with the shakes.

She did not get her composure back until she had drunk a cup of
steaming hot coffee. Then she looked at the clock, saw it was eleven
and that she had spent nearly two hours looking for the hand. She saw,
too, that the figure was still in the yard, standing there motionless,
like something carved out of stone.

Her husband drove in at mid-night and it seemed an eternity between
the time the engine stopped and he entered the house.

From the way he looked at her he was surprised to find her still in
the kitchen.

"You still up?" His face was flushed, his tongue thick.

"Mac," she said, not knowing how to begin. "Where is that hand?"

"You still worried about that?" He took off his coat and threw it on
the table.

"But Mac! They've come after it."

He looked at her dully. "Who's come after it?"

"The aliens--from the ship. There's one of them in the yard. Look out
the window."

He turned around and saw the stationary figure in the yard. He took a
deep breath. "So that's one of 'em, eh?" He laughed in a way that
chilled her, then went to the cupboard and reached for his shotgun on
the wall next to it.

Alice put her hand on his shoulders and he stopped before he touched
the gun.

"Listen, Mac. They need that hand. It belongs to one of their men and
they need it because they're going to put it back on and it will be as
good as new. Then they're going to leave."

He looked down at her with bloodshot, narrow eyes and she could see
where tobacco had run out of the corner of his mouth and the only
thing she could think of was what it would look like on the overalls
when she'd wash them.

"That thing out there," Mac said, "ain't got no business 'round here
scarin' the pigs and chickens. And I aim to get it."

"I wish you had told me where the hand is," Alice said, her eyes
scalded with tears. "I tried to find it. I looked everywhere. If I had
found it I would have given it to him and now they'd be gone."

He shoved her from him rudely. "Jest like a woman to do a thing like that.
And without even askin' me." He was breathing hard and he moved to the
window to look at the alien again. "You, out there. You want that hand,
eh?" He laughed again, then turned to her. "You looked for it. That's what
you said. Well, you jest looked in the wrong place. I hid it good." He
went over to his coat and withdrew a newspaper-wrapped package from one of
the pockets. He unfolded it on the table. It was the hand.

"Please take it out to him, Mac," Alice said. "He's waiting for it."

His face was sour and his lips a sneer. "Give it to him, hell," he
said. "Dobie brought it here, didn't he? I've a mind to let Dobie have
it."

"No, No!"

Mac put his hands on the table, stared down at the hand and shook his
head. "But Dobie don't deserve it."

He picked up the hand and a queasiness prevented Alice from looking
directly at it.

"It's a matter of time," she pleaded. "Please take it to them. They've
got to have it right away or they can't use it. She heard the clink of
one of the stove lids and watched in horror as Mac dropped the hand
through the hole into the fire beneath. She was suddenly sick. During
it all she could hear was Mac's laughter.

"Git on upstairs," he said a few minutes later. "Git on up to bed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Alice looked at him, knowing her face was pale and her eyes wet and
hating him for what he had done to her and what he had done to the
aliens. But she felt fear, too, because she had never seen him quite
like this.

"What are you going to do?"

He went over, took down a box of shells from the cupboard. "What d'you
suppose? I'm goin' to run that thing off my place."

"You can't do that!"

"You wait and see."

"But he's done nothing to you!"

"He's on my property, ain't he? Now you get on upstairs like I told
you. Git!"

Alice went up the stairs engulfed by a feeling of sorrow for the
aliens, particularly for the one that would never get his hand back,
and filled with fury for her husband.

From her bedroom window she could see the alien still standing in the
yard and she wondered what he would think of them for burning the hand
and for what Mac was about to do.

She stood there a long time before the alien moved. She heard the
downstairs door open and close and she knew Mac was outside and that
the two were approaching each other. The alien finally moved from her
field of vision.

Listening, she heard the alien's calm, whistling voice but she could
not make out what he said. She could only hear the raving of her
husband and this she did not want to hear.

When the shotgun blast came she jumped as if she herself had been hit
and once again she was flooded with compassion for the creature from
another world somewhere who had come in friendship and who had been
given something hateful in return.

She went to the window but she could see nothing. She did not dare go
downstairs again with Mac in the mood he was in. She sat in an
armchair at the window looking out into the barn lot illuminated by
the lone electric light high in the windmill. And eventually, she did
not know when, she fell asleep.

When she woke up the day was just dawning and with a rush she
remembered everything that had happened the night before and she found
she had slept through the night in the chair without removing her
clothes. When she stood up, her muscles screamed protestingly. She
looked out into the yard and saw that the light in the windmill was
still burning.

She went to Mac's bedroom, expecting to find him sprawled out across
his bed. But his bed had not been slept in. Downstairs she expected to
find him, head in hands, asleep at the kitchen table. But he was not
there and the shotgun was not in its place on the wall.

She found the gun on the doorstep. But Mac wasn't in sight. Dobie came
up to her and nuzzled her hands.

"Where is he Dobie?" she asked. "Where's Mac?"

Dobie turned and trotted before her, looking back at her as if to say,
"This is the way."

She found Mac behind the barn.

He was alive, but in a state of shock, moaning in pain and fear.

His right hand was missing. Severed neatly at the wrist.

THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hand, by Gerald Allan Sohl

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAND ***

***** This file should be named 32055.txt or 32055.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/5/32055/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
