The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Regular Brigade of the Fourteenth Army
Corps, the Army of the Cumberland, in the Battle of Stone River, or Murfreesboro', Tennessee, by Frederick Phisterer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Regular Brigade of the Fourteenth Army Corps, the Army of the Cumberland, in the Battle of Stone River, or Murfreesboro', Tennessee

Author: Frederick Phisterer

Release Date: April 21, 2010 [EBook #32073]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REGULAR BRIGADE--14TH ARMY CORPS ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  THE REGULAR BRIGADE OF
  THE FOURTEENTH ARMY CORPS,
  THE ARMY OF THE CUMBERLAND,
  IN THE BATTLE OF
  STONE RIVER, OR MURFREESBORO', TENNESSEE,
  FROM DECEMBER 31ST, 1862, TO JANUARY 3D, 1863,
  BOTH DATES INCLUSIVE.


  BY
  FREDERICK PHISTERER,
  _Late Adjutant 2d Battalion 18th U. S. Infantry_.




  To his Comrades,
  THE SURVIVORS OF THE REGULAR BRIGADE,
  ARMY OF THE CUMBERLAND,
  IN REMEMBRANCE OF PAST DAYS,
  AND TO PLACE ON RECORD A TRUE ACCOUNT
  OF THE PARTICIPATION OF THE BRIGADE
  IN THE BATTLE OF STONE RIVER.

  JULY 1ST, 1883.




When General Rosecrans took command of the Army of the Ohio there were in
that army five battalions of regular infantry in two different divisions;
when he reorganized this army he determined to bring these battalions
together, to give them a regular battery, and form of them a Regular
Brigade. The 15th, 16th and 19th were already at Nashville; the orders
organizing the brigade found the two battalions of the 18th near Gallatin,
Tenn., as a part of General Stedman's Brigade. On receipt of the orders,
the 18th marched, on the 23d of December, 1862, from Pilot Knob to
Nashville, Tenn., arriving there on the 25th day of December, 1862, and,
joining the other battalions and the battery, it completed the formation
of the brigade, which, as then organized, consisted of:

     The 1st Battalion of the 15th Infantry: Companies A, B, C, D, E, F, G
     and H; commanded by Major John H. King.

     The 1st Battalion of the 16th Infantry: Companies A, B, C, D, E, F, G
     and H, 1st Battalion, and Company B, 2d Battalion; Major A. J.
     Slemmer commanding.

     The 1st Battalion of the 18th Infantry: Companies A, B, C, D, E, F, G
     and H, of the 1st, and A and D, of the 3d Battalion; Major J. N.
     Caldwell in command.

     The 2d Battalion of the 18th Infantry: Companies A, B, C, D, E and F,
     of the 2d, and B, C, E and F, of the 3d Battalion; commanded by Major
     Frederick Townsend.

     The 1st Battalion of the 19th Infantry: Companies A, B, C, D, E and
     F; Major S. D. Carpenter commanding.

     Battery H, 5th U. S. Artillery, commanded by 1st Lieutenant F. L.
     Guenther.

Lieutenant-Colonel O. L. Shepherd, 18th U. S. Infantry, the senior
officer, was placed in command of the brigade.

When the Army of the Ohio--then become the Army of the Cumberland, or the
14th Corps--advanced from Nashville, Tenn., toward its objective point,
the enemy, the Regular Brigade broke camp on the 26th, encamping on the
evening of that day on the Petersburg Turnpike; on the 27th it encamped
near Nolansville, Tenn.; on the 28th, at night, it marched across the
country to Stewart's Creek, and on the 30th to a point on the
Murfreesboro' and Nashville Turnpike about four miles from Murfreesboro',
Tenn.

On the morning of the 31st of December the brigade left its bivouac at an
early hour and advanced on the Nashville Turnpike to a point a little less
than three miles northwest of Murfreesboro', and, with its division, was
posted in reserve. The division consisted of Scribner's, John Beatty's,
Starkweather's and the Regular Brigade, and was commanded by
Major-General Lovell H. Rousseau. Starkweather's Brigade had been left at
Jefferson's Crossing on Stone River. The division was part of the centre,
commanded by Major-General George H. Thomas. The formation in the brigade
was from right to left as follows: 15th, 16th, 18th, 1st and 2d
Battalions, and the 19th.

To fully understand the events now following, it will be necessary to
preface them with a short resume of the opening and progress of the battle
from 6.30 A. M. until noon; from the right of the army to the left of
Palmer's Division of the left wing.

The left of Palmer's Division, Hazen's Brigade, rested on the Nashville
Turnpike, about two and a half miles northwest of Murfreesboro', facing
south by east--the other brigades of this division faced almost east;
Negley's Division, of the centre, next in order, faced south by east;
Sheridan's, of the right wing, faced almost east; Davis' faced south by
east, and Johnson's, the right of the army, east and south, and a portion
of it on the right flank west by south. A line drawn from the extreme
right due north would have crossed the Nashville Turnpike near General
Rosecrans' headquarters, about one mile northwest of Hazen.

All the divisions, excepting Palmer's and the left of Negley's, had to
cross a dense cedar forest about three-quarters of a mile deep before
they could reach the Nashville Turnpike to their left and rear.

The extreme right of Johnson's Division was attacked about 6.30 A. M., and
the engagement extended gradually toward our left, the attacking columns
of the enemy moving in echelon from their left to their right; the attack
struck Johnson's flank, and, although portions of the division made a
gallant stand, the weight of the attack was too much for the division.
Johnson having been flanked and driven back, it became Davis' turn to be
taken in rear and right flank, and forced back after considerable
resistance. The next division, Sheridan's, was forewarned, and offered a
most determined resistance, falling back and changing front to the west as
its flank and rear became vulnerable; ammunition falling short, the rebel
force on his flank increasing, Sheridan commenced his retreat about 9.30
A. M., falling back slowly and fighting. Negley necessarily had now to
refuse his right, change front to the west and northwest, and, running out
of ammunition about 11 A. M., commence his retreat out of the cedars. This
exposed the right of Palmer's Division, compelling him, after a sharp
fight, to change front to the west and fall back on the railroad, pivoting
his division on the left of Hazen's Brigade, until it was at right angles
with its former position; this took place about noon.

The general front of the line, which in the morning was south by east, was
now west by south; the new line formed about noon ran along the railroad
and turnpike, and in front of it were open fields from Hazen's left to a
point about one-eighth of a mile southeast of General Rosecrans'
headquarters from which point the now re-organized right wing was posted
in the forest in a semicircle facing south and west, with the right,
refused, facing north by west and resting near the turnpike. Between the
right wing and Palmer's Division there were Van Cleeve's Division of the
left wing, the Pioneer Brigade, Negley's and Rousseau's Divisions.

During the remainder of the day these positions were not materially
changed, except that Van Cleeve's and Negley's Divisions were later
withdrawn and placed in reserve.

To return to the Regular Brigade: About 9 o'clock A. M. it became apparent
that the tide of battle was most decidedly against the right wing of the
army, and Rousseau's Division was ordered to the support of General
McCook. The Regular Brigade with its battery moved by the right flank into
the dense wood of cedars, alluded to above; when near Sheridan the head of
the brigade changed direction to the right, and line of battle was formed
in the cedars facing west. Meanwhile it had become evident that on this
ground no use could be made of the battery, and that no good position
could be obtained for the infantry; the advance was therefore discontinued
and the battery with the brigade ordered by General Rousseau to the open
field between the cedars and the turnpike, near where it started from.

Guenther's Battery first took position on a slight rise outside of the
woods, but moved shortly to a knoll between the turnpike and railroad,
shelling the woods in the direction of the advance of the enemy. The two
right battalions, the 15th and 16th, not receiving the orders to halt,
continued their advance, deployed skirmishers, and soon became engaged
with a rebel force sweeping down in the rear of Sheridan. This force
appeared to be clothed in the Union Blue, and for a time there was an
uncertainty as to its character; the skirmishers being soon driven in, the
status of these troops was quickly developed and the battalions had a hot
and fierce fight for a short time, in which they were assisted by the 6th
Ohio Volunteer Regiment on their right. Majors King and Slemmer having
finally received information of the movement of the brigade, prepared to
rejoin it, falling back through the woods, and halting twice to repulse
the enemy. Other forces coming to the support of the right, and Sheridan
having changed front and refused his right, enabled these battalions to
rejoin the brigade. Among the killed in this affair was Captain Bell, of
the 15th. The other battalions, though under fire, did not come into
action, but covered the movements, and followed in support of their
battery, all taking, finally, position on a rise or knoll near the
turnpike. At this point the 19th was shifted from the left to the right
wing between the 15th and 16th, thereby equalizing the strength of the two
wings more nearly. While in this position, the line facing southwest, the
brigade, the battalions of the 18th, and the battery especially, were
exposed to an enfilading artillery fire, and Captain Denison, of the 2d
Battalion, was mortally wounded, and Sergeant White, of Co. F. 3d
Battalion, 18th infantry, was killed by a solid shot. The brigade was not
long in position when Sheridan's troops began to come out of the woods,
followed shortly after by the enemy, whose further advance was resisted by
it. At a point where a short thicket about half way between the battery
and the woods and nearly opposite the battery and right of the brigade
covered to some extent its approach, Wither's Division formed and made a
desperate charge on Guenther's Battery. The enemy advanced boldly and
bravely; Guenther turned his admirably served guns on him, and with the
fire of his supports broke the column, which made four gallant efforts to
continue the charge, but melted away under the dreadful fire; their battle
flag went down three times in succession. Portions of Scribner's Brigade
flanked the enemy's left, and, upon the repulse of his charge on the
Regular Battery, Scribner's and John Beatty's Brigades, Van Cleeve's
Division, the Pioneer Brigade and other organizations, led by Generals
Rosecrans and Rousseau in turn, charged upon the enemy, driving him well
back into the cedars. The remnants of the right wing having meanwhile been
reorganized, reformed nearly all on the right, advanced and took
positions, held by them until the close of the battle. The enemy's advance
on our right and his flanking operations had now been successfully
resisted, but Negley was still in the woods, flanked and almost
surrounded. Extraordinary efforts were then made by the enemy to crush the
centre and left; reinforcements were brought from their right and thrown
upon the left of Negley and against Cruft, Grose and Hazen. Negley, out of
ammunition, was compelled to almost cut his way out; Grose's and Cruft's
Brigades of Palmer's Division, on Negley's left, necessarily had to follow
in his wake, in a measure covering his retreat; Hazen's right, on Cruft's
left, fell back and changed front from southeast to northwest, pivoting on
his left.

To enable these troops to fall back, to afford them protection, to gain
time to execute the now absolutely necessary movements in order to rectify
positions of troops and to form a new line from Hazen's left toward the
right, Rousseau's Division was again ordered into the cedars. General
Thomas himself gave the orders for the advance of the Regular Brigade,
saying to its commander: "Shepherd, take your brigade in there," pointing
southwest toward the cedar forest, "and stop the rebels." The brigade,
without the battery, for which there was no suitable position in this
movement, was at once put in march, advancing to the front (south) along
the railroad and turnpike. After reaching the further side (south) of the
open ground, it was suddenly directed to the right to enter the cedar
forest, and after a change of direction slightly to the right, it was
halted along the edge of the cedars facing southwest and west. During this
movement the 2d Battalion of the 18th executed a change of front to the
south, by companies on its left company, as if at ordinary battalion
drill, then marched by the right flank into the cedars; the other
battalions moved up by their flanks and shortest routes, preserving proper
intervals. This, all accounts agree, was about noon. The line was then
advanced about fifty yards, until our retreating troops were in sight. The
15th held the right; the 2d Battalion of the 18th the left, which rested
less than one hundred yards from the south end of the woods; each
battalion occupied the best position the rocky ground in its front
afforded, and the brigade covered a front of a little over one-fourth of a
mile. Let us review the situation: Negley and Grose were retiring; Cruft
was covering Negley's retreat and following him; Hazen's right was
falling back; the enemy's force was victorious and reinforced by three
brigades--according to a Murfreesboro' rebel paper and Bragg's
report--which were fresh and intact and commanded by Jackson, Preston and
Adams, and in this breach stood the forlorn hope of the army, the Regular
Brigade. Hazen's right retiring, left the left flank of the brigade
uncovered, but John Beatty's Brigade covered that point and the rear in
reserve; on the right of the brigade, Scribner came up to cover that flank
and to connect with troops still further on the right. As soon as the
front of a battalion was clear of our retiring troops, its fire commenced;
this waiting for our men to retire, and, meanwhile, receiving the enemy's
fire without being able to reply, was the most trying time of all. The
firing commenced at the left as soon as Cruft's men--so reported by a
staff officer--had withdrawn, and soon rose into a continuous roar. Capt.
Oscar A. Mack, on General Thomas' staff, who approached the brigade with
orders, and was severely wounded, declared the din of the fire to have
been appalling. The first line of the enemy were scattered like chaff;
their second line brought to a halt and held. The report of the men,
especially, is that there was a third line, which coming up, fixed
bayonets and with the remnants of the other two lines prepared for a
charge. General Negley, with some of his men, united with the 15th, our
right, and with them resisted the advance of his pursuers. Part of
Scribner's Brigade formed on Negley's right; John Beatty covered the left
and rear of the brigade. Officers and men were falling all along the line,
but not a man turned his back to the enemy; every one stood up to his work
and strove to be worthy of the hope placed in him, and to do credit to the
Regular Brigade. General Thomas' orders had been obeyed; the enemy's
onslaught on the centre had been repulsed, and his victorious troops
brought to a halt; the rebels had been stopped, and the key of the
battlefield secured, but at a loss of nearly half of the infantry force of
the brigade. The new lines along the turnpike and railroad having been
formed, troops moved into position, artillery posted to protect and cover
the new lines, the right of the brigade received orders to fall back; the
movement was executed under the protection of the battery, but unmolested
by the enemy, from right to left in perfect order, one battalion moving
after the other by the right of companies through the cedars to the rear.
Lieut. Ludlow's section of the battery had been detached to the front and
right to cover the retreat of the right of the brigade. It was a bitter
disappointment to obey orders then, but as the object of the advance of
the brigade had been achieved, its further exposure would have been
useless, and could only have resulted in its annihilation; still, this
was not understood at the time by the officers and men of the brigade.
When the heads of companies debouched from the woods, they were exposed to
a tornado of artillery fire from rebel batteries to our left. From the
position of the brigade in the cedars to a short distance outside, it was
a gentle decline, the ground then again commenced to rise as far as the
pike and railroad; about one hundred yards from the woods, on higher
ground, the brigade reformed and faced the enemy; as there was no pursuit,
it fell back of our new lines and joined again its battery in proper
supporting position. Here roll was called, reports were made, and now the
loss of the brigade was fully understood. John Beatty's and Scribner's
Brigades fell back with the left and right of the Regular Brigade, and the
artillery opened on the woods as soon as the brigade was out of them.

When the action opened in the cedars, Major Slemmer, of the 16th, was
badly wounded, and Capt. Crofton took command; almost immediately after
giving the command to retire, Major Carpenter fell, mortally wounded,
struck by six bullets, and the command of the 19th devolved on Capt.
Mulligan; on the retreat between the cedars and the railroad, Major King,
of the 15th, was disabled, and Capt. Fulmer assumed command; in the
cedars; in the 1st Battalion of the 18th, Capt. Kneass was killed and
Lieut. McConnell mortally wounded; in the 2d Battalion of the 18th, Lieut.
Hitchcock was killed and Lieut. Simons mortally wounded; in the 15th Capt.
Wise was mortally wounded; Major Townsend had his horse shot under him;
the Adjutant of the 1st Battalion of the 18th had his horse wounded; and
the Adjutant of the 2d Battalion had his killed under him. When the
brigade was again in its supporting position, its left wing was committed
for the remainder of the battle to Major Townsend, the right wing,
deprived of its field officers, needing more the attention of the Brigade
Commander.

This closed the enemy's and our operations for that day as far as active
participation by the Regular Brigade was concerned; the battery, however,
continued to play on the enemy's position, and when later in the afternoon
an attack was made to the left of the brigade, it assisted in the repulse
of the enemy in that quarter. During the night parties were organized to
collect the wounded of the brigade; the pickets of the enemy and of the
brigade were within speaking distance, and one of the parties was
captured; another party claimed to be an informal flag of truce, asking
for the privilege to collect our wounded, and thus after some parleying
was permitted to return. During the night also our lines were straightened
out; positions changed; the right of the first division of the left wing
posted on the left of the turnpike, by which movement our front was thrown
back about three hundred yards; and the left wing formed on a new line
toward Stone River; this gave us a shorter line, more reserves, and
allowed the Regular Brigade, at about 4 o'clock A. M., of the 1st of
January, to fall back to a little piece of woods near General Rosecrans'
headquarters, there to bivouac and seek rest.

Early on the 1st of January, 1863, the brigade, with its battery, was
ordered to the right to support McCook's wing, against which
demonstrations were made, and several positions were held by it without
coming into action. Shortly after two o'clock the brigade was ordered to
Stewart's Creek; having marched about four miles, it received orders to
return double quick, and marched nearly the whole distance at that gait.
Night coming on, the brigade bivouacked again to the left of the pike,
near General Rosecrans' headquarters.

On the morning of the 2d of January, before breakfast, the brigade
advanced under heavy artillery fire to the support of the left wing,
remaining as its support in different positions during the day and night;
the battery, being in action off and on during the day, assisted in the
enemy's repulse by the left wing in the afternoon of the day.

On the morning of the 3d, the fourth day of the battle, the battery opened
fire upon one of the enemy, which was annoying our troops, and soon
silenced and drove it from its position. During the forenoon the brigade
and battery advanced again to its position, the key of the field, held on
the 31st of December, threw up slight intrenchments and held them for the
remainder of the battle. The heavy rains during the day filled the ditches
partly with water and rendered them almost untenable, while the
surrounding ground was fast turning into a bed of mud; the men, at their
option, could stand or recline in water or mud, but not a word of
discontent escaped their lips in this trying and painful, as well as
arduous and dangerous service. About 6 P. M., under the cover of the
brigade and other batteries, an attack was made to the front by parts of
John Beatty's and Spear's Brigades; this attack, though spreading to the
front of the brigade, required on its part only increased watchfulness to
prevent surprise in case of a reverse; the battery, however, was actively
engaged in shelling the enemy's position in the woods to our front, south.

Before daylight of the morning of the fourth, the brigade pickets reported
the retreat of the enemy. The day, Sunday, was spent in the sad duty of
collecting the dead of the brigade, who were interred at night by
moonlight and with military honors just in front of the intrenchments.

Thus ended the battle of Stone River, or Murfreesboro'; and here it may be
proper to relate a few of the many incidents occurring in and during it,
showing the spirit which pervaded the officers and men of the brigade,
ready to laugh one moment, the next to suffer, and, if need be, to die.

During the fight at noon of the 31st of Dec., the color-bearer of the 2d
Battalion of the 18th was killed by a shot in the head and fell with and
on the colors; the color-guard at once raised the flag, when the top
became entangled in a low cedar; the Adjutant of the battalion, then still
mounted, finally called Lieut. Bisbee to the aid of the color-guard and
the colors were at last free again and thrown to the breeze; it was a
moment of great anxiety to all near, for it was understood that there was
to be no losing of the colors. When the left reformed after leaving the
cedars, Major Townsend, when on the rise took the colors and rode along
the new line for all to see that and where the stand was to be made. Capt.
Douglass, of the 18th, described the rebel artillery fire in the open
field, as if a blacksmith shop full of rotten iron was being thrown at the
command. When the brigade was reformed near its battery, there was a large
pile of knapsacks back of it, and many men rested against it from time to
time; pretty soon a rebel battery commenced firing solid shot at it,
making the knapsacks fly in all directions, but doing no other harm. For
a while it was a pastime to watch the solid shot coming through the air,
and one ball was especially noticed, going apparently straight toward a
man crossing the large open field to the rear, coming from the hospital
probably; the ball seemed to strike in front of and close to the man,
ricochetted and passed over the man, who at the same time made a profound
obeisance; to all appearances the ball would have decapitated him, had the
man been erect; a shout of laughter, seemingly from all parts of the
field, at the ludicrousness of the scene, relieved the anxious feeling of
suspense. But what a closing and beginning of a year was that! A large
number of officers and men, in fact all, were without rations on the 1st
and 2d, and parched corn, horse and mule steaks were in demand and
appreciated; the double quick back from near Stewart's Creek was doubly
hard on empty stomachs; at last, on the evening of the 2d, some bacon,
flour and coffee were received and helped to tide the command over the
worst; though the men were hungry, they were in the best possible spirits.
When on the 2d the brigade advanced by the right of companies double quick
to the front, one man, seeing a solid shot rolling along very leisurely,
put his foot out to stop it; the opposing forces did not overcome each
other, and, the shot being stronger, the man found himself nicely tripped
and rolling along with the ball, much to his surprise, and, not being
injured, to the merriment of his comrades. The Battalion Quartermasters,
with the teamsters, servants, cooks and sick, defended their trains
against the charges of rebel cavalry repeatedly, repulsing the enemy every
time, and saving and preserving their trains. Of the three rebel brigades
of Jackson, Preston and Adams, General Bragg, the commander of their army,
says: "How gallantly they moved to their work, and how much they suffered
in the determined effort to accomplish it, will best appear from the
reports of subordinate commanders, and the statement of losses therewith."
This shows some of the work done by the Regular Brigade, and later by its
battery repulsing the determined charge of these troops on to the left of
the line of battle. General Thomas, when asked why he sent the brigade
into the cedars, a regular holocaust, replied that it became a necessity
to do so.

The casualties in the brigade were fearful, and almost all were suffered
at noon of, and all occurred on, the 31st of December.

The following statement is taken from official sources, and shows the
casualties in the brigade in detail:

  Key: CO = Commissioned Officers.         Btn. = Battalion
       EM = Enlisted Men.                  Inf. = Infantry

                                NUMBER    NUMBER    NUMBER    NUMBER
                                ENGAGED.  KILLED.   WOUNDED.  CAPTURED.
                                CO   EM   CO   EM   CO   EM   CO   EM
  Field and Staff of Brigade     4
  1st Btn., 15th U. S. Inf.     16  304    2   10    3   74    --  17
  1st  "    16th        "       15  293   --   16    7  127    --  16
  1st  "    19th        "       10  198    1    6   --   55    --   7
  1st  "    18th        "       16  273    1   27    6  109    --   2
  2d   "    18th        "       16  298    1   30    5   98    --   5
  Battery H, 5th Artillery       3  120   --   --   --    5    --  --
                               ________   _______   _______    ______
                  Total         80 1486    5   89   21  468    --  47

                  Aggregating    1566        94       489        47

                                 TOTAL
                                 LOSS.
                                CO   EM
  Field and Staff of Brigade
  1st Btn., 15th U. S. Inf.      5  101
  1st  "    16th        "        7  159
  1st  "    19th        "        1   68
  1st  "    18th        "        7  138
  2d   "    18th        "        6  133
  Battery H, 5th Artillery      --    5
                                _______
                  Total         26  604

                  Aggregating     630

In his official report, General Rosecrans gives his loss as follows:
Killed, 92 officers, 1,441 enlisted men; total, 1,523; wounded, 384
officers, 6,861 enlisted men; total, 7,245.

Total killed and wounded, 8,778 officers and men, or 20.22% of the entire
force in action; the loss of prisoners, he states, will fall short of
2,800 officers and men.

The loss of the brigade compared with the loss of the army is as follows:
Officers killed in the army, 92; in the brigade, 5; = 5.4% of army loss.
Officers wounded in the army, 384; in the brigade, 21; = 5.4% of army
loss. Enlisted men killed in the army, 1,441; in the brigade, 89; = 6.1%
of army loss. Enlisted men wounded in the army, 6,861; in the brigade,
468; = 6.8% of army loss. Captured and missing in the army, 2,800; in the
brigade, 47; = 1.6% of army loss.

The loss of the army in killed and wounded was about 20% of the force in
action; the loss of the brigade in killed and wounded was 37% of its
strength in action.

The effective force of the army in the battle was, all told, 43,400
officers and men; the effective force, of the brigade taken into action
was, all told, 1,566 officers and men, or 3.6% of the strength of the
army; while the loss of killed and wounded of the brigade is 6.6% of that
of the army.

The loss of killed and wounded in Scribner's Brigade was reported as 208
officers and men, or about 2.3% of army loss; in John Beatty's Brigade as
281 officers and enlisted men, or about 3.2% of army loss; while the three
brigades were virtually the same in strength of effective force.

Only two brigades in the whole army report a larger loss of killed and
wounded than the Regular Brigade; both were about 200 men stronger than
that brigade, and suffered losses before and after the 31st December,
while the loss of the Regulars was all on that day; the brigades were
Carlin's, of the right wing, loss 627--but lost on the 30th 175 men, and a
few more after the 31st; Grose's, of the left wing, 585--but lost before
the 31st 10 men, and on the 2d of January, the brigade report states, met
with a severe loss, not as large as on the 31st, however.

These figures tell the tale, and it is doubtful if in any other engagement
of the war any organization under similar circumstances suffered as large
a loss.

The total number of men received by the general Government in its armies
during the war, for various periods, was 2,859,132; these, reduced to a
three years' standard, would make 2,320,272 men.

The average effective number of each 1,000 men in service has been
computed at 693 men; this, applied to the number of men of the three
years' standard, would, in round numbers, give an effective force of
1,608,000 men.

The total losses of the war, as near as it can be done with incomplete
returns, has been computed to be: Killed in action, 44,238, or about 1.9%
of the effective force; wounded in action, 280,000, or about 12% of the
effective force; while the Regular Brigade lost on the 31st of December
alone: Killed in action, 94, or 6% of its effective strength; wounded in
action, 489, or 31% of its effective strength. Of course, the above
computations can be applied only in a general way, inasmuch as after 1861
the actual number of men in the United States service, on an average, was,
in round numbers, only about 850,000 per year.

In his report of the battle, General Geo. H. Thomas says: "In the
execution of this last movement, the Regular Brigade came under a most
murderous fire * * * but with the cooperation of Scribner's and Beatty's
Brigades and Guenther's and Loomis' Batteries, gallantly held its ground
against overwhelming odds."

General Rousseau, in his report, speaks of the brigade as follows: "On
that body of brave men the shock of battle fell heaviest, and its loss was
most severe. Over one-third of the command fell, killed or wounded. But it
stood up to the work and bravely breasted the storm, and, though Major
King, commanding the 15th, and Major Slemmer (old Pickens), of the 16th,
fell severely wounded, and Major Carpenter, commanding the 19th, fell dead
in the last charge, together with many officers and men, the brigade did
not falter for a moment. These three battalions were a part of my old 4th
Brigade at the battle of Shiloh. The 18th Infantry, Majors Townsend and
Caldwell commanding, were new troops to me, but I am proud now to say we
know each other. * * * The brigade was admirably and gallantly handled by
Lieut.-Col. Shepherd. * * * Of the batteries of Guenther and * * * I
cannot say too much. * * * Without them we could not have held our
position in the centre."

Surgeon Eben Swift, Medical Director, Department of the Cumberland,
reports: "Much of the heaviest loss sustained to-day fell upon our Regular
Battalions, brigaded under command of Lieutenant-Colonel O. L. Shepherd,
in holding the cedar brake on the right of the centre against the columns
of the enemy sweeping down upon them after having forced back our entire
right wing."

W. D. Bickham, who was on the field himself, in his book, "Rosecrans'
Campaign with the Army of the Cumberland," published in March, 1863, makes
the following record: "The Regular Brigade, Lieut.-Col. Shepherd at the
head of the column, moved steadily into the thickets, and formed with
Colonel John Beatty's Brigade on the left, and Scribner's in close
support. Directly a dropping fire, like the big drops which precede a
storm, indicated the proximity of the enemy. * * * But the enemy pushed
hard. The gallant regulars resisted with the staunchness of their
professional _esprit_, and refused to yield an inch. * * * The file firing
of the regulars at this point was fearfully destructive."

"Pont Mercy," a correspondent of the New York _Tribune_, wrote from the
battle-field: "There is a record, however, which shall be more amply made,
when the Biography of the gallant Regular Brigade is ready for history.
* * * Almost one-half the casualties were regulars, while they numbered
less than one-fourth of the entire division. The missing indicates
discipline and skill of officers with unmistakable emphasis. It was so in
the sanguinary battle of Gaines' Mills on the Peninsula."

The Regular Brigade of the West had indeed sent greeting to their comrades
in the East.

As already stated, the dead of the brigade were buried in front of the
position held by it nearly throughout the battle; the intention was to
erect a monument over their remains, and officers and men subscribing
liberally, a large sum was collected--about $4,000. The dead heroes rest
now at the same point in the National Cemetery, established by the General
Government; and on the 12th of May, 1883, a monument made by the sculptor,
Launt Thompson, was erected over their resting-place.

The foregoing is not a fancy painted history of the brigade in this
battle; it is not embellished with rhetorical allusions to fire and smoke,
shot and shell, grape and canister, the roar of the cannon, the rattling
of the musketry, the groans of the dying and wounded; it is a simple and
plain statement of facts in unembellished terms; although the groans of
the wounded and dying, the rattling of the musketry, the roar of the
cannon, grape and canister, shot and shell, and fire and smoke were
constant accompaniments of the shifting scenes of this bloody and
destructive drama of the history of our country.




ROSTER OF COMMISSIONED OFFICERS OF THE REGULAR BRIGADE, AT THE BATTLE OF
STONE RIVER, TENNESSEE.


BRIGADE STAFF.

  Lieutenant-Colonel O. L. Shepherd, 18th Infantry, Commanding Brigade.[5]
  Captain N. C. Kinney, 18th Infantry, Quartermaster.[6]
  1st Lieutenant Anson Mills, 18th Infantry, Commissary of Subsistence.[7]
  1st Lieutenant Robert Sutherland, 18th Infantry Act'g Assist.
    Adjut.-Gen'l.[6]


1ST BATTALION, 15TH U. S. INFANTRY.

  Major John H. King, Commanding Battalion.[3][5]
  1st Lieutenant F. D. Ogilby,[4] Adjutant.
  Captain Jesse Fulmer.[6]
  Captain W. W. Wise.[1]
  Captain J. Bowman Bell.[1]
  Captain Henry Keteltas.[6]
  Captain Joseph S. Yorke.[3][6]
  1st Lieutenant Horace Jewett.[7]
  1st Lieutenant Charles Wickoff.[7]
  1st Lieutenant Sol. E. Woodward.[6]
  1st Lieutenant W. B. Occlestone.[3][4]
  1st Lieutenant R. P. King.[6]
  1st Lieutenant James Y. Semple.[4]
  2d Lieutenant William Galloway.[6]
  2d Lieutenant Roman H. Gray.[4]


1ST BATTALION, 16TH U. S. INFANTRY.

  Major A. J. Slemmer, Commanding.[3][4]
  1st Lieutenant John Power, Adjutant.[3][6]
  Captain R. E. A. Crofton.[7]
  Captain R. P. Barry.[3][6]
  Captain James Biddle.[6]
  Captain N. L. Dykeman.[3][6]
  Captain J. C. King.[3][6]
  1st Lieutenant A. W. Alleyn.[6]
  1st Lieutenant E. McConnell.[6]
  1st Lieutenant W. H. Bartholomew.[3][4]
  1st Lieutenant W. W. Arnold.[6]
  1st Lieutenant J. C. Howland.[3][6]
  1st Lieutenant R. E. Kellogg.[7]
  2d Lieutenant S. E. St. Onge.[6]
  2d Lieutenant W. J. Wedemeyer.[7]


1ST BATTALION, 18TH U. S. INFANTRY.

  Major J. N. Caldwell, Commanding.[5]
  1st Lieutenant R. L. Morris, Adjutant.[4]
  1st Lieutenant Dan'l W. Benham, Quartermaster.[7]
  Captain Henry Douglass.[3][7]
  Captain William S. Thurston.[6]
  Captain David L. Wood.[3][6]
  Captain Charles L. Kneass.[1]
  Captain Robert B. Hull.[3][6]
  Captain William H. H. Taylor.[6]
  1st Lieutenant Joseph L. Proctor.[6]
  1st Lieutenant Thomas T. Brand.[5]
  1st Lieutenant Samuel I. Dick.[4]
  1st Lieutenant Joseph McConnell.[2]
  1st Lieutenant Gilbert S. Carpenter.[3][7]
  2d Lieutenant Merrill N. Hutchinson.[5]
  2d Lieutenant Ebenezer D. Harding.[6]
  2d Lieutenant John J. Adair.[3][6]


2D BATTALION, 18TH U. S. INFANTRY.

  Major Frederick Townsend, Commanding.[6]
  1st Lieutenant Frederick Phisterer, Adjutant.[6]
  1st Lieutenant Wm. P. McClery, Quartermaster.[6]
  Captain Henry R. Mizner.[7]
  Captain Charles E. Denison.[2]
  Captain Henry Belknap.[6]
  Captain Ai B. Thompson.[3][5]
  Captain Wm. J. Fetterman.[4]
  Captain Henry Haymond.[3][6]
  Captain Ansel B. Denton.[6]
  1st Lieutenant Morgan L. Ogden.[3][6]
  1st Lieutenant Herman G. Radcliff.[4]
  1st Lieutenant James Simons.[2]
  1st Lieutenant Henry B. Freeman.[7]
  2d Lieutenant William H. Bisbee.[7]
  2d Lieutenant John F. Hitchcock.[1]
  2d Lieutenant Wilbur F. Arnold.[4]


1ST BATTALION, 19TH U. S. INFANTRY.

  Major S. D. Carpenter, Commanding.[1]
  1st Lieutenant Howard E. Stansbury, Adjutant.[6]
  Captain James B. Mulligan.[6]
  1st Lieutenant A. H. Andrews.[6]
  1st Lieutenant Jacob D. Jones.[6]
  2d Lieutenant Joseph J. Waggoner.[4]
  2d Lieutenant Wm. R. Lowe.[6]
  2d Lieutenant Alfred Curtis.[6]
  2d Lieutenant Chas. F. Miller.[4]
  2d Lieutenant Geo. W. Johnson.[6]
  2d Lieutenant Arthur B. Carpenter.[6]


BATTERY H, 5TH U. S. ARTILLERY.

  1st Lieutenant F. L. Guenther, Commanding.[7]
  2d Lieutenant Israel Ludlow.[6]
  2d Lieutenant J. A. Fessenden.[7]


MEDICAL DEPARTMENT.

  Assistant Surgeon Webster Lindsley, Acting Brigade Surgeon.[4]
  Acting Assistant Surgeon Patton.[6]
  Acting Assistant Surgeon Henderson.[6]


NOTES.

1 killed in battle of Stone River

2 died of wounds received at Stone River

3 wounded at Stone River

4 died in service since Stone River

5 retired

6 resigned, discharged, mustered out, and out of service

7 still in the U. S. Army, active list




BATTLES AND ENGAGEMENTS PARTICIPATED IN BY THE REGULAR BRIGADE.

  Stone River or Murfreesboro', Tenn., Dec. 31, 1862 to Jan. 3, 1863.
  Eagleville, Tennessee, March 2, 1863.
  Hover's Gap, Tennessee, June 26, 1863.
  Chicamauga, Ga., September 19 to 21, 1863.
  Mission Ridge, Tenn., November 25, 1863.
  Buzzard Roost and Tunhill, Ga., Feb. 25 to 27, 1864.
  Rocky Faced Ridge, Ga., May 5 to 9, 1864.
  Resaca, Ga., May 13 to 15, 1864.
  New Hope Church, Ga., May 28, June 1 and 4, 1864.
  Kenesaw Mountain, Ga., June 22 and 30, 1864
  Neal Dow Station, Ga., July 3 and 4, 1864.
  Peachtree Creek, Ga., July 20, 1864.
  Atlanta, Ga., July 27 and 31, and August, 1864.
  Utoy Creek, Ga., Aug. 7, 1864.
  Jonesboro', Ga., September 1, 1864.


ENGAGEMENTS AND BATTLES PARTICIPATED IN BY THE BATTALIONS BEFORE
ORGANIZATION OF THE REGULAR BRIGADE.

15th, 16th and 19th U. S. INFANTRY.

  Shiloh, Tenn., April 7, 1862.
  Corinth, Miss., May, 1862.


1st and 2d BATTALIONS, 18th U. S. INFANTRY.

  Lick Creek, Miss., April 26, 1862.
  Corinth, Miss., May, 1862.
  Springfield to Texas, Ky., October 6, 1862.
  Perryville or Chaplin Hill, Ky., October 8, 1862.




Transcriber's Note:

The key to the table on page 19 does not appear in the original, where,
instead, the words appear in full.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Regular Brigade of the Fourteenth
Army Corps, the Army of the Cumberland, in the Battle of Stone River, or Murfreesboro', Tennessee, by Frederick Phisterer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REGULAR BRIGADE--14TH ARMY CORPS ***

***** This file should be named 32073.txt or 32073.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/7/32073/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
