The Project Gutenberg EBook of Records of Harvest Mice, Reithrodontomys,
from Central America, with Description of a New Subspecies from Nicaragua, by Sydney Anderson and J. Knox Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Records of Harvest Mice, Reithrodontomys, from Central America, with Description of a New Subspecies from Nicaragua

Author: Sydney Anderson
        J. Knox Jones

Release Date: April 24, 2010 [EBook #32112]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARVEST MICE (REITHRODONTOMYS) ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Volume 9, No. 19, pp. 519-529
January 14, 1960


Records of Harvest Mice, Reithrodontomys,
from Central America, with Description
of a New Subspecies from Nicaragua

BY

SYDNEY ANDERSON AND J. KNOX JONES, JR.


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
LAWRENCE
1960




UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
Robert W. Wilson

Volume 9, No. 19, pp. 519-529
Published January 14, 1960


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas


PRINTED IN
THE STATE PRINTING PLANT
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1960

28-1279




Records of Harvest Mice, Reithrodontomys,
from Central America, with Description
of a New Subspecies from Nicaragua

BY

SYDNEY ANDERSON AND J. KNOX JONES, JR.


Since 1952 when Hooper's review of Latin American harvest mice was
published, collectors from the Museum of Natural History of the
University of Kansas have visited several countries in Central America,
and have obtained many additional specimens. Among these we find a new
subspecies of _Reithrodontomys fulvescens_ from Nicaragua, significant
extensions of known geographic range for several other species, and
additional information on variation in some little known kinds.
Specimens in the Museum of Natural History of _Reithrodontomys
mexicanus cherriei_, _Reithrodontomys tenuirostris_, and
_Reithrodontomys creper_ that are from within the geographic and
altitudinal ranges listed by Hooper (1952) are not included in this
report.

     All place names are on the map of Hispanic America published
     by the American Geographical Society and can be located by
     consulting the "Index to map of Hispanic America" (Vol. 1,
     Geographical names in Central America, U. S. Government
     Printing Office, Washington, D. C., 1943.) All measurements
     cited are in millimeters.

     Support for field work was provided by the Kansas University
     Endowment Association. Support for the laboratory phases of
     the work came in part from a grant from the National Science
     Foundation. Most of the specimens herein reported were
     collected by James W. Bee in late 1954 and early 1955, and
     by J. R. Alcorn and A. A. Alcorn in 1955 and 1956. A few
     that were collected earlier by other persons are mentioned.
     We are indebted to the following individuals for the loan of
     specimens in their care: R. G. Van Gelder, American Museum
     of Natural History; Philip Hershkovitz, Chicago Natural
     History Museum; W. H. Burt and E. T. Hooper, Museum of
     Zoology, University of Michigan; and D. H. Johnson and C. O.
     Handley, Jr., U. S. National Museum.

~_Reithrodontomys sumichrasti australis_~ J. A. Allen.--Seven specimens
from the vicinity of Volcan Irazu, Cartago, Costa Rica, are from within
the geographic and altitudinal range recorded for the subspecies by
Hooper (1952:82).

One female, KU 26967, trapped on March 2, 1947, on the SW slope of
Volcan Irazu, 8500 ft., contained five embryos that were 17 mm. in
crown-rump length.

~_Reithrodontomys sumichrasti dorsalis_~ Merriam.--A total of 93
females are among 195 specimens from 24 localities in Guatemala that
lie within the geographic and altitudinal range recorded by Hooper
(1952:78) for _dorsalis_.

Two females were pregnant; KU 71363, taken on January 28, 1956, 7 mi.
E, 2 mi. S La Union, Quetzaltenango, Guatemala, contained three embryos
that were 7 mm. in crown-rump length, and KU 65245, taken on December
15, 1954, 1 mi. NE Nebaj, 6000 ft., El Quiche, Guatemala, contained
four embryos that were 15 mm. in crown-rump length. These two females
were the only pregnant ones among 36 taken in December, 23 in January,
1 in February, 19 in March, 5 in April, and 9 in August.

~_Reithrodontomys fulvescens chiapensis_~ Howell.--GUATEMALA.--Baja
Verapaz: 1/2 mi. N, 1 mi. E Salama, 3200 ft., 1 (KU 65378--January 28,
1955); 1 mi. S Rabinal, 3450 ft., 4 (KU 65379-82--January 29, 1955); 5
mi. N, 1 mi. W [Santa Cruz] El Chol, 6000 ft., 1 (KU 65375--January 30,
1955). Guatemala: 5 mi. S Guatemala City, 4950 ft., 2 (KU
65371-72--March 13, 1955); 7 mi. S, 6 mi. E Guatemala City, 5800 ft., 1
(KU 65370--March 14, 1955). Santa Rosa: 2 mi. N, 2 mi. W Cuilapa [=
Cuajiniquilapa], 2980 ft, 2 (KU 65376-77--March 5, 1955).

The specimens from the departments of Guatemala and Santa Rosa are from
localities that lie on the Pacific slope and are southwest of the
previously known range of the species (see Hooper, 1952:93). The
specimens from 1/2 mi. N and 1 mi. E Salama and from 1 mi. S Rabinal
are paler dorsally than other Guatemalan specimens available to us,
including the specimen from the nearby locality, 5 mi. N and 1 mi. W El
Chol.

Specimens from Nicaragua that are recognizable by the E-shaped pattern
of the worn occlusal surface of the third upper molars and by the
S-shaped occlusal pattern of the third lower molars as of the species
_Reithrodontomys fulvescens_, extend the known range of the species
approximately 200 kilometers southeast from the vicinity of
Tegucigalpa, Honduras (Hooper, 1952:93). The Nicaraguan specimens are
described below as a new subspecies.


~Reithrodontomys fulvescens meridionalis~, new subspecies

     _Type specimen._--Skin and skull of adult male, no. 71388
     Museum of Natural History, University of Kansas, from 9 mi.
     NNW Esteli, Esteli, Nicaragua; obtained by J. R. Alcorn on
     July 15, 1956; original number 21,464.

     _Diagnostic characters._--A short-tailed _Reithrodontomys
     fulvescens_ having a distinctly streaked or "peppered," and
     short pelage composed of relatively dark hairs as well as
     relatively brightly colored hairs on dorsum and
     white-tipped hairs on venter; and having shallow skull,
     elongate and posteriorly attenuate incisive foramina, small
     postpalatal foramina, broad interorbital region, and
     mid-dorsal depression at junction of nasal and frontal
     bones.

_Comparisons._--Each of three adults of _meridionalis_ (trapped in
February and March) can be distinguished from seven adults of the
geographically adjacent _R. f. chiapensis_ from Guatemala (trapped in
late January and in March) by shorter tail, more streaked or "peppered"
dorsal pelage, yellower hue of non-blackish parts of hairs on dorsum,
less distinct mid-dorsal darkening, and more whitish (less buffy)
venter.

Four specimens of _meridionalis_ trapped in July at the type locality,
only one mile from the locality of capture of the February-taken
specimens, are distinctly darker dorsally and slightly darker ventrally
than the three _meridionalis_ trapped in February and March, but
resemble the latter three in shortness of tail and in having short,
"peppered" dorsal pelage. We lack specimens of _chiapensis_ in summer
pelage. According to Hooper (1952:122) the summer pelages of _R. f.
chiapensis_ and _R. f. helvolus_ are indistinguishable. Our
_meridionalis_ differ from five summer-taken specimens of _helvolus_ in
shorter, more "peppered," and distinctly darker dorsal pelage.

Six skulls of _meridionalis_ were matched with six skulls of
_chiapensis_ having approximately the same amount of wear on the teeth,
and the series were compared, pair by pair, in various cranial
characters. In five of the six pairs _meridionalis_ had a less inflated
braincase, and smaller postpalatal foramina, and in each of the six
pairs _meridionalis_ had a greater depression in the frontonasal region
and posteriorly more acute incisive foramina. Four external
measurements and nine cranial measurements were compared using the
series of _meridionalis_, the series of _chiapensis_ from Guatemala,
and Hooper's (1952:213) measurements of seven _chiapensis_ from central
Chiapas. The lesser average and maximum total length of skull in
_meridionalis_ than in either series of _chiapensis_ suggests that
_meridionalis_ has a smaller skull. Externally, the lesser total length
of _meridionalis_ is largely owing to its shorter tail; there is little
difference in length of head and body between _meridionalis_ and
_chiapensis_. The longest tail among our _meridionalis_ is shorter than
the shortest tail among the _chiapensis_ (disregarding two Guatemalan
specimens of _chiapensis_ that probably had injured tails). The
interorbital breadth of _meridionalis_ is on the average greater and
the depth of cranium is less than in _chiapensis_. There is some
overlap in the range of each of these two cranial measurements, but in
all _meridionalis_ the interorbital breadth exceeds 42 per cent of the
depth of cranium, and in all _chiapensis_ is less than 42 per cent. The
length of the incisive foramina in _meridionalis_, expressed as a
percentage of the total length of the skull, is usually greater than in
_chiapensis_.

One of our specimens (KU 71389) contained four embryos that measured 5
mm. in crown-rump length.

     _Measurements._--Selected measurements of the holotype,
     followed by the average and extreme measurements of six
     specimens of _meridionalis_ (including the holotype) from
     the vicinity of the type locality are: total length, 154,
     152.0 (148-154); length of tail, 82, 82.0 (81-83); length of
     hind foot, 17, 18.0 (17-19); length of ear from notch, 13,
     13.3 (12-14); total length of skull, 21.4, 21.13
     (20.3-21.7); zygomatic breadth, 10.0, 10.38 (10.0-10.6);
     breadth of braincase, 10.1, 10.17 (9.9-10.4); depth of
     skull, 8.2, 8.00 (7.8-8.3); interorbital constriction, 3.7,
     3.53 (3.4-3.7); breadth of rostrum, 3.8, 3.75 (3.6-3.9);
     length of rostrum, 7.4, 7.33 (7.1-7.7); length of incisive
     foramen, 4.6, 4.47 (4.2-4.6); length of upper molar
     tooth-row, 3.2, 3.32 (3.2-3.5). Corresponding measurements
     of a specimen from 11 mi. SE Dario are: 153, 82, 18, 13,
     20.7, 10.3, 10.1, 7.8, 3.4, 3.6, 7.2, 4.3, and 3.2.

     _Specimens examined, 8, as follows_: NICARAGUA.--Esteli: 9
     mi. NNW Esteli, 4 (KU 71386-89--July 15, 1956); 8 mi. NNW
     Esteli, 3 (KU 71393-95--February 5, 1956). Matagalpa: 11 mi.
     SE Dario, 1 (KU 71392--March 21, 1956).

     Specimens of _Reithrodontomys fulvescens helvolus_ used in
     comparisons: OAXACA: 3 mi. ESE Oaxaca, 1 (KU 68891--June 24,
     1955); 3 mi. W Mitla, 4 (KU 68892-95--August 5 to 9, 1955).

~_Reithrodontomys gracilis anthonyi_~ Goodwin.--EL SALVADOR.--Santa
Ana: 2 mi. SE San Cristobal, 2950 ft., 2 (KU 65401-02--March 6, 1955).
GUATEMALA.--Jutiapa: 2-1/2 mi. W, 2-1/4 mi. N San Cristobal [El
Salvador], 2900 ft., 5 (KU 65396-400--March 6, 1955).

The subspecies _anthonyi_ has been known previously by seven specimens,
none of which is fully adult, judging from Hooper's (1952:134) comment
that the adult pelage of _anthonyi_ is unknown. Six of our seven
specimens are clearly adults as is shown by well-worn teeth and degree
of development of temporal ridges. The seventh is a young animal in
process of postjuvenal molt. Individuals from our series in general
resemble specimens of _Reithrodontomys mexicanus orinus_ from the
vicinity of Guatemala City but differ from the latter as follows:
dorsal pelage brighter (with less suffusion of black), "peppered" in
appearance, shorter and sparser; ears distinctly paler, owing both to
the paler color of the skin and the paleness of the hairs inside the
pinna; dark tarsal stripe not extending onto hind foot; ears and hind
feet uniformly smaller; averaging smaller in cranial dimensions (but
there is considerable overlap), braincase less convex dorsally.

Measurements of the adult _anthonyi_ now available show that the
subspecies reaches a greater size than was apparent in the sample
available to Hooper. Consequently the three largest adults would be
identified as _R. mexicanus_ according to Hooper's key (1952:31),
rather than _R. gracilis_, and the three smallest adults could not be
unequivocably identified as either one species or the other.

The ranges of _R. gracilis_ and _R. mexicanus_ are allopatric except in
southern Guatemala where the ranges overlap. However, the two species
have not been taken there at the same place.

In comparison with May-taken adults of _R. g. harrisi_ from 3 mi. SW
Managua, Nicaragua, the adult _anthonyi_ average brighter (more orange)
in color (but two of the _anthonyi_ cannot be distinguished by color
when placed with the _harrisi_), and are larger in total length, length
of tail, and size of skull.

One female (KU 65400) contained two embryos that measured 18 mm. in
crown-rump length.

     Average and extreme external and cranial measurements of the
     six adults are: total length, 183.6 (170-198); length of
     tail, 106.0 (95-113); length of hind foot, 18.0 (18); length
     of ear from notch, 14.0 (14); total length of skull, 22.21
     (21.4-22.8); zygomatic breadth, 11.20 (10.9-11.7); breadth
     of braincase, 10.90 (10.3-11.4); depth of skull, 8.36
     (8.0-9.0); length of rostrum, 7.60 (7.3-7.8); breadth of
     rostrum, 4.24 (4.0-4.6); interorbital constriction, 3.78
     (3.6-4.0); length of incisive foramen, 4.05 (3.8-4.3);
     length of upper molar tooth-row, 3.28 (3.1-3.4). Weight in
     grams of the adults averaged 14.3 (12-17).

~_Reithrodontomys gracilis gracilis_~ Allen and
Chapman.--GUATEMALA.--El Peten: Uaxactun, 1500 ft., 2 (KU
65384-85--April 3, 1955).

These specimens are the first of the subspecies to be recorded from
Guatemala. Uaxactun is near, but not within, the range of _R. g.
gracilis_ as mapped by Hooper (1952:131). The male, KU 65384, and
female, KU 65385, are adults with comparatively unworn molar teeth.
Respective external measurements are: total length, 178, 175; length of
tail, 106, 102; length of hind foot, 18.5, 19; length of ear from
notch, 14, 14.

~_Reithrodontomys gracilis harrisi_~ Goodwin.--NICARAGUA.--Esteli: 9
mi. NNW Esteli, 1 (KU 71342--July 15, 1956). Managua: 3 mi. SW Managua,
15 (KU 71345-59--February, May, June, 1956); 4 mi. W Managua, 2 (KU
71360-61--June 26, 28, 1956).

Comments on the series from 3 mi. SW Managua have appeared elsewhere
(Englert, 1959:153). The specimen from 9 mi. NNW Esteli contained four
embryos that measured 5 mm. in crown-rump length.

~_Reithrodontomys gracilis pacificus_~ Goodwin.--EL SALVADOR.--San
Salvador: 1 mi. NW San Salvador, 1 (KU 71396--July 29, 1956).

In coloration (being but slightly paler), and in small size, this
specimen resembles the description of _R. g. pacificus_ given by Hooper
(1952:135) and ten specimens of _pacificus_ (nine from Guatemala and
one from Chiapas) examined by us. Because of this resemblance and the
marked contrast with specimens of _R. g. anthonyi_ discussed above we
assign this specimen to _pacificus_. In comparison with two topotypes
(AMNH 79062, 79090) of _R. g. anthonyi_ from Sacapulas, Guatemala,
taken on February 9 and March 2 that are essentially the same age as KU
71396, the latter specimen is darker dorsally, the tail is darker both
dorsally and ventrally, and the skull is smaller. In paleness of upper
surface of hind feet, length of palate relative to length of incisive
foramina, and size of bullae, KU 71396 resembles _anthonyi_. We
interpret these resemblances to _anthonyi_ as evidence of
intergradation between _pacificus_ and _anthonyi_. Felten (1958:9)
referred two specimens from El Salvador (one from San Salvador and one
from Amate de Campo, Departmento de La Paz) to _anthonyi_, without
comparison with _pacificus_ and with no mention of examination of other
specimens of _Reithrodontomys gracilis_. When the distribution and
variation of _R. gracilis_ in this region are more adequately known
these two specimens may well be reassigned to _pacificus_. Hooper
(1952:134) observed that two specimens from Monte Cristo Mine in
eastern El Salvador were the smallest and darkest of the _R. g.
anthonyi_ examined by him and approached _R. g. pacificus_ in these
particulars. Possibly these specimens from Monte Cristo Mine also
should be assigned to _pacificus_ rather than _anthonyi_. External
measurements of KU 71396 are: total length, 167; length of tail, 99;
length of hind foot, 19; length of ear from notch, 13. The specimen
contained four embryos that measured 10 mm. in crown-rump length.

~_Reithrodontomys microdon microdon_~
Merriam.--GUATEMALA.--Huehuetenango: 2 mi. S San Juan Ixcoy, 9340 ft.,
10 (KU 65404-13--December 24 and 25, 1954); 3-1/2 mi. SW San Juan
Ixcoy, 10,120 ft., 4 (KU 65210, 65414-15, 65417--December 27 and 28,
1954). San Marcos: 3-1/4 mi. N, 3/4 mi. E San Marcos, 9500 ft, 1 (KU
65420--March 22, 1955). Totonicapan: 5 mi. ESE Totonicapan, 4 (KU
68897-900--July 17, 1955).

All the localities from which we have examined specimens fall within
the geographic range of the subspecies as mapped by Hooper (1952:168).
He examined six specimens of _R. m. microdon_ and listed external and
cranial measurements for only two specimens.

     Average and extreme external measurements of 13 adults (7
     males, 6 females) from the vicinity of San Juan Ixcoy are:
     total length, 176.5 (168-187); length of tail, 105.8
     (100-110); length of hind foot, 19.5 (19-20); length of ear
     from notch, 16.8 (15-18). The average weight in grams of
     these same specimens is 9.1 (8-11). Average and extreme
     cranial measurements of 12 specimens from the same series (7
     males, 5 females) are: total length of skull, 22.55
     (21.6-23.0); zygomatic breadth, 10.82 (10.2-11.2); breadth
     of braincase, 11.02 (10.6-11.4); depth of skull, 8.67
     (8.4-8.9); interorbital constriction, 3.78 (3.6-3.9);
     breadth of rostrum, 3.86 (3.6-4.0); length of rostrum, 8.33
     (8.1-8.6); length of incisive foramen, 4.27 (4.0-4.5);
     length of palate, 3.48 (3.2-3.8); length of upper molar
     tooth-row, 3.25 (3.0-3.4).

~_Reithrodontomys mexicanus howelli_~ Goodwin.--GUATEMALA.--Baja
Verapaz: 5 mi. N, 1 mi. W [Santa Cruz] El Chol, 6000 ft., 3 (KU 65315,
65386-87--January 30, 1955). El Quiche: 1 mi. NE Nebaj, 6000 ft., 2 (KU
65275, 65277--December 19, 1954). Huehuetenango: 5 mi. E, 1 mi. N
Huehuetenango, 7000 ft., 2 (KU 65418-19--December 22, 1954). Santa
Rosa: 1 mi. WSW El Molino [= approximately 1 mi. S, 6 mi. E
Cuajiniquilapa], 1 (KU 71315--August 3, 1956).

The specimen from 1 mi. WSW El Molino is from within the range of the
subspecies _R. m. orinus_ as mapped by Hooper (1952:141), coming from a
locality to the southeast of the two westernmost localities shown by
him for _orinus_. This mouse is distinctly darker than any of the
specimens of _orinus_ discussed beyond, and is as dark as the darkest
_howelli_ seen by us. In addition to the specimens of _howelli_ listed
above, we have examined 12 from Prusia, Chiapas (UMMZ 88351-58,
96810-13), and three from 3 mi. NW San Cristobal, Chiapas (KU
66680-82).

_R. m. howelli_ may occur at moderate elevations along the coast of
southern Guatemala, or possibly this specimen represents a population
of dark-colored mice that is isolated from similarly colored
populations to the north and west. According to the field notes of
Albert A. Alcorn, the collector, this specimen was taken in a "tree
set." Perhaps pale-colored and dark-colored populations of _R.
mexicanus_ are sympatric but ecologically segregated in this region.

~_Reithrodontomys mexicanus lucifrons_~ Howell.--NICARAGUA.--Jinotega:
1 mi. NW Jinotega, 1 (KU 71344--April 12, 1956); 5 mi. S, 2 mi. E
Jinotega, 1 (KU 71343--April 12, 1956).

Comments on these specimens have appeared earlier (Englert, 1959:153).

~_Reithrodontomys mexicanus orinus_~ Hooper.--GUATEMALA.--Guatemala: 5
mi. S Guatemala City, 4950 ft., 2 (KU 65388-89--March 11, 1955); 6 mi.
S Guatemala City, 4680 ft., 3 (KU 65390-92--March 10, 1955); 7 mi. S,
6 mi. E Guatemala City, 5800 ft., 2 (KU 65393-94--March 14, 1955).

Our seven specimens are from near the northwestern edge of the
geographic range of _orinus_ (where it meets that of _howelli_) as
mapped by Hooper (1952:141). Nevertheless, they are distinctly brighter
dorsally, paler ventrally, and average larger than the specimens listed
in the account of _R. m. howelli_ above. Also, they match well in size
and coloration the specimens from nearby Lago de Amatitlan (USNM
275406-09) and Finca San Rafael (CNHM 41770) that were referred by
Hooper to _R. m. orinus_. He (_op. cit._:149) noted that these
last-mentioned specimens were slightly darker than topotypes of
_orinus_ and differed from them in several minor cranial features,
which he interpreted as evidence of intergradation with _howelli_.

~_Reithrodontomys brevirostris_~ Goodwin.--COSTA RICA.--Alajuela: 5 mi.
SW San Ramon, 1 (KU 71362--July 11, 1956). NICARAGUA.--Carazo: 3 mi.
NNW Diriamba, 2 (KU 71390-91--June 16, 21, 1956).

External measurements of these three specimens are respectively: total
length, 179, 167, 173; length of tail, 107, 96, 101; length of hind
foot, 19, 18, 18; length of ear from notch, 15, 13, 13. The teeth show
about the same moderate wear in each of the three specimens. Our
_brevirostris_ differ noticeably from specimens of _Reithrodontomys
mexicanus cherriei_ and _R. m. lucifrons_ that we have seen in duller,
darker, and less reddish color. One specimen, KU 71390, still has a
patch of gray juvenal pelage on the nape; the newer pelage elsewhere is
shorter and sparser than that of the other two specimens. In addition,
No. 71390, a female, contained no embryos, but has two pairs of mammae,
one pair pectoral and one inguinal, that are conspicuous on the dried
skin; perhaps this female was lactating when captured. The mammae of KU
71362, also a non-pregnant female, are inconspicuous on the dried skin.
The Nicaraguan specimens extend the known geographic range
approximately 270 kilometers northwestward from near Villa Quesada,
Alajuela, Costa Rica, and are the first records of the species from
Nicaragua.




LITERATURE CITED


ENGLERT, D. C.

     1959. First records of two species of harvest mice in
           Nicaragua. Southwestern Nat., 4:153, October 24.

FELTON, H.

     1958. Nagetiere (Mammalia, Rodentia) aus El Salvador, Teil
           2. Senckenbergiana Biologica, 39 (1/2):1-10, 1 fig.,
           March 31.

HOOPER, E. T.

     1952. A systematic review of the harvest mice (genus
           _Reithrodontomys_) of Latin America. Miscl. Publ.
           Mus. Zool., Univ. Michigan, 77:1-225, 9 pls., 24
           figs., 12 maps, January 16.

_Transmitted October 1, 1959._




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Bold text is shown within ~tildes~.

Italicized text is shown within _underscores_.

Bold italicized text is shown within ~_tildes and underscores_~.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Records of Harvest Mice,
Reithrodontomys, from Central America, with Description of a New Subspecies from Nicaragua, by Sydney Anderson and J. Knox Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARVEST MICE (REITHRODONTOMYS) ***

***** This file should be named 32112.txt or 32112.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/1/1/32112/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
