The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hitch Hikers, by Vernon L. McCain

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hitch Hikers

Author: Vernon L. McCain

Release Date: May 7, 2010 [EBook #32284]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HITCH HIKERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |
    | Transcriber's note:                                          |
    |                                                              |
    | This story was published in _If: Worlds of Science Fiction_, |
    | November 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any        |
    | evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was     |
    | renewed.                                                     |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+




_Illustrated by Kelly Freas_




The Hitch Hikers

    _The Rell, a great and ancient Martian race, faced extinction when
    all moisture was swept from their planet. Then, one day, a lone
    visitor--a strange, two-legged creature composed mostly of
    water--landed on Mars..._

BY VERNON L. MC CAIN


The dehydration of the planet had taken centuries in all. The Rell had
still been a great race when the process started. Construction of the
canals was a prodigious feat but not a truly remarkable one. But what
use are even canals when there is nothing to fill them?

What cosmic influences might have caused the disaster baffled even the
group-mind of the Rell. Through the eons the atmosphere had drifted into
space; and with it went the life-giving moisture. Originally a liquid
paradise, the planet was now a dry, hostile husk.

The large groups of Rell had been the first to suffer. But in time even
the tiny villages containing mere quadrillions of the submicroscopic
entities had found too little moisture left to satisfy their thirst and
the journey ever southward toward the pole had commenced.

The new life was bitter and difficult and as their resources were
depleted so also did their numbers diminish.

[Illustration]

Huddled at their last retreat the Rell watched the ever smaller ice cap
annually diminish and lived with the knowledge they faced extinction. A
mere thousand years more would see even this trifling remainder gone.

Oh, you might say there was hope ... of a sort. There might be Rell in
the northern hemisphere. The canals girdled the globe and a similar ice
cap could well exist at the opposite pole. Rell perhaps survived there
also.

But this was scant comfort. The fate of the Rell in the South was
sealed. What hope of any brighter future for those in the North? And if
they survived a few hundred thousand years longer ... or if they had
perished a similar period earlier, what actual difference did it make?

There was no one more aware of this gloomy future than Raeillo/ee13.

In the old days a single unit of the group-mind of the Rell would have
possessed but a single function and exercised this function perhaps a
dozen times during his life. But due to the inexorable shrinkage only
the most important problems now could command mind-action and each unit
had been forced to forsake specialization for multi-purpose endeavors.

Thus Raeillo/ee13 and his mate Raellu//2 were two of the five thousand
units whose task was to multiply in any group-mind action involving
mathematical prediction. Naturally Raeillo/ee13 and Raellu//2 did not
waste their abilities in mundane problems not involving prediction. Nor
did they divide, add, or subtract. That was assigned to other units just
as several million of the upper groups had the task of sorting and
interpreting their results. Raeillo/ee13 and Raellu//2 multiplied only.
And it must be admitted they did it very well. It is a pity the Rell
could not have multiplied physically as easily as Raeillo/ee13 and
Raellu//2 multiplied mentally.

With the exception of an occasional comet or meteor the Rell were seldom
diverted by anything of a physical nature. The ice cap was their sole
concern.

But one afternoon a rare physical phenomenon was reported by a bank of
observer Rell.

"In the sky's northwest portion," an excited injunction came through.
"Observe that patch of flaming red!"

More observer Rell were quickly focused on the novel sight and further
data was rapidly fed into the interpretive bank.

The Rell were justifiably proud of their interpreters. With the race
shrinkage it had proved impossible to properly train new interpreters.
So, not without a great deal of sacrifice, the old interpreters, dating
back to when the canals still flowed with water, had been kept alive.

They were incredibly ancient but there was no doubt as to their ability.
It was a truism among the Rell that the interpretive banks arrived at
their conclusions faster than any other group and that these conclusions
could be checked to hundreds of decimal places without finding
inaccuracy.

So it was no surprise to have the interpretive bank respond almost
instantly, "It is quite odd but the flame appears to be of artificial
origin."

"Artificial!" came the rough and questing probe of the speculative bank.
"But how could Rell possibly be out there?"

"Who mentioned Rell?" was the interpretive bank's smug answer. They were
not utterly averse to demonstrating their superior mental abilities on
occasion.

The speculative bank replied, "Artificial implies intelligence, and
intelligence means Rell..."

"Does it?" the interpretive bank interrupted. The speculative bank
waited but the interpretive bank failed to enlarge on the provocative
query.

The Rell had found certain disadvantages accrued to abnormal
prolongation of life and thus were not unused to the interpretive bank's
occasional tendency to talk in riddles.

"Perhaps not," the speculative bank replied after a quick check with the
logical formulae held in reserve by the historical bank. "It is
theoretically possible that Rell-like individuals might have developed
elsewhere, and perhaps even have developed intelligence, although,
according to the historical bank, such an idea has never before been
subjected to consideration. But what is the flame doing?" they
continued, a trifle resentful at having been left to do work properly in
the interpretive bank's province.

The observation and interpretive banks once more came into play,
studying the situation for several minutes. "The flame appears to be the
exhaust of a fairly crude vessel," the interpretive bank finally
reported, "propelled by ignition of some gaseous mixture."

"Is it moving?"

"Quite rapidly."

"Where is it going?"

This called into play the prophecy division of the mind and Raeillo/ee13
and Raellu//2, who had been merely interested onlookers before,
hurriedly meshed themselves with the other forty nine hundred odd of
their fellows. (It was impossible to say at any given time just how many
there were in their computer section, as several births and deaths had
occurred among the group since beginning the current observations. These
would be suspended for the next several moments, however, as there was a
strict prohibition against anyone being born, dying, or otherwise
engaging in extraneous activity while their particular bank was either
alerted or in action.)

Raeillo/ee13 and Raellu//2 felt the group discipline take hold much more
firmly than the free-and-easy mesh which each unit enjoyed with the
complete group-mind during periods of leisure.

With a speed that would have been dizzying and incomprehensible to any
individual unit, the observing banks relayed huge masses of extraneous
data to the interpretive bank. They strained out the salient facts and
in turn passed these to the computing:prediction section. Here they were
routed to the groups who would deal with them. Raeillo/ee13 and Raellu//2
found their own talents pressed into service a dozen or more times in
the space of the minute and a half it took the computing:prediction and
interpretive banks to arrive at the answer.

"It's aimed here," the interpretive bank reported.

"Here!" a jumble of incoherent and anarchistic thoughts resounded from
many shocked and temporarily out-of-mesh units.

"Order!" came a sharp command from the elite corp of three thousand
disciplinary units.

As stillness settled back over the group-mind the speculative bank once
more came in. "By here ... do you mean _right_ here?"

"Approximately," replied the interpretive bank with what would have
sounded suspiciously like a chuckle in a human reply. "According to
calculations the craft should land within half a mile of our present
location."

"Let's go there then and wait for it!" That thought from the now seldom
used reservation of impulse.

The speculative bank murmured, "I wonder if there would be any danger.
How hot is that exhaust?"

Calculations were rapidly made and the answer arrived at. The Rell
prudently decided to remain where they were for the present.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Leonard Brown, USAF, hunched over the instruments in the cramped
control cabin which, being the only available space in the ship, doubled
as living quarters. A larger man would have found the arrangement
impossible. Brown, being 5' 2" and weighing 105 pounds found it merely
intolerable.

At the moment he was temporarily able to forget his discomfort, however.
The many tiny dials and indicators told a story all their own to Brown's
trained vision.

"Just another half hour," he whispered to himself. "Just thirty more
minutes and I'll land. It may be just a dead planet but I'll still be
the first."

There really wasn't a great deal for Brown to do. The ship was
self-guided. The Air Force had trusted robot mechanisms more than human
reactions.

Thus Brown's entire active contribution to the flight consisted in
watching the dials (which recorded everything so even watching them was
unnecessary) and in pressing the button which would cause the ship to
start its return journey.

Of course the scientists could have constructed another mechanism to
press the button and made it a completely robot ship. But despite their
frailties and imperfections, human beings have certain advantages.
Humans can talk. Machines may see and detect far more than their human
creators but all they can do is record. They can neither interpret nor
satisfactorily describe.

Brown was present not only to report a human's reactions to the first
Mars flight; he was also along to see that which the machines might
miss.

"We've never satisfactorily defined life," one of his instructors had
told Brown shortly after he started the three grueling years of training
which had been necessary, "so we can't very well build a foolproof
machine for detecting it. That's why we've left room for 105 pounds of
dead weight."

"Meaning me?"

"Meaning you."

"And I'm your foolproof machine for detecting life?"

"Let's say you're the closest we can come to it at present. We're
banking everything on this first trip. It'll be at least eighteen
months later before we can get a second ship into space. So it's up to
you to get everything you can ... some evidence of life, preferably
animal, if possible. With public support it'll be a hell of a lot easier
squeezing appropriations out of Congress for the next ship and to get
public support we need the biggest possible play in the newspapers. If
anything is newsworthy on Mars it should be evidence of life ... even
plant life."

So here he was, 105 pounds of concentrated knowledge and anticipation,
itching with the desire for action and also from more basic causes
having to do with two months confinement in a small space with a minimum
of water.

"Life is most probable at the poles," the instructor had said. "You
won't be able to stay long so we'll try to set you down right at the
South Pole. You won't have room to bring back specimens. So keep your
eyes open and absorb everything you see. Don't forget anything. What you
bring back in your mind weighs nothing."


"It's just sitting there," the observing banks reported, "and the red
flame has gone out."

"Is it safe now?" enquired the speculative bank.

"In what way?"

"Is it safe to go near that thing?"

"It's very huge," ventured the observing banks unasked. There was a stir
of activity which encompassed practically all except the most simple
units and which lasted for perhaps five minutes while the speculative
bank's last question was processed.

Finally the interpretive bank reluctantly admitted, "We can't arrive at
a positive answer. Too many unknown elements are present. We don't know
for sure what caused the flame, when it might start again, or what, if
anything, is inside."

"But you said it was a work of intelligence. Doesn't that mean Rell
would be inside?"

"Not necessarily. They could have constructed the thing to operate
itself."

It was just then that the observing banks reported, "It's opening."

The speculative bank quickly responded, "This is an emergency. We must
be able to observe from close up. We'll have to approach it."

"The entire mind?" enquired the disciplinary corps.

The speculative bank hesitated. "No, we'll need to split up. One-fifth
of us will go, the rest remain here. It's a short distance and we'll
still be able to continue in complete contact."

Those who were to go were quickly sorted out and Raeillo/ee13 was quite
thrilled to find he and Raellu//2 were included in the scouting party.

The group set off briskly toward their objective but had moved hardly
one hundred yards when a vertigo seemed to overtake them. Raeillo/ee13
found himself swimming helplessly in a vortex of darkness and isolation,
blanked off from not only the group-mind and his bank but also from
Raellu//2. Frantically he grasped for some sort of stasis, but
dependence on the group-mind was too ingrained and he was unable to stir
his long-dormant powers of sight and education.

Then the isolation cleared to be replaced by a brief impression of chaos
with perhaps a tinge of alienness. Another instant of vertigo followed
and then everything was normal once more as the comfortable familiar
mesh took hold.

"What was that?" Even the speculative bank sounded frightened.

"Sorry." The usually silent meshing bank sounded abashed. "We weren't
prepared for that. Some sort of thought wave is issuing from the opening
and it disrupted the group mesh till we were able to take it into
calculation and rebuild the mesh around it."

"Thought wave? Then there _are_ Rell in that thing."

"Do not compute before the mesh is set," the interpretive bank
cautioned. "The presence of Rell, while extremely probable, is not yet
entirely certain."

Without waiting for a suggestion from elsewhere the disciplinary group
ordered the entire mind forward.

Perhaps, in time of stress, dormant qualities tend to emerge,
Raeillo/ee13 mused. Certainly everyone, himself included, appeared to be
exercising speculative qualities. Not that specialization isn't a
marvelous blessing, he hastily added, in case the disciplinary corps
might be scanning his bank. But the disciplinary corps itself was as
fascinated by the phenomenon ahead as Raeillo/ee13.

Emerging from the infinitely huge upright thing was a mobile being, also
infinitely huge. Not that they were the same size. The mobile one was
small enough to fit easily through the opening in the lower portion of
the larger. But beyond a certain point words lose meaning and infinitely
huge was the closest measurement the tiny Rell could find for either the
upright pointed thing or the knobby one which had emerged and was
quickly identified as the source of the disrupting thought patterns.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leonard Brown was enjoying himself thoroughly. The inside of a space
suit can scarcely be termed comfortable but at least you can move around
in it and Brown was making the most of this sensation after two months
cramped in his tiny cell. He was, in fact, comporting himself much as a
three-year-old might have done after a similar release.

But before long he settled down to the serious business of observing and
mentally recording everything in sight.

There were none of the mysterious 'canals' in view, which was
disappointing; one piece of glamour the publicity boys would necessarily
forego until the next trip. The ice cap itself, if such it could be
called, was almost equally disappointing. On Earth it would have been
dismissed as a mere frost patch, if this section was typical. For a
radius of many yards the ground was blasted bare by the action of the
exhaust and nowhere in sight did there appear to be more than the
flimsiest covering of white over the brown sandy soil.

"Not even lichens," muttered Brown in disgust.

But disgust cannot long stand against the magic of a fresh new planet
and Brown continued his avid, though barren, search until hunger forced
his return to the ship. He had been able to detect no life and was
completely unaware of his close proximity to the planet's dominant
species. It had been considered neither practical nor particularly
desirable to build a microscope into the space suit. Simplicity and the
least possible weight had been the watchwords here as with everything
designed to go aboard the ship.

In any case, a microscope would have done Brown little good in trying to
detect the submicroscopic beings of the Rell.


The Rell, who had somewhat lost their fear of Brown, hastily retreated
when they saw him returning to the still awesome ship.

"But are you _sure_ he's _completely_ self-powered?" the speculative
bank queried. "No Rell inside him at all?"

"There are many Rell-like beings in various parts of him," replied the
interpretive bank. "Some help digest his food, others are predators, and
still others their enemies. But most are too big and clumsy to have
developed intelligence, and even the small ones appear completely
mindless."

"But where do the thought waves come from? We all felt them."

"It's hard to accept but we are almost forced to conclude they are
emanating from the mobile unit itself, or rather from the living part
within the cocoon."

"You're positive they aren't the product of some of the Rell-beings
inside?"

"Almost positive. The mesh insists not. In fact, it claims this is an
un-Rell like type of intelligence, though that appears to be a
contradiction in terms. The thought pattern is completely outside our
experience. In fact, it is so alien we haven't broken it down yet to the
meaning behind it."

"But if the Rell inside are too large to have developed intelligence,
how could this gigantic monster in which they live have done so?"

"We cannot yet say. Remember, the theory that intelligence cannot
develop in creatures above a certain size is unproven, even though never
before challenged. We've watched other races die through failure to
adapt to change so apparently it is true of Rell-like creatures on this
world. But who can say about organisms on another world or of the
unprecedented size of this one? Completely different physical laws may
apply."

It was later that afternoon after the Rell had spent much time observing
Brown while Brown was busy observing the landscape that the interpretive
bank made the triumphant announcement, "We have it! We've broken the
thought waves down to their meanings and know what he's thinking. What
would you like to know first?"

"Check and see if there are any Rell inside the other thing or on his
home world. They might have constructed him."

"Apparently there are none, or at least no intelligent Rell, on his
world. We can't guide his mind but the memory bank recorded all the
thoughts we've received and some time ago he was thinking of something
he termed 'vermin'. Apparently these are sometimes Rell-like creatures,
although far larger. He regards them as a great nuisance, but mindless.
The big thing, by the way, he calls a 'ship' and it is utterly lifeless.
We needn't fear the flame until this creature leaves."

"What about him? What is he like?"

"That's the most exciting part! He thought of his bodily needs once and
we glimpsed a concept dealing with his physical construction. It's
incredible! His body is composed almost entirely of water ... there's
enough water in him alone to prolong the life of the Rell many ages.
Further, the air in his 'ship' is heavily impregnated with moisture and
he even has reserve supplies of water for his needs."


At this, not only Raeillo/ee13, but all except perhaps the most
responsible units felt a shiver of primitive longing and perhaps even
greed. Not for millennia had there been such a plentitude of water so
close!

"Then can't we appropriate at least part of it?" asked the speculative
bank.

"Unfortunately both the 'man', as he calls himself, and his 'ship' are
sealed so tightly that we could not penetrate either. Worse yet, almost
half his time here is already gone. We don't quite understand his
purpose here. His thoughts seem to say he is searching for Rell for some
unfathomable reason yet he seems to know nothing of the Rell and cannot
even detect us."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the next day when the time was almost all gone that the two big
discoveries were made. During a routine check, the mesh came across a
thought of the man's return and a visualization of his home world. It
was so startling that the interpretive bank was recalled from its effort
to try to devise a means through the spacesuit and set at the new
problem.

A hasty check of the man's subconscious thoughts revealed the big news.
"Do you know," the interpretive bank announced, "not only does this
being's home world have a moist atmosphere like that in his ship but two
thirds of the surface of his world is _liquid water_!"

Even the speculative bank was silent for a full two seconds after this
news. Then a hasty impulse was sent to the disciplinary corps and the
entire mind called into action. An extreme emergency upon which the fate
of the race hinged called for the utmost effort by even the humblest
members of the group.

The Rell worked diligently and many blind alleys were explored, but it
was not for some time that anyone thought of enquiring of the
not-too-bright feeding bank how they were managing to keep the mind
operating at considerably more than normal power with no frost within
feeding distance.

"We're taking moisture from the air," was the answer.

"Where is the moisture coming from?" the interpretive bank was asked.

The answer didn't take long. Rapid measurements supplied it. "Some of it
is vaporized frost but that wouldn't be enough for our needs. The only
other possibility is that moisture must be seeping away from either the
man or his ship despite his sureness that they were both airtight and
our own investigations which confirmed it."

They had maintained a cautious distance from the ship for the most part
despite the interpretive bank's assurance of no immediate danger. But
now they swarmed over both it and the spacesuit determined to detect the
leak.

They found none.

And now the man was returning to his ship.

"This is the last time," the mesh warned. It was now or never.

For a second there was conflict over control of the circuits to the
disciplinary corps which carried with it command of the organism during
the emergency. The speculative bank customarily assumed this
responsibility, but a slight schism had developed between it and the
interpretive bank. The latter's greater age and skill came into play and
victory was quickly won.

From the disciplinary corps came the order, "Stay close to the 'man'."

The interpretive bank explained, "He breathes the air so he'll have to
get to it some way."

The defeated speculative bank maintained a sulky silence.

Thus it was that the entire mind of the Rell rode into the interior of
the ship through the airlock while clustered around Brown.

The Rell had grasped that the man lived and traveled inside his ship and
the necessity for it to be airtight. But so desperate were the two
races' needs that the necessity for an airlock and the consequent slight
seepage each time it was used had not occurred to even the interpretive
bank.

Inside, many Rell, suddenly intoxicated by the heady moisture-laden air,
commenced uniting with each other then splitting away, each such union
resulting in another unit of Rell, naturally. The interpretive bank
again seized control.

"Stop it! Stop it this instant!" it snapped. "Reproduction must be kept
to the former minimum for now. That is a firm order."

Reluctantly the process was halted. The interpretive bank explained, "It
would not take long for us to use up the entire supply of water if we
indulged in uncontrolled reproduction. That might endanger the whole
trip."

"What do we do now?" the speculative bank finally asked.

"There is no way of knowing positively whether the man uses this same
atmosphere until he returns to his world or not. For our own safety it
would seem best, since Rell-like creatures already inhabit him, that we
join them. If any place is safe it will be his interior. And there is
plenty of moisture within to sustain us. But we must be good parasites,"
the interpretive bank warned. "Remember, no undue reproduction no matter
how many quarts of moisture seem to be going to waste inside this 'man'.
He may need it himself and if he does not survive the ship might not
complete its trip."

Brown was just emerging from his space suit so the Rell chose his
closest available body opening and flowed as a group into his mouth and
nostrils.

"Ahchoo!" sneezed Brown, violently evicting half the Rell.

They re-entered a bit more cautiously in order not to irritate the
sensitive membrane again.

"Dammit," said Brown, "don't tell me I've caught a cold clear out here
on Mars. Hope I didn't pick up any Martian germs."

But he needn't have worried. By the time he reached Earth he was far
less germ-ridden, even if considerably more itchy on the exterior, than
when he'd left. The Rell were good at self defense and a surprising
number of mindless but voracious creatures in Brown's interior had been
eliminated.

Brown dreaded having to give the news he carried but he needn't have. He
was a conquering hero.

So much fuss was made over the first flight to Mars that Congress
promptly voted twice the appropriation for the second ship that the Air
Force had requested, despite strong opposition from the Navy and
headlines which read:

    NO LIFE ON MARS

Actually, as it happened, the headlines were one hundred percent
correct, but they neglected to mention, chiefly because the headline
writers didn't know it, that there were now two races of intelligent
life on Earth.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hitch Hikers, by Vernon L. McCain

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HITCH HIKERS ***

***** This file should be named 32284.txt or 32284.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/2/8/32284/

Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
