The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Justice and Necessity of Taxing the
American Colonies, Demonstrated, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Justice and Necessity of Taxing the American Colonies, Demonstrated
       Together with a Vindication of the Authority of Parliament

Author: Unknown

Release Date: May 20, 2010 [EBook #32463]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAXING THE AMERICAN COLONIES ***




Produced by Ernest Schaal, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)











                                 THE
                         JUSTICE and NECESSITY
                                  OF
                                TAXING
                                 THE
                               COLONIES.

                         [Price One Shilling.]





                                  THE
                          JUSTICE and NECESSITY
                                   OF
                                 TAXING
                                  THE
                           AMERICAN COLONIES,
                              Demonstrated.

                            TOGETHER WITH A
                              VINDICATION
                                 OF THE
                        Authority of Parliament.

                                LONDON:
        Printed for J. Almon, opposite Burlington-House in
                            Piccadilly, 1766.





                                    A
                           VINDICATION OF THE
                     Authority of Parliament, _&c._


OF all the objects, which have since the revolution, engaged the
attention of the legislature, the proper method of adjusting our present
quarrels with the Americans is undoubtedly the most important. For as
the riches and power of Britain depend chiefly on trade, and that trade
on her colonies; it is evident that her very existence as the first of
commercial nations, turns upon this hinge.

It cannot therefore be impertinent in any one modestly to offer his
sentiments on this topick; that by the confrontation of different
opinions we may strike out truth, as we do fire by the collision of
flints; and that, as much light as possible may be afforded to our
legislators to guide them through so dark and intricate a labyrinth.

This is the more necessary, as there can be found no similar case in all
the records of history to serve as a precedent, or clew, to direct their
steps; and all they can do is to grope their way by their own industry,
and to employ their reason, as the only compass which can steer their
course aright to this land unknown.

Without any farther preamble, therefore, I shall proceed to discuss this
point, and to state the case fairly between the two contending parties,
that those, who having like myself, no particular interest concerned,
have consequently little prepossession for either side, may be enabled
to form an adequate idea of the subject.

While the colonies were under any apprehensions from the encroachments
of the French and Indians, they submitted to the British legislature
without reluctance; because they were sensible of their inability to
defend themselves, and of the necessity of taking shelter under the
wings of their mother. But no sooner were the French kites and Indian
vultures scared away, than they began to strut and to claim an
independent property to the dunghil. Their fear and their natural
affection forsook them at one and the same time. They now boast that
they owe their present happy state to no power on earth but themselves;
that they worked out their own salvation by their own right arm:
forgetting that, had we not conquered at Louisbourg, at Quebec, and many
other places; had we not constantly protected and defended them, the
French and Indians would have long ago reduced them to the situation of
the ancient Britons, and we should ere now have received some such
letter as this, inscribed, _The groans of the Americans. The
barbarians, on one hand, drive us into the sea; the sea on the other,
forces us back on the barbarians: so that we have only the hard
alternative left us, of perishing by the sword, or by the waves._

Their insolence is arrived to such a pitch that they are not ashamed to
assume to themselves the merit of bringing the last war but one to a
period. According to them, what obliged the enemy to listen to terms of
accommodation was not our success by sea, not the ruin of the French
navy, not the total stagnation of their trade, not the march of the
Russian auxiliaries; but the reduction, in a couple of short days, by a
couple of little cannon, of a little island hardly discernable in a map,
called Cape-Breton.

This undutiful, this disobedient behaviour of Britain's children abroad,
owed, no doubt, its origin partly to the causes assigned above, and
partly to the murmurs and discontent of those at home; the Sacheveril
in London produced another in Boston; the spirit of disaffection and
mutiny, which the harangues of a general raised in the cyder counties,
those of a colonel conjured up in New-England. Out of one hydra many
more arose, and there wants a Hercules to crush them. But who has the
courage and skill to wield his club? In hopes that such a hero will
arise, I will endeavour to furnish him with weapons, and to show him how
to pierce the vitals of the monster.

The most effectual way, in my opinion, of laying the spirit of
disaffection among the colonists, and of quieting the present
disturbances to the mutual satisfaction of each party, is to convince
the Americans that they ought to be taxed rather than the English, and
to prove that the interest of both is best promoted by leaving the power
of taxation in the hands of the British legislature; I shall therefore
address myself now to this task.

In this age all the kingdoms in Europe maintain a standing military
force, which may be ready on all occasions to defend themselves, and to
seize every opportunity of annoying their foes; Great-Britain therefore
is obliged to keep, tho' contrary to the genius of its constitution, a
large body of regular troops in constant pay: and as America must have a
considerable share of these for its safeguard, on whom ought the burden
of supporting them to fall, but on the Americans, to whom they prove an
immediate benefit? Great-Britain is sufficiently exhausted already; she
has spilt plenty of her blood in their cause, she has expended many
millions in their service, and has by these means contracted an immense
load of debt, of which she is never likely to be eased. Must she then
expire under her pressures? Instead of being relieved, must a new burden
be laid on her shoulders to crush her entirely? A tax for the support of
American guards and garrisons must be raised somewhere; else all the
labour of the last war may be lost in a moment; the colonies may be
conquered by our enemies in one campaign.

What then must be done? America must be taxed. By no means, says
America; I am sufficiently taxed already; the many restrictions and
prohibitions, under which I labour in point of trade, are an ample tax.
You gain of me by way of balance about half a million a year; let this
be applied to the defence of America, and it will be found an abundant
provision for all her wants.

But why, good America, dost thou not also desire us to apply to the
defence of Spain and Turkey all that we gain by them annually? The
argument will hold equally good, and cannot be absurd in the latter case
without being so in the former.

Why likewise, do'st thou not throw into the opposite scale the many
millions, which we have already laid out for thy preservation, and see
whether they do not make all, that we have ever drawn from thee, mount
up and kick the beam.

Thou sayest indeed, that we receive in the general course of trade all
the specie, which thou can'st spare; and that it is cruel, nay,
impolitick, to exact more than thou can'st afford; as excessive imposts
always damp industry, create a despondency in merchants, and
incapacitate a state for furnishing its ordinary quota of taxes.

But let me tell thee that the money raised by the stamp act, being all
necessary for paying the troops within thy own territories, must center
wholly in thyself, and therefore cannot possibly drain thee of thy
bullion.

It is true, this act will hinder thee from sucking out the blood of thy
mother, and gorging thyself with the fruit of her labour. But at this
thou oughtest not to repine, as experience assures us that the most
certain method of rendering a body politick, as well as natural,
wholesome and long-lived, is to preserve a due equilibrium between its
different members; not to allow any part to rob another of its
nourishment, but, when there is any danger, any probability of such a
catastrophe, to make an immediate revulsion, for fear of an unnatural
superfetation, or of the absolute ruin and destruction of the whole.

All countries, unaccustomed to taxes, are at first violently
prepossessed against them, though the price, which they give for their
liberty: like an ox untamed to the yoke, they show, at first, a very
stubborn neck, but by degrees become docile, and yield a willing
obedience. Scotland was very much averse to the tax on malt; but she is
so far from being ruined by it, that it has only taught her to double
her industry, and to supply, by labour, what she was obliged to give up
to the necessities of the state. Can America be said to be poorer, to be
more scanty of money than Scotland? No. What then follows? America must
be taxed.

It is in vain to pretend that the increase of the American territories,
and of the commodities, which they furnish to the British markets, has
reduced the price of any article; or placed the ancient colonists in a
worse situation than before the war; and consequently rendered them
incapable of bearing any additional burden.

Europe is still the same as in seventeen hundred and fifty-five, its
inhabitants are as numerous; therefore as Britons, with regard to it and
America, are, for the most part, but factors, the demand for American
goods must be as great, if not greater, than formerly; their value
cannot be diminished, nor can the Americans be worse situated than at
the commencement of the war.

It is equally idle to pretend that a tax on America must prove
prejudicial to Britain.

A tax for defending it must, as hinted above, be levied somewhere;
either in Britain or its colonies: and nothing is more manifest than
that those, on whom the tax is laid, or who advance the money, must be
the only sufferers, as in all dealings between two, what is taken from
the one is added to the other; it always requires some time to balance
accounts, by raising the price of commodities in proportion to the tax,
and to reduce every thing by the course of circulation to a level. What
America loses, Britain gains; the expences of the former are a saving to
the latter. All the world is sensible of the justness of this maxim, the
clamours of the colonists are a striking proof of it. If they were not
convinced of this truth, why grumble at the impost? If they did not know
that a tax upon them must prove comparatively detrimental to their
country, and serviceable to Britain, why exclaim against it? How absurd
then, is it to advance that as an argument for the abolition of the
tax, which was the principal one for opposing it? Indeed, to alledge
that England will gain more by laying the tax on herself, is to alledge
that a man, who gives his daughter an annual pension, becomes richer
than if he received an equal sum.

I own, if Britain, by any channel, receives in return a larger portion
than she bestows, she gains by the bargain. But that cannot be the
present case; for by taxing herself she raises the price of provisions,
which encreases that of labour, and manufactures, not only at home, but
also in America, and all other foreign markets; by which means all her
rivals in trade undersell her; she diminishes the quantity of her
exports, the number of her artisans and people, and empoverishes herself
in general. Whereas by levying the tax on the colonies, she saves a
round sum of money annually; the price of her manufactures continues
nearly the same, and as the wants of the colonists, cannot be much
lessened, her exports are almost equally considerable; in short, the
foregoing prospect is wholly inverted.

But why keep any Forces at all in America? She is sufficiently able to
defend herself. Every Male above sixteen years of age is enrolled in the
militia; they have arms, they are disciplined, their numbers are great,
and still upon the Increase: what more is wanting for her security? Is
she in greater danger now, that the French are exterminated, than she
was before the last war, when the enemy pressed vigorously upon her, and
yet hardly any troops were to be found throughout her whole extent?

No; but lest the same Difficulties should recur, lest the same quarrels
which bred the last expensive and bloody War, should return, troops must
be maintained for her safeguard. Britain observes this policy within
herself; is it not absurd to imagine she would not follow the same
maxim with regard to her colonies? She keeps on foot a considerable
body of forces to be prepared on every emergency, not only to oppose a
public foe, but also to enforce the decisions of the civil magistrate.
And notwithstanding the antipathy which most people have to standing
armies, they have been found to be very useful; and no government,
antient or modern, can be named, which was not, without their
assistance, subject to bloody riots and insurrections. Nor is there any
danger to be apprehended from them, while their number is small, while
the sword is in the hands of the people in general, while, as in
America, there is a superior well regulated militia to check them, if
they should discover any sinister design against liberty.

It is with a view of being useful to the mother country, that colonies
are first planted; this is part of their charter, a tacit condition, on
which they are allowed to depart and settle; therefore they are not
allowed by the laws of nature and nations to violate this agreement, as
long as the mother is able to avail herself of it, and treats them with
due Lenity and maternal affection. A few restrictions on their trade, in
order to pay off what debts they contracted, while yet in the nursery,
cannot be construed into acts of severity, and as little can a tax
intended for their own defence, and appropriated to that sole use.

Upon the supposition that America is never to be taxed, this country,
which now groans, and is like long to groan under the weight of taxes,
will in time be left desolate, all its inhabitants will flock to
America, to enjoy the benefits of a less oppressive government, and to
mingle with a people of similar manners, religion and laws. Britain, the
assylum of liberty, the seat of arts and sciences, the glory of Europe,
and the envy of the world, will be ruined by her own ungrateful sons,
and become a desart. What neither Spain nor France, nor all the world
combined, could accomplish, America, the child of her own fostering,
will effect.

    _Quos neque Tydides, nec Larissaeus Achilles,
    Non anni domuere decem, non mille carinae,
    Vincentur_ pueris.

America will prove a continual drain upon her industry and people, an
eternal spunge to suck up her vital moisture, and leave her a dry and
sapless trunk, exposed, without branches, without leaves, to the
inclemency of the weather. This event may be distant, but it is in the
womb of time; and must be brought forth, unless we have sufficient skill
to cause an abortion.

But what does America gain by all this? A transitory independence
perhaps, on the most noble constitution, which the wit of man has been
hitherto able to invent. I say transitory independence, for the broken
and disjointed members of the American empire cannot be cemented and
consolidated into one firm mass; it is too unwieldy and unmanageable; it
is composed of particles too heterogeneous to be ever melted down into
one consistent and well digested system of liberty. Anarchy and
confusion will soon prevail, were it to attempt an union; and the loss
of liberty will tread fast upon their heels. For a free and extended
empire on a continent are incompatible: to think they are not is a
perfect solecism in politicks. No history furnishes us with an example;
foreign conquest, or the power with which the magistrate must be
entrusted, are an invincible obstacle in their way. It is in islands
alone, where one part of the people cannot be so easily employed to
oppress the other, where the sea separates them from conquerors and
great empires, that liberty can be deemed a native of the soil. What a
wretched exchange, then, would the Americans make! They would barter
liberty for slavery.

But, say they, we are not represented in parliament.

True; you are not; no more is one twentieth of the British nation; but
they may, when they become freeholders, or burgesses: so may you;
therefore complain not; for it is impossible to render any human
institution absolutely perfect. Were the English animated by your
spirit, they would overturn the constitution to-morrow.

Like the colonies of all other countries, you enjoy the privilege of
being governed in the same manner, as the people, from which you are
derived. You have the same parliament, the same laws; you are all deemed
free-born Britons, and are intitled to all their immunities. What would
you have more? Would you reduce your protectors, your deliverers, your
parents to a state of servitude, by obliging them to pay taxes for you?
It is plain, too plain, excessive prosperity has rendered your heads
giddy, you attempt to soar higher than your strength will carry you,
than your safety will permit; it is incumbent on us, under whose care
you are, to clip your wings.

You tell us you are very sober and temperate, that you fear the
influence of a standing army will corrupt you, and introduce profligacy
and debauchery.

I take your word for it, and believe you are as sober, temperate,
upright, humane and virtuous, as the posterity of independents and
anabaptists, presbyterians and quakers, convicts and felons, savages and
negro-whippers, can be; that you are as loyal subjects, as obedient to
the laws, as zealous for the maintenance of order and good government,
as your late actions evince you to be; and I affirm that you have much
need of the gentlemen of the blade to polish and refine your manners, to
inspire you with an honest frankness and openness of behaviour, to rub
off the rust of puritanism, and to make you ashamed of proposing in your
assemblies, as you have lately done, to pay off no more debts due to
your original native country.

I am only afraid that you will not be blest with enough of their
company; they will be obliged to live on the frontiers, in order to
check the Indians, and to preserve your hairy scalps untouched; they
must be constantly exposed to secret treachery, and open violence, for
your ease and security; and yet you will not contribute a single penny
for their support.

In the name of wonder, what would you desire? Every farthing raised by
the stamps, and a great deal more from Britain, is necessary for your
defence, and is to be applied solely to that purpose: what more would
you ask? Would you, preferably to all the parts of the British
dominions, be exempted from taxes?

Do you murmur because Britain is not taxed for you, or because you are
not allowed to lay the tax on what commodities you please? If the former
be the source of your discontent, you are very unnatural, and very
ungrateful: very unnatural, because you have no compassion, no
fellow-feeling for the distresses of your exhausted parent; very
ungrateful, because, after Britain has done so much for you, after she
has nourished and reared you up, from your sickly infancy to a vigorous
state of adolescence, or rather manhood, after she has conquered your
enemies, and placed you, if now you be not wanting to yourselves, beyond
the reach of French perfidy and fraud, you will not stretch forth your
hand to ease her, sinking under her burden, nor contribute to her
security, or more properly your own.

But if the latter gave rise to your disaffection, you are very ill
informed, very short sighted, in not perceiving, that a general tax, for
the general defence of all America, could not be raised by
_peace-meal_, in every province separately. How could the quota of every
colony be ascertained; and, if it could be ascertained, how were the
colonists to be persuaded to grant it? We remember with what difficulty
they were induced to advance money for their own defence in the late
war, when the enemy was at their gates, when they fought _pro aris &
focis_, for their religion and property. Some of them have not, to this
day, contributed a single shilling. Are we to imagine, that they will be
more forward, more lavish now, when the danger is distant, and perhaps
imperceptible to the dull senses of most of them, than when it stared
them in the face, and threatened immediate ruin. Whoever thinks so, must
be a very weak politician, and ought to be sent to catch flies with
Domitian.

Each assembly among you, forsooth, pretends to an equality with the
British parliament, and allows no laws binding but those, which are
imposed by itself. But mark the consequence. Every colony becomes at
once an independant kingdom, and the sovereign may become, in a short
time, absolute master, by playing the one against the other.

But were the sovereign always virtuous enough not to avail himself of
this power, which with the greatest good nature, with the utmost
political foresight, you thus put into his hand, quarrels would, in all
probability, soon arise among you. It is well known you cannot boast of
much mutual love, or christian charity; the same spirit which actuated
your ancestors, and kindled the flames of civil war in this country,
still reigns among you, and wants but a single spark to raise a
combustion.

You will tell me, perhaps, that notwithstanding the multiplicity of
governments, you may, like the Swiss cantons, live for ages in harmony
and unity.

But I aver the contrary. The strength of the Protestants and Roman
Catholicks among them, is nearly equal, and keeps them in awe of each
other; but above all, the fear of being crushed by the surrounding
powers in case of intestine dissensions, prevents ambitious projects,
and secures the peace. But as neither of these is your case, you have
little reason to hope that you could preserve your liberties. Greece, as
soon as it ceased to dread the Persian monarch, fell immediately into
the hands of a despotick prince; you have no king of Persia to fear, how
then do you expect to remain free from slavery? Believe me, your safest
course is to continue in your dependence on Britain, where liberty is
naturalized, and where you are entitled to every blessing with which it
is attended.

Can you be so weak as to imagine that the two houses of parliament will
allow you to set up a claim to uncontrollable authority in your several
provinces? Perhaps you do not comprehend how this will in time reduce
them, and consequently you to mere cyphers? I will inform you. The power
of the crown is, of late, greatly encreased, by the vast number of
places, which the last war, and the enormous growth of the national debt
have left at its disposal. Give it also but the management of the
colonies, exclusive of the parliament, and there needs no more, in a few
years, to render it despotick.

Undoubtedly, the weight of this consideration was what moved the
British, to assume a superiority over the Irish parliament; and Ireland,
considerable a country as it is, submits to their controul; how can you
have the front to ask greater privileges? Indeed, till you are placed on
a quite different footing, you cannot expect even this indulgence: such
a number of scattered jarring governments would create so much
embarrassment and perplexity, as to be quite unmanageable.

Some of you complain that the privileges granted by your charters are
invaded.

But by whom, pray, were these privileges granted? By a king, who had no
power, I mean legal power, to grant you any privileges, which rendered
you independent of parliament, no more than he can make a corporation in
England independent of it. Talk not then, of such privileges; the spirit
of the British constitution could allow you none, by which you did not
remain subordinate to every branch of the legislature, and consequently
subordinate to parliament. The king makes but one member of the
legislature, and it is self-evident he cannot give away the rights and
privileges of the rest. He can grant any body of men a charter, by which
they are empowered to make bye-laws for their own government, but
farther his prerogative does not extend. He cannot free them from
obedience to acts of parliaments.

Another, and a general complaint is, that you are taxed by a body of men
unacquainted with your circumstances.

But who can be so well acquainted with the circumstances of the colonies
in general, as the British parliament? It is composed of men very well
versed in mercantile affairs, and much accustomed to the discussion of
intricate questions; many of them are merchants, and merchants that
trade to America and the West Indies. They are always ready to receive
information from any hand, and never proceed to business of importance,
till they have made the requisite inquiries. Nothing can be a better
proof of this, than their conduct with regard to the stamp act. A year
before it was passed, the ministers desired you to send agents over to
London, in order to propose your objections to the whole, or any part of
it; but you neglected this reasonable request; therefore, if the duty
on some articles should be too high, you have none but yourselves to
blame.

How then can you pretend to set up your own knowledge in competition
with that of the British parliament? Every single assembly among you,
may, perhaps, be a better judge of its own province than it; but that is
all: a full and comprehensive idea of the whole they cannot be expected
to have; their own particular interest they may understand, but the
interest of the colonies in general is an object too large, too complex,
to be taken in at one view, and to be perfectly scanned by them. It is
the British legislature alone, whose close connection with all the
colonies, whose thorough acquaintance with their trade and with commerce
in general, is universally allowed, that is properly qualified for such
an arduous task.

Thus have I shewn that the interest of both parties, of England and
America, is best promoted by adhering religiously to the ancient
system; that a claim of new privileges by the Americans, for they have
been taxed before by our parliament, will be attended with many
immediate disadvantages, and that the remote consequence will be their
own ruin and slavery.

But if, after all, the prejudices of the Americans should be so great as
to make them reject all reasonable terms of accommodation, should they
be so tenacious of what they call their privileges, as to be fully
resolved on asserting an absolute independence on the parliament of
Great Britain. Should they be determined, rather than yield to it as
formerly, to proceed to the last extremity, I would, with all due
deference to the wisdom of parliament, advise a certain number of
contiguous provinces to be incorporated, and to be allowed parliaments
under the same restriction as that of Ireland.

If they decline this equitable compromise, were I a member of either
House, I would give my vote for treating them as the Romans did the
Latins, when they attempted by force to make themselves denizens of
Rome. This step, I own, is dangerous, and very delicate in its
management, but in such a crisis, it is the only one which can, with any
dignity and prudence, be taken.

Though the partizans of America, in order to throw dust in our eyes, and
erect a bug-bear to the ignorant, insinuate that the colonies would, in
this extremity, follow the example of the Low Countries under Philip the
Second, and call in the assistance of France and Spain. There is little
reason to be apprehensive on that score; for the case is by no means
parrellel: the Flemings and Dutch contended for ancient established
rights, which had been allowed such by their oppressors themselves; the
Americans assert privileges unknown, unheard of before; the Spaniards
were strangers and foreigners to the inhabitants of the Low Countries;
the Britons are brothers and relations to the Americans; the seventeen
provinces were cruelly oppressed by the king of Spain, and a few of his
counsellors; the colonies are moderately taxed by the whole body of the
British legislature. Is it credible then, that, in order to free
themselves from the gentle tutorage of their parent, they should run
directly into the jaws of ruin and slavery? It is more probable that,
when they hear of the final determination of this point against them by
our parliament, the weight and authority of that body, the most august
in the world, will make them sit down, like the Cyder counties, quiet
under their burden.

But should they be so far infatuated as to act otherwise, it is in our
power to prevent any fatal consequence; the British fleet can soon bring
them to reason; all their capital towns lie defenceless on the edge of
the shore, and must always obey the dictates of the tremendous mouths of
cannon. This, however, is the last argument which ought to be used; for
it is always of consequence to preserve the affections of subjects, to
rule them by love rather than fear: nothing but the utmost contumacy, of
which, I trust in Heaven, they will never be guilty, can justify such a
violent measure.


                               F I N I S.




_Speedily will be Published._

_In two Volumes Octavo, Price_ 10s. _sewed, or_ 12s. _bound._


An Authentic Collection of the SPEECHES and DEBATES in the British House
of Commons from the Year 1742, to the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748.
In the Debates of this Period, are many important Motions arising from a
Variety of interesting Events, both Domestic and Foreign. Several
material Changes in the Administration, were the Consequence of those
Debates. As the Attention of Parliament was occasionally employed upon a
long and expensive War with both France and Spain, and the Suppression
of an unnatural and intestine Rebellion; a Moment's Reflection will shew
this to have been one of the most important Periods in our History. It
is therefore to be regretted, that these Debates have not been collated
and digested before, and that so necessary a Work has been so long
neglected; a Work so essentially useful to every Member of Parliament,
and every Lover of Constitutional History. These Debates which are
principally compiled from authentic Notes taken in the House, are
arranged partly upon the same Plan with Chandler's Collection, which is
brought down to the Year 1742; but with such Improvements from the
Journals, and other authentic Papers, as, it is presumed, will render
them worthy the Notice of every British Legislator.

Printed for J. Almon, opposite _Burlington-House_, in _Piccadilly_.


Of whom may be had, just published;

I. The Double Mistake; a new Comedy; as it is now performing at the
Theatre-Royal, in Covent-Garden. Price 1s. 6d.

II. The Royal Kalendar; containing new and very correct Lists of all the
public Offices, and both Houses of Parliament. Price only 6d.--The same
in an Annual Pocket-book. Price 1s. 6d.

III. The late Occurrences in America, and Policy of Great-Britain,
considered. Price 1s.

IV. Considerations on the Propriety of imposing Taxes in the British
Colonies. Price 1s. 6d.

V. The Necessity of repealing the American Stamp-Act, demonstrated.
Price 1s.

VI. The Grievances of the American Colonies, examined. Price 1s.

VII. Dummer's Defence of the Provincial Charters. Price 1s. 6d.

VIII. Considerations on behalf of the Colonies. Written at _Boston_.
Price 1s.

IX. An Examination of the Rights of the Colonies, upon the Principles of
Law. Price 1s.

X. The Principles of the late Changes, impartially examined. By a Son of
Candor. Third Edition. Price 1s. 6d.

XI. THE SECURITY OF ENGLISHMEN's LIVES; or the Trust, Power, and Duty of
the GRAND JURIES of ENGLAND, explained according to the fundamentals of
the English Government, and the Declarations of the same made in
Parliament by many Statutes. First printed in the Year, 1681. Written by
the Right Honourable JOHN Lord SOMERS, Baron of Evesham, and Lord High
Chancellor of England. Price 1s. 6d.

This excellent Tract has for many Years been very scarce, although
several Times strongly recommended by the best Writers on the English
Constitution; and in particular by the learned and able Author of the
_Letter upon Libels and Warrants_, &c. As that ingenious Work treats so
fully on the Rights and Privileges of Petit and Special Juries; this
admired Performance, on the Subject of Grand Juries, is thought to be
its proper Companion: and is therefore printed in the same Size, and at
the same Price.

XII. A LETTER concerning Juries, Libels, Warrants, the Seizure of
Papers, and Sureties for the Peace or Behaviour. With a View to some
late Proceedings, and the Defence of them by the Majority, upon the
Principles of Law and the Constitution. Fifth Edition. Price only 1s.
6d.

XIII. A POSTSCRIPT to the same, second Edition. Price 1s.

XIV. A Letter from Candor to the Public Advertiser, on some late
interesting Trials, and other Points of civil Liberty. Second Edition.
Price 1s.

XV. The Trial of Mr. William Owen (_never before printed_) Bookseller,
near Temple Bar, who was charged with the Publication of a Libel
against the Government in 1751, of which he was acquitted by a Jury of
free-born Englishmen, Citizens of London. The principal Speakers in this
Trial for the Crown, were, Sir Dudley Rider, Attorney-General,
afterwards the _famous_ Chief Justice of that Name, and Mr. William
Murray, Sollicitor-General, now Lord Mansfield and Chief Justice of the
King's Bench. For the Defendant, Mr. Ford, since dead; and Mr. Pratt,
now Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas: Whose Speeches are all
printed as nearly _verbatim_ as possible.--To which is prefixed, the
whole of the remarkable Trial of John Peter Zenger of New York, Printer,
(which for some Time has been very Scarce) who was also charged with
printing and publishing a Libel against the Government; of which he was
acquitted by an honest, independent Jury. With a Narrative of his Case.
Price only 1s. (Zenger's Trial alone was formerly sold for 1s. 6d.)

XVI. The State of the Nation; with regard to its Income, Expenditure,
and unfunded Debt. Fifth Edition. Price 1s.

XVII. The BUDGET. Eleventh Edition. Price 1s.

XVIII. The Right of Appeal to Juries in Causes of Excise asserted.
Second Edit. Price 1s.

XIX. The Rights of the Colonies, asserted and proved. By James Otis,
Esq; of Boston in New England, Second Edit. Price 2s.

XX. An Account of the late Right Hon. Henry Bilson Legge. With Original
Papers. Price 1s.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscores_.
Small caps have been replaced with Title cased text.

Obsolete spellings of words (e.g., impolitick, antient, assylum, can'st,
etc.) have been retained; ct ligatures are represented as ct, and long s
as modern round s.

Typesetting error on page 30: comlpain changed to complain.
Typesetting error on page 39: POSTCRIPT changed to POSTSCRIPT.

On page 20, the last word of the three-sentence Latin passage was not
italicized in the original, so the last word was not marked as
italicized.

Catchwords have been deleted. (Catchwords were used on each page of very
old books to indicate the first word of the following page.)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Justice and Necessity of Taxing
the American Colonies, Demonstrated, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAXING THE AMERICAN COLONIES ***

***** This file should be named 32463.txt or 32463.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/4/6/32463/

Produced by Ernest Schaal, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
