The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Maner of the Tryumphe of Caleys and
Bulleyn and The Noble Tryumphant Coronacyon of Quene Anne, Wyfe unto the Most Noble Kynge Henry VIII, by Wynkyn de Worde

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Maner of the Tryumphe of Caleys and Bulleyn and The Noble Tryumphant Coronacyon of Quene Anne, Wyfe unto the Most Noble Kynge Henry VIII

Author: Wynkyn de Worde

Editor: Edmund Goldsmid

Release Date: May 24, 2010 [EBook #32515]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRYMPHE OF CALEYS AND BULLEYN ***




Produced by Meredith Bach and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









_THE MANER of the TRYUMPHE AT CALEYS AND BULLEYN._




_This Edition is limited to 75 Large Paper copies, and 275 Small Paper
copies, issued only to Subscribers._




Bibliotheca Curiosa.


  THE MANER OF THE TRYUMPHE OF CALEYS AND BULLEYN,

  AND THE

  NOBLE TRYUMPHAUNT CORONACYON OF QUENE ANNE,
  _Wyfe unto the Most Noble Kynge Henry VIII_.


  _Printed by_ WYNKYN DE WORDE, _1532-33_.


  Edited by
  EDMUND GOLDSMID, F.R.H.S., F.S.A. (Scot.)

  PRIVATELY PRINTED, EDINBURGH.
  1884.




INTRODUCTION.


The two extremely rare tracts here given have been reprinted by Prof.
Arber in his "English Garner," if we can call _reprinting_ the issuing of
a pamphlet not only with the spelling entirely modernised, but also with
words and phrases inserted or inverted to suit the Editor's taste. In the
"_Tryumphe at Caleys_" Mr Arber has issued the Second Edition, giving us
no particulars whatever as to the First. In the list of the noblemen of
France, Mr Arber modernises the names and yet gives us a Cardinal
_Gramond_, being evidently unaware of the existence of the noble family of
de Grammont, and he equally fails to recognise in the Comte de Tonnore,
the celebrated Armand, Comte de Tonnerre. Anne de Montmerancy remains for
him an unknown actor on the brilliant stage, and yet, surely, the name of
the Montmorency must have reached his ears.

I have here given an absolute reprint of the first edition and have noted
at the foot of each page any variations in the readings which occur in the
second. Both Editions were printed by Wynkyn de Worde, probably about
November, 1532. The collation according to the copies in the British
Museum (c. 21, b. 20) is as follows. It is a black letter, unpaged tract
of four leaves. Page 1 contains the title, with a woodcut of Henry VIII.
on horseback, with two attendants.[1] Page 2 is blank in the First
Edition but contains a list of the noblemen of France in the second. Then
come five pages of text in the First Edition, followed by page 8 blank,
whilst the Second Edition has six pages of text. The second tract, "The
Cornacyon of Quene Anne," was printed by Wynkyn de Worde in 1533. I trust
the few notes I have added, either for the purpose of explaining obsolete
words or to give a slight clue to the identity of the more important
persons mentioned, may prove of use to the student.

EDMUND GOLDSMID.

EDINBURGH, _Nov. 15th, 1884_.




  The Maner of
    the Tryumphe
      at Caleys
        and Bulleyn.




The Maner of the Tryumphe of Caleys and Bulleyn.[2]

_Cum Priuilegio._[3]


I[4] will certyfye you of our newes in the partyes of Caleys. Fyrst the
xj. day of October whiche was Fryday in the mornyng at. v. of the clocke
the kynges grace toke his Shyppe called the Swallowe and so came to
Caleys by. x. of the clocke. And there he was receyved with processyon
and with the mayre and the lorde delite and all the speres[5] and the
sowdyours in araye with a greate peale of gonnes and laye in Caleys tyll
the Sondaye seuenyght after. And on the. xvj. day of October my lorde of
Norffolke accompanyed with my lord of Darby and a great nombre of
gentilmen besydes mette with the great mayster of Fraunce vj. myles fro
Calays at y{e} englysshe pale the sayd great mayster hauynge two greate
lordes in his company of theyr ordre and a hondred gentylmen attendynge
vpon them. And there my lorde of Norffolke and the greate mayster deuysed
the place where the two kynges sholde mete whiche was at Sandyngfelde. And
that done they wente bothe to Caleys with theyr companyes. And the sayd
greate mayster with dyuerse other straungers dyned that daye with y{e}
Kynge. And after dyner my lorde of Norffolke brought them forth on theyr
way a myle or two and so departed for that tyme. And on the mondaye the.
xxj. daye of October the Kyng of Englande toke his waye to mete with the
frensshe kyng at the place before appoynted with vij. score all in veluet
cotes afore hym lordes and Knyghtes and xl. of his garde and other to the
nombre (as we thynke) of. vj. hondred horses and as well horsed as euer
was seen. And y{e} Kyng our mayster mette with the frensshe Kyng at
Sandyngfelde within the englysshe pale thre myles. There the frensshe
kynge taryed for our mayster the space of an houre or two the frensshe
kynge beynge accompanyed with the kynge of Nauerne the cardinal of Loreyn
the duke of Vandome and[6] with dyuerse other noblemen well and rychely
appoynted beynge of lyke nombre as our kyng was of that is to saye vj.
hondred psones.[7] There was the louyngest metyng that euer was seen for
the one embraced y{e} other v. or vj. tymes on horsbacke and so dyd the
lordes on eyther party eche to other and so dyd ryde hande in hande with
greate loue the space of a myle[8] and than they dyd lyght of theyr horses
and dranke eche to other the frensshe kyng dranke fyrst to our kyng and
whan they had dronke they embraced eche other agayne with great loue and
so rode towards Bulleyn our kynge on the ryght hande. And whan they came
within a myle of Bulleyn there mette with the kynges the Dolphyn beynge
accompanyed with his two bretherne the duke of Orliaunce and the count or
erle of Angolame very goodly chyldren and attendyng vpon them four
cardynalles with a M. horses very well beseen. And whan they came nere to
y{e} towne the frensshe kynge caused our mayster to tary whyles y{e}
gonshot was shotte whiche was herd fro Bulleyn. xx. englysshe myles of.
And so entered the towne where stode the captayn with the sowdyours in
good ordre and aboue them stode a hondred swytsheners of the frensh kynges
garde in theyr dublettes and theyr hosen of yelowe veluet cutte goodly
persons[9] and aboue them stode cc. of the frensshe kynges garde more
scottes and frensshmen in cotes of yelow blewe and crymsyn veluet beryng
halberdes in theyr handes and aboue them stode cc. gentylmen beyng in
theyr gownes well and rychely beseen euery man hauyng an ax[10] in theyr
handes and theyr captaines standyng by them. And so they taryed in Bulleyn
mondaye tuysdaye Wednesday and thursday all daye.[11] And for the greate
chere that was there no man can expresse it. For the kynges grace was
there enterteyned all at the frensshe kynges costes and charges. And euery
daye noble men of Fraunce desyred our nobles and gentylmen home to theyr
lodgynges where as they founde theyr houses rychely hanged greate
cupbordes of plate sumptuous fare with syngyng and playenge of all kyndes
of musyke. And also there was sent vnto our lodgynges great fare with all
maner of wynes for our seruantes and our horsmeet payd for and al at theyr
charges. And euery day y{e} frensshe kyng had at dyner and souper with
hym certayne noble men of Englande. And the kynges grace had in lykewyse
certeyn of theyr nobles at dyner and souper during y{e} tyme of theyr
beyng at Bulleyn. And this contynued with as great chere and familiarite
as myght be. And as concernyng ladyes and gentylwoman there[12] was non
there. And on frydaye folowynge the kynges came to Caleys. And the dolphyn
with the cardynalles and all theyr gentylmen brought the kynges vnto y{e}
place where they fyrst mette and than departed. The frensshe king had
great cariage[13] for there came ccc. mules laden w{h} stuffe. And[14]
whan they came to Caleys they were saluted with great melody what with
gonnes and all other instrumentes and the ordre of the towne it was a
heuenly syght for the tyme First at Newnam bridge. iiij. c. shotte at the
blockhous. xl. shot at Rycebanke toure. iij. c. shot within y{e} towne of
Caleys. ij. m. shot great and small besydes the shyppes it was all
nombered. iij. m. shot. And at Bulleyn by estymation it past not. cc. shot
but they were great peces. Also for the ordre of the towne there was set
all seruynge men on the one syde in tawny cotes and sowdyours on the other
syde all in cotes of reed and blewe with halberdes in theyr handes. And so
the kynges came ryding in the myddes and so the frensshe kynge went to
staple hall which is a pryncely hous and vpon saterday bothe the kynges
rode to our lady chyrche to masse. And at after noone[15] bothe theyr
counselles sate togyder. And vpon sondaye both y{e} kynges herde masse in
theyr lodgynges. And at after-noone the kynge of Englande went to Staple
hall to the frensshe kynge and there was bothe bere baytynge and
bulbayting tyll nyght. And at nyght the frensshe kynge souped with our
kynge and there was greate bankettynge. And after souper[16] there came in
a maske mylady marques of Penbroke[17] my lady Mary[18] my lady Darby my
lady Fitzwater my lady Rocheford my lady Lislie and my lady Wallop
gorgyously apparayled with visers on theyr faces and so came and toke the
frensshe kynge by the hande and other lordes of Fraunce and daunced a
daunce or two. And after that the kynge toke of theyr visers and than they
daunced with gentylmen of Fraunce an houre after. And than they departed
to theyr lodgynges. And as for y{e} apparayle of y{e} frensshe lordes my
tongue can not expresse it and in especyal the frensshe kyng his
apparayle passed[19] my penne to wryte for he had a dublet ouer set all
with stones and ryche diamondes whiche was valued by discrete men at a
hondred thousand pounde they passed ferre our lordes and knyghtes in
apparayle and rychesse. They had greate chere in Caleys and louynge also
and all at our kynges costes and charges. Also the same daye that the
kynges came from Bulleyn the frensshe kynge made the duke of Norffolke and
the duke of Suffolke of the ordre of saynt Mighill.[20] And vpon monday
whiche was the. xxix. day of October at Caleys our kyng made the great
mayster of Fraunce and the admyrall of Fraunce knyghtes of the garter. And
that daye there was a greate wrastelynge betwene englysshe men and
frensshe men before bothe the kynges the frensshe kynge had none but
preestes that wrasteled which were bygge men and stronge they were
bretherne but they had moost falles.[21] And vpon the. xxix. daye of
October the frensshe kynge departed fro Caleys to Parys ward and our kynge
brought hym as ferre as Morgyson which is fro Caleys. vij. myle and so
came to Caleys agayne. And he purposeth (god wyllynge) to be at
Caunterbury the. viij. daye of Nouember and so home whome god of his
goodnes euer preserue and sende good passage and safe agayne into
Englande. Amen.

God Saue the Kynge.

  Imprynted by Wynkyn de Worde vnder
     the grace and preuylege of our moost
     royall and redoubted prynce Kynge
     Henry the viii. for Johan Gowgh
     dwellinge at Poules gate in Chepe.


_Cum Priuilegio._




  The Noble
    Tryumphaunt
      Coronacyon of
        Quene Anne.




The Noble Tryumphaunt Coronacyon of Quene Anne,

_Wyfe unto the Moost Noble Kynge Henry the VIII_.[22]


First the. xxix. daye of Maye[23] beynge thursday all the worshypfull
craftes[24] and occupacyons in their best araye goodly besene toke theyr
bargs which were splayed[25] w{h} goodly baners fresshe and newe with the
cognysaunce and armes of theyr faculty to the nombre of L. great barges
comly besene and euery barge hauynge mynstrels makynge greate and sweete
armony. Also there was the bachelers barge comly besene decked with
innumerable baners and all about hangyd with ryche cloth of golde
foystes[26] waytynge her upon decked[27] with a great shotte of ordynaunce
whiche descended the ryuer afore all y{e} barges and the bachelers barge
formest[28] and so folowynge in good araye and ordre euery crafte in theyr
degree and ordre tyll they came to Greenwyche and there taryed abydynge
the quenes grace which was a wonderfull goodly syght to beholde. Than at
thre of the clocke the quenes grace cam to her barge and incontynent[29]
all the cytezins with that goodly company set forth towards London in good
arraye as before is sayd. And to wryte what nombre of gon shot what with
chambres and great peces of ordynaunce were shotte as she passed by in
dyuers places it passeth my memory to wryte or to tell the nombre of them
and specially at Ratly and at lyme house out of certeyne shyppes. And so
y{e} quenes grace in her ryche barge amonge her nobles the cytezyns
accompanyed her to London unto the toure wharfe. Also or she came nere the
toure there was shot innumerable peces of ordynaunce as euer was there by
any mennes remembraunces where the Kyng receyued her grace with a noble
louyng countenaunce and so gaue great thankes and prayse to all the
cytezyns for theyr great kyndnesse and louynge labour and paynes in that
behalfe taken to the greate ioye and comforte of all the citezyns. Also to
beholde the wonderfull nombre of people that euer was seen that stode on
the shore on bothe sydes of the ryuer was neuer in one syght out of y{e}
cyte of London sene what in goodly lodgynges and houses that be on y{e}
ryuer syde bytwene Grenwyche and London it passeth al mennes iudgementes
to esteme the infinyte nombre of them. Wherein her grace with al her
ladyes reioysed moche.

Knyghtes made at Grenwyche the sonday before Whytsonday.

And the sondaye before this tryumphe beyng the xxv daye of Maye the Kynge
made at his maner of Grenwyche all these Knyghtes.

  Syr Christofer Danby.
  Syr Christofer Hylarde.
  Syr Brian Hastynges.
  Syr Thomas Methven.
  Syr Thomas Butteller.
  Syr Willyam Walgrave.
  Syr Wyllyam Feldeyng.

The fryday made Knyghtes of the Bathe xix whose names foloweth.

Also on fryday the xxx day of Maye y{e} Kynge treated and made in the
towre of London, xix. noble men Knyghtes of the bathe whose names folowe.

  The lorde Marques Dorset.
  The erle of Derby.
  The lorde Clyfforde sone and heyre to therle of Cumberlande.
  The lorde Fitzwater sone and heyre to therle of Sussex.
  The lorde Hastynges sone and heyre to therle of Huntyngton.
  The Lorde Barkelay.
  The lorde Mountagle.
  The lorde Vaux.
  Syr Henry Parker sone and heyre to y{e} lorde Morley.
  Syr Wyllyam Wyndsour sone and heyre to the lorde Wyndesour.
  Syr John Mordant sone and heyre to y{e} lorde Mordant.
  Syr Fraunces Weston.
  Syr Thomas Aroundell.
  Syr Johan Hudelston.
  Syr Thomas Ponynges.
  Syr Henry Sauell.
  Syr George Fitz Wyllyam of Lyncolne shire.
  Syr Johan Tyndall.
  Syr Thomas Jermey.

Also the saturday the last daye of May the Kynge made Knyghtes of the
swerde in y{e} towre of London whose names folowe.

  Syr Wyllyam Drury.
  Syr John Gernyngham.
  Syr Thomas Rusche.
  Syr Randolfe Buerton.
  Syr George Caluerly.
  Syr Edwarde Fytton.
  Syr George Conyers.
  Syr Robert Nedham.
  Syr Johan Chaworth.
  Syr George Gresley.
  Syr Johan Constable.
  Syr Thomas Umpton.
  Syr John Horsley.
  Syr Richarde Lygon.
  Syr Johan Saintclere.
  Syr Edwarde Maidison.
  Syr Henry Feryngton.
  Syr Marmaduc Tustall.
  Syr Thomas Halsall.
  Syr Robert Thyrkham.
  Sir[30] Anthony Wyndsour.
  Syr Water Hubbert.
  Syr Johan Wyllongby.
  Syr Thomas Thytson.
  Sir Thomas Mysseden.
  Sir Thomas Fouleshurst.
  Sir Henry Delues.
  Sir Peter Warburton.
  Sir Rycharde Bulkelley.
  Sir Thomas Lakyng.
  Sir Henry Lakyng.
  Sir Water Smythe.
  Sir Henry Eueringham.
  Sir Willyam Unedall.
  Sir Tho. Massyngberd.
  Sir Willyam Sandon.
  Sir James Baskeruille.
  Sir Edmonde Trafforde.
  Sir Arthur Eyre.
  Sir Henry Sutton.
  Sir Johan Nories.
  Sir Willyam Malorie.
  Sir Johan Harcourt.
  Sir Johan Tyrell.
  Sir Willyam Browne.
  Sir Nycolas Sturley.
  Sir Randolfe Manering.

Also the sonday after Whytsonday beyng trynyte sonday and the viij. daye
of June was made at Grenewyche these knyghtes followynge.

  Sir Christofer Cowen.
  Sir Geffray Mydelton.
  Sir Hugh Treuyneon.
  Sir George West.
  Sir Clement Herleston.
  Sir Humfrey Feryes.
  Sir Johan Dawne.
  Sir Richarde Haughton.
  Sir Thomas Langton.
  Sir Edwarde Bowton.
  Sir Henry Capell.

Also all the pauements of the cyte from Charyncrosse to y{e} towre was
ouer couerde and caste with grauell. And the same saturday beyng Whytson
euen the mayre with all the aldermen and the craftes of the cyte prepared
aray in a good order to stande and receyue her and with rayles for euery
crafte to stande and leane from prease of people. The mayre mette the
quenes grace at her comyng forthe of y{e} towre and all his bretherne and
aldermen standyng in chepe. And upon the same saturday the quene came
forth from y{e} towre towarde Westmynster in goodly aray as here after
foloweth. She passed the stretes first with certayne straungers then
horses trapped w{h} blewe sylke and them selues in blewe veluet with white
fethers acompanyed two and two. Lykewise squiers knights barons and
baronetts knightes of y{e} bath clothed in vyolet garmentes edged with
armyns lyke iuges. Than folowyng y{e} juges of the lawe and abbottes. All
these estats were to y{e} nombre of CC. cople w{h} more two and two
accompanyed. And than folowed bysshops two and two: and tharch bysshops of
Yorke and Caterbury y{e} ambassaders of Fraunce and Venyce the lorde mayre
w{h} a mace mayster garter the kyng of heraudes and the kings cote armour
upon him with y{e} offycers of armes apoyntyng euery estate in their
degre. Than folowed two aunciente knights with olde fassion hattes poudred
on their heedes disgysed who dyd represent y{e} duke of Normandy and of
Guyen after an olde custome: the lorde constable of Englande for y{e} tyme
beyng y{e} duke of Suffolke the lorde Willyam Hawarde y{e} deputie for
y{e} tyme to the lorde marshall duke of Norfolke. Than folowed y{e} quenes
grace in her lytter costly and rychly besene w{h} a ryche canape ouer her
which bare y{e} lordes of y{e} fyue portes: after her folowyng y{e}
mayster of her horse w{h} a whyte spare palfray ledde in his hande rychly
apoynted. Than folowed her noble ladyes of estate rychly clothed in
crymosyn poudred w{h} armyns to the nobre of xij. Than the mayster of y{e}
garde with the garde on both sydes of the strets in good aray and all the
constables well besene in veluet and damaske cotes with whyte stanes in
their handes settynge euery man in araye and orner in the stretes untyll
she came to Westminster. Than folowed four ryche charyottes with ladyes of
honour after than folowed xxx. ladyes and gentylwomen r(ich)ly[31]
garnysshed and so y{e} seruyng men after them. And a(s)[32] she was
departed from y{e} towne a meruaylous great shot of gonnes was there fyred
and shot. So this moste noble company passed till her grace came to
fanchurch where was a pagent fayre and semly w{h} certayne chyldren which
saluted her grace with great honour and prayse after a goodly fassyon: and
so passed forthe to Grase churche where was a ryght costly pagent of
Apollo with the nyne muses amonge y{e} mountaynes syttyng on y{e} mount of
Pernasus and euery of them hauynge theyr instruments and apparayle
acordyng to the descryption of poets and namely of Uirgyll with many
goodly verses to her great prayse and honour. And so she passed forth
through gracyous[33] strete unto leaden hall where was buylded a
sumptuous and a costly pagent in maner of a castell wherein was
fasshyoned an heuenly roufe and under it vpon a grene was a roote or a
stocke whereout spronge a multytude of whyte roses and reed curyously
wrought so from the heuenly roufe descended a whyte faucon and lighted
upon y{e} said stocke and roote and incontynent descended an angell w{h}
goodly armony hauynge a close crowne bytwene his handes and set it on the
faucons heed: and on the said flour sate saynt Anne in y{e} hyest place on
that one syde her progeny w{h} scripture that is to wete the thre Marys
w{h} theyr issue y{t} is to vnderstande: Mary the mother of Christ Mary
Solome y{e} mother[34] of Zebedee with the two chyldren of them also Mary
Cleophe with her husbande Alphee with their four chyldren on y{e} other
syde with other poetycall verses sayd and songe w{h} a balade in englisshe
to her great prayse (and)[35] honour and to al her progeny also. And so
she passed (for)th[36] from thence through cornehill and at y{e} condyt
was a sumptuous pagent of the thre graces: and at the comynge of the
quenes grace a poete declared the nature of all those thre ladyes and gave
hye prayses vnto the quene. And after his preamble fynysshed every lady
partyculer spake great honour and hye prayse of the quenes grace: And so
she passed forth with all her nobles tyll she came in chepe and at the
great condyt was made a costly fountayne whereout ranne whyte wyne claret
and reed great plenty all that after noone: and ther was great melody w{h}
speches. And so passed forthe through chepe to the standarde whiche was
costly and sumptuously garnisshed with gold and asure with armes and
stories wher was great armony and melody: and so passed she forth by the
crosse in chepe whiche was newe garnisshed and so through chepe towarde
the lesser condyt. And in the mydwaye bytwene the recorder of London
receyved her afore the Aldermen with great reuerence and honour salutynge
her grace with a louyng and humble preposycion presentynge her grace with
a ryche and costly purse of golde and in it a thousande marke in golde
coyne gyuen vnto her as a free gyfte of honour: to whom she gaue great
thankes bothe with herte and mynde. And so her grace passed a lytell
further and at the lesser condyt was a costly and a ryche pagent where as
was goodly armonye of musyke and other mynstrels with syngyng: And within
that pagent was fyue costly seates wherin was set these fyue personages
that is to wete Juno Pallas Mercury and Venus and Parys hauyng a ball of
golde presentyng it to her grace with certayne verses of great honour and
chyldren syngyng a balade to her grace and prayse to all her ladyes and so
passed forth to Poules gate where was a proper and a sumptuous pagent y{t}
is to wete ther sat. iij. fayre ladyes virgyns costly arayde with a fayre
rounde trone ouer their heedes where aboute was written this. Regina Anna
prospere procede et regna that is in englysshe Quene Anne prospere procede
and reygne. The lady that sate in the myddes hauynge a table of golde in
her hande wrytten with letters of asure. Ueni amica coronaberis. Come my
loue thou shallbe crowned. And two aungels hauyng a close crowne of golde
bytwene their handes. And the lady on y{e} ryght hande had a table of
syluer wherein was writte. Domine dirige gressos meos. Lorde god dyrecte
my wayes. The other on the lyfte hande had in another table of syluer
written thus. Confide in domino. Trust in god. And vnder theyr fete was a
longe rol wherin was written this. Regina Anna nouum regis de sanguine
natum cum paries populis aurea secla tuis. Quene Anne whan y{u} shalte
beare a newe sone of y{e} kynges bloode there shalbe a golden worlde vnto
thy people. And so y{e} ladyes caste ouer her heede a multytude of wafers
with rose leaues and about y{e} wafers were written with letters of gold
this posay.[37] And so her grace passed forth into Poules chyrchyarde and
at the eest ende of y{e} chyrch agaynst y{e} schole was a great scaffolde
whereon stode y{e} nombre of two hundred chyldren well befene who receyued
w{h} poetes verses to her noble honour whan they had fynisshed she sayd
Amen w{h} ioyful smylyng countenaunce and so passed forth thrugh the longe
chyrchyarde and so to Ludgate whiche was costly and sumptuously garnysshed
with golde colours and asure with swete armony of ballades to her greate
prayse and honour w{h} dyuerse swete instrumentes. And thus her grace came
thorowe the cyte with great honour and royaltye and passed thorowe Flete
strete tyll she came to y{e} Standarde and condyth where was made a fayre
toure with foure tourrettes with fanes there within great plenty of swete
instrumentes w{h} chyldren syngyng the standarde of mason warke costly
made with ymages and aungels costly gylted with golde and asure with other
colours and dyuerse fortes of armes costly set out shall there contynue
and remayne and within the standarde a vyce with a chyme. Also there ranne
out of certayne small pypes great plenty of wyne all that after-noone. And
so her grace passed through the cyte to temple barre and so to Charyng
crosse and so thorowe Westmynster into Westmynster hall where that was
well and rychly hanged with cloth of Arras with a meruaylous ryche
cupborde of plate and there was a voyde[38] of spyce plates and wyne. And
y{t} done the quenes grace withdrewe her in to y{e} whyte hall for that
nyght and so to Yorke place by water. The sondaye in y{e} mornynge at
viij. of the clocke y{e} quenes grace w{h} noble ladyes in theyr robes of
estate w{h} al y{e} nobles aparayled in parlyament robes as dukes erles
archbysshops and bysshops w{h} barons and the barons of y{e} fyue
portes[39] with the mayre of y{e} cite the aldermen in theyr robes as
mantels of scarlet. The barons of y{e} fyve portes bare a ryche canopy of
cloth of golde with stanes of golde and four belles of syluer and gylt.
The abbot of Westmynster in his rygals[40] came in to y{e} hall in
pontificalibus w{h} his monkes in theyr best copes the Kynges chapell in
theyr best copes with y{e} bysshops rychely aourned[41] in pontificalibus
and the ray cloth blewe spredde from the hygh desses of y{e} kynges benche
unto the hygh aulter of Westmynster. And so every man procedynge to the
mynster in y{e} best order euery man after theyr degree apoynted to theyr
order and office as aperteyneth came vnto y{e} place apoynted where her
grace receyued her crowne w{h} al y{e} serymonyes therof as ther vnto
belongeth. And so al y{e} serimonyes done w{h} y{e} solempne masse they
departed home in their best orders euery man to the hal of Westmynster
where y{e} quenes grace withdrew her for a tyme in to her chambre apoynted
and so after a certayne space her grace came in to y{e} hall. Than ye
shulde haue sene euery noble man doyng their seruyce to them apoynted in
y{e} best maner y{t} hath ben sene in any suche serimony. The quenes grace
wasshed y{e} archbisshop of Canterbury sayd grace. Than y{e} nobles were
set to the table therw{h} came y{e} quenes seruice w{h} y{e} seruyce of
tharch bysshop a certayne space thre men with the quenes grace seruyce.
Before y{e} said seruyce came y{e} duke of Suffolke high constable y{t}
day and stewarde of y{e} feest on horsbacke and meruaylously trapped in
aparell w{h} rychesse. Than w{h} hym came y{e} lorde Wyllyam Hawarde as
depute to y{e} duke of Norfolke in y{e} rome of y{e} marshal of Englande
on horsbacke. The erle of essex caruer. Therle of Sussex sewer. Therle of
Darby cupberer. Therle of Arundell butteller. The visconte lysle panter.
The lorde Bray awmoner. These noble men dyd theyr seruyce in suche humble
sorte and fassyon that it was wonder to se the payne and dylygence of them
beynge suche noble personages. The seruyce borne by Knyghtes whiche were
to me to longe to tell in order the goodly seruyce of kyndes of meate with
their deuyses from the hyest vnto the lowest there haue not ben sene more
goodlyer nor honorablyer done in no mannes dayes. There was foure tables
in y{e} great hall alonge the sayde hall. The noble women one table
syttyng al on y{e} one syde. The noble men an other table. The mayre of
London an other table w{h} his bretherne. The barons of the portes with
y{e} mayster of the chauncery the fourth table. And thus all thynges nobly
and tryumphantly done at her coronacyon her grace retourned to Whyte hall
with great ioy and solempnyte and the morowe was great iustes at y{e}
tylte done by xviij. lordes and knyghtes where was broken many speares
valyauntly: but some of their horses wolde nat come at their pleasure nere
unto the tylte whiche was displeasure to some that there dyd ronne.

  Thus endeth this tryumphe: Imprinted
     at London in Flete-strete
     by Wynkyn de Worde
     for Johan Goughe,


_Cum Priuilegio._




Footnotes:

[1] I believe the woodcut represents Henry VIII. although the horsecloth
has a _fleur de lys_ on it, and not the Tudor rose; probably Henry wore
the _fleur de lys_ in compliment to Francis.

[2] The title of the Second Edition is as follows:--

        The Maner of the
        Tryumphe at Caleys and Bulleyn.
        The second pryntyge with more addicions as it was
        done in dede.

        Cum Priuilegio Regali.

[3] In the Museum copy are two MS. Latin lines:

  "Congressus lector fuma et foedera Regum
    Et quas vix credas pretiosas perlege pompas."

[4] In the Second Edition, the text begins with:

        "The names of the noble men of Fraunce.

        Fyrst the frensshe Kynge.[A]
        The kynge of Nauerne.[B]
        The Dolphyn Duke of Brytayne Frauncys.
        The duke of Orlyaunce Henry.
        The duke of Angoulesme Charles.
        The duke of Vendosme Charles.
        The duke of Guyse.[C]
        The duke of Longouille.[D]
        The cardynall of Burbon.
        The cardynall of Lorrayne.[E]
        The legate and cardynall chaunceler of Fraunce Antony de prayt.[F]
        The cardynal tournon.[G]
        The cardynal gramond.[H]
        The marques of Lorayne de pont.
        The marques of Rochelyne.
        The two sonnes of the duke of Uendosme.
        The sone of the duke of Guyse conte damualle.[I]
        The conte of saynt Poule Frauncys de Burbon.
        The conte of Neuers.
        The conute[J] Loys de Neuers conte danseore.
        The lorde marshall seigneur de Floraynge.
        The lorde myrepois marshall de la foy.[K]
        The conte de porsean.
        The conte de bresne.
        The conte de tonnore.[L]
        The conte de sensare.
        The conte de grant pre.
        The conte d'apremont.
        The lorde greate mayster Anne de momerancy.[M]
        The lorde admarald Philyp Schabbot.[N]
        The lorde grand esquyer Galliot.
        The prynce of molse.
        The conte de tande.[O]
        The conte de villars.[P]
        The conte de estampes Johan de la berre.[Q]
        The conte de chambre.[R]
        The lorde canamples.
        The lorde barbeluiez.
        The lorde hummeres.[S]
        The lorde roche piot.
        The lorde of saynt Andrews.
        The lorde montigeu.
        The lorde roche guyon.
        The lorde piennes.
        The lorde pontremy.
        Monsieur de longe.
        Monsieur de belley.[T]
        The archebysshop of Roan.
        The archebysshop of Vienne.
        The bysshop of Lyseures.
        The bysshop of Langres.
        The bysshop of Charttres.
        The bysshop of Lymoges.
        The bysshop of beauuoys.
        The bysshop of Auuergne.
        The bysshop of Macon.
        The bysshop of Castres.
        The bysshop of Paris.
        The bysshop of Angoulesme.

        And as concernynge the nobles and ryall states
        of this realme it nedeth not to expresse by name.

        [A] _Francis I._

        [B] _Henry d'Albret, King of Navarre._

        [C] _Claude de Lorraine, first duke of Guise._

        [D] _The duke de Longueville._

        [E] _Jean de Lorraine, brother of the duke de Guise._

        [F] _Antoine Duprat had been tutor to Francis I. He must have been
        an old man at this time, for he died in 1535 at the age of 72._

        [G] _Of Francois de Tournon, de Thou says: "Homme d'une prudence,
        d'une habilete pour les affaires, et d'un amour pour sa patrie,
        presque au-dessus de tout ce qu'on peut poser." He died in 1562._

        [H] _Gabriel, Cardinal de Grammont, was the last of the male line
        of this celebrated family. His sister married into the family of_
        AURE, _which then took the name and arms the de Grammonts_.

        [I] _D'Aumale._

        [J] _Sic._

        [K] _A descendant of Guy de Levis, who was elected marshall of the
        Crusaders who marched against the Albigenses; hence his successors
        were all called Marechaux de la Foi. He received the lands of
        Mirepoix, in Languedoc, in return for his services. The family
        became very illustrious, and we refer readers who have the time
        and patience to study a very curious piece of history, to the
        writings of Cartier and Lognac._

        [L] _The Comte de Tonnerre._

        [M] _He began life as page to Francis I., became Constable of
        France in 1538, and died at the age of 74, at the battle of St
        Denis, killed, it is said, by a Scotsman named Stuart._

        [N] _Phillipe Chabot, Seigneur de Brion, in Poitou, a great
        protege of the celebrated Duchesse d'Etampes._

        [O] _This is undoubtedly Honorat, son of Villars, Comte de Tende,
        natural son of Philip, duke of Savoy. Villars had been killed at
        Pavia in 1525. Honorat's daughter married the great duke de
        Mayenne._

        [P] _Andre de Brancas, comte de Villars._

        [Q] _Jean de Berri, comte d'Etampes._

        [R] _? Chambery._

        [S] _Probably Henry de Crevant d'Humieres, ancestor of the
        celebrated marechal d'Humieres._

        [T] _Probably Martin du Bellay, prince d'Yvetot._

[5] Knights.

[6] The Second Edition omits: "and."

[7] Persons.

[8] The Second Edition inserts: "At ye metyng of these two noble kynges
there were sacres and sacrettes cast of and at dyuerse flyghtes two kytes
were beten downe which were sooryng in y{e} ayre w{h} such lyke pastyme
whiche greatly pleased al the nobles on bothe partyes."

[9] The Second Edition reads "persons" thus "psones."

[10] The Second Edition has "a batayle ax."

[11] The Second Edition inserts: "The tuysday beynge y{e} seconde day of
hys there beyng the frenssh king gaue our kyng ryche apparayle wrought
with nedle werke pyrled[U] w{h} golde in y{e} whiche lyke apparayle bothe
y{e} kynges went to our lady chyrche in Bulleyn And at that time our kyng
optayned release and lyberte of the frenssh kyng for all prysoners at that
tyme beynge prisoners in Bulleyn. And in lykewyse dyd the frenssh kyng in
Caleys of our kyng and mayster at his there beynge and optayned grace for
all banysshed men whiche wolde make sute for theyr pardon. And to esteme
y{e} rich trauerses[V] y{t} were in Bulleyn at our lady chyrche and in
Caleys in our lady chyrche in lykewyse for bothe the kynges the riche
ordynaunces and prouysyon for the same it is to moche for to wryte. And as
for the greate chere" &c.

     [U] _Fringed._

     [V] _Low curtains._

[12] The Second Edition omits: "there."

[13] Baggage.

[14] The Second Edition reads for: "And when they came to Calais" ... "And
so commynge towarde Caleys the duke of Rychemonde accompanyed with
bysshops and many other noble men that were not with the kyng at Bulleyn
and all the kynges garde which were with all other meruaylously well
horsed and trymde they stode in aplace appoynted in aray and good order in
the way two mile out of Caleys where the frensshe kynge sholde come who
saluted y{e} frensshe kynge with great honour in lyke maner as the kynge
our mayster was saluted at Bulleyn with amykable and moost goodly
salutacyons as euer was seen they were saluted w{h} great melody," &c. &c.

[15] For "after noone" the Second Edition reads, "after onne."

[16] The Second Edition reads "soup" for "souper."

[17] Anne Boleyn.

[18] Lady Mary Boleyn.

[19] The Second Edition reads "passeth" for "passed."

[20] Saint Michael.

[21] After "most falls" the Second Edition inserts, "And as concernynge
y{e} haboundaunt and lyberal multytude of gyftes that were so louyngly and
cordyally gyuen on bothe partyes (to the greate honour of bothe the
kynges) my penne or capacit can not expresse it as well amonge the greate
lordes as vnto the lowest yemen that bare ony offyce in eyther kynges hous
and specially the kynges gyftes on both partyes alway rewarded the one
lyke vnto y{e} other And all other gyftes was nothynge but ryche plate
golde coyne and syluer was of no estymacyon beside raymentes horses
geldynges fawcons beres dogges for the game with many other whiche were to
moche to write. And upon y{e} xxix. day" &c.

[22] MS note: Q. Anne Bullen the second wife of K. Henry 8 was crowned at
Westminster on Whitsonday the first of Iune Anno Domini MDXXXIII. This
triumph is set forth at large in Stowes Chronicle.

[23] 1533.

[24] City companies.

[25] Displayed.

[26] Swift ships.

[27] Bedecked.

[28] "Sic."

[29] French, "_incontinent_," immediately.

[30] Sic.

[31] In the original copy, in the British Museum, the corner is torn off
after the letter "r" but the three missing letters are of course "ich."

[32] The missing letter is as evidently "s."

[33] Gracechurch Street.

[34] Wife.

[35] Torn away.

[36] Idem.

[37] The posy is not given in the original.

[38] Collation.

[39] Whenever the five ports are mentioned in the original a curious
contraction is used at the end of the word probably for "es."

[40] Vestments.

[41] A misprint for adourned.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

Superscripted letters are shown in {brackets}.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Maner of the Tryumphe of Caleys
and Bulleyn and The Noble Tryumphant Coronacyon of Quene Anne, Wyfe unto the Most Noble Kynge Henry VIII, by Wynkyn de Worde

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRYMPHE OF CALEYS AND BULLEYN ***

***** This file should be named 32515.txt or 32515.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/5/1/32515/

Produced by Meredith Bach and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
