The Project Gutenberg EBook of Of Stegner's Folly, by Richard S. Shaver

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Of Stegner's Folly

Author: Richard S. Shaver

Release Date: May 29, 2010 [EBook #32582]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OF STEGNER'S FOLLY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          Of Stegner's Folly

                         By Richard S. Shaver

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science
Fiction March 1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _When a twenty-foot goddess walked out of the jungle, they
knew Stegner wasn't kidding._]


Old Prof Stegner never foresaw the complications his selective
anti-gravitational field would cause. Knowing the grand old man as I
did, I can say that he never intended his "blessing" should become the
curse to mankind that it did. And the catastrophe it brought about was
certainly beyond range of all prophecy.

Of course, anyone who lived in 1972 and tried to get inside Stegner's
weird life-circle must agree that you can get too much of a good thing.
Even a pumpkin can get too big--and that's what happened when the Prof
turned on his field--things got big; and too darned healthy!

I was there the day Stegner announced the results of ten year's research
on his selector. Nearly everyone present had read the sensational
articles concerning his work in the feature sections of the big town
newspapers. Like the rest, I had a vague idea of what it was about. It
seemed the Prof had developed a device that repelled various particles
of matter without effecting others. In short, if he turned on his
gadget, gravity reversed itself for certain elements, and they went away
in a hurry. Like this: he could take oxide of iron, turn on his
selective repellor, and the rust rather magically turned to pure iron
without the oxygen. Or, he could take a pile of mixed chemicals, turn
his control knobs to the elements known to be present in the mixture,
and presto! Only certain ones, of his choosing remained. The atoms of
the other elements conveniently left the vicinity.

All of which was interesting and extremely useful. The Prof promptly got
rich selling patent rights to the device, tuned to certain frequencies
which refined heretofore unrefinable ores. His device made an
improvement over most known methods of refining, costing far less in
operation than the standard and often complicated methods previously in
use.

Money gave the old man his opportunity. He fitted out a big research lab
in California, not too far from civilization, but secluded enough for
secrecy. Then he set about to try his selective repellor on living
tissues. His suspicion, that wonderful things could be discovered if he
tuned his anti-gravitational field to the undesirable elements in the
body, was confirmed. Like lead poisoning--something no doctor can cure
if it is severe. He found that he could cure a case of lead poisoning
merely by making the lead go away from there via the field. More
wonderful things began to come out of the Stegner laboratory, and he
made a lot more money.

Which was all very well indeed, only the Prof couldn't leave well enough
alone--he had to delve and pry. He had his own theories about disease
and its cause, old age, and so on--all nuttier than a fruit cake. He was
something of a crank on various health foods and diets that left out
foods raised with chemical fertilizers. He had an organic garden, a
garden where no chemical fertilizer or poison spray was ever used. And
after all, who knew better than the Prof--who could isolate them in a
trice--how many poisons could be found accumulating in the average human
body, consumed along with perfectly harmless foods during a lifetime?

Anyway, when the Prof called in the press, myself among them, he was
really excited. "Gentlemen," he said, "I have solved the greatest
medical puzzle of all time. Before me, no medical man knew the cause of
old age. I have proved what the deterioration factor is, and I have
provided a remedy--a sure and immediate remedy! The golden age of
mankind is here! Our life span can be greatly extended!"

I looked at Jake Heinz, my cameraman. Jake winked at me, but I didn't
respond. I liked the Prof. Such a fine old gentleman, to go whacky from
so much success....

Jake took a few shots of the Prof's rabbits and guinea pigs, of the Prof
himself, and of the apparatus he had constructed which he claimed drove
out the causative poison of age; a poison he called a radioactive
isotope of Potassium. The other reporters, not having the soft hearts
Jake and I toted around, wrote him up as a joke; said right out they
thought the old boy was blowing his top. Immortality! Hah! They
presented the whole thing as a farce.

No reporters were ever more wrong than those smart buckos.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some months after the Prof's little news conference was over and
forgotten, an item of vast importance turned up. It seemed that around
Stegner's secluded retreat there was a line where things started. What
kind of things? Well, up to that line, things were normal; but beyond
it, grass got enormous, the ground was higher and softer. Trees forgot
to shed their leaves. Animals flocked there to eat the lush grass, so
the Prof erected a ten-foot electrified fence around his land to keep
out the hordes of rabbits, deer, mice and what have you that came to
feast off the new supply of better forage.

That was only the beginning. Some months later there came items about
houseflies the size of walnuts hatching out around the Prof's retreat.
Now a swarm of houseflies the size of walnuts is news, and Jake and I
got up there on the jump.

It was terrific! The flies were there all right, but so were a good many
other oversized creatures. Roosting in the trees were robins, bluebirds,
and doves as large as turkeys. King-sized ducks waddled about
importantly, displaying pouter-pigeon crops from overeating. It was as
if some god had drawn a line and said: "This is the new Eden, where all
living things will prosper terrifically."

You never saw a sight like it! Or did you? Were you one of the horde who
started camping around the Prof's magic circle trying to get permission
to enter?

It was then we got proof that it pays to be kind. Of all the
news-grabbers who surrounded the Prof's big wire gate, Jake and I were
the only ones who got in. The old man had not forgotten who had taken
him seriously and who had made fun of him.

Jake snapped a series of startling pics of the oversized animals and
birds. I interviewed the Prof again, even got his maid, Tilda's
opinions, and wrote it up as unsensationally as possible, playing down
the tremendous potential for trouble, playing up the really effective
method the old scientist had discovered for "eliminating the
deterioration factor" in life. I could see where the world was in for
some changes, and the going was going to be rough enough for the old man
without making it worse. But my efforts came to naught when the pics
Jake had taken reached the editor's desk. He hit the ceiling, called me
on the carpet, wanted to know where my news sense had gotten lost. Then
he sent out three other smart boys to do a _good_ job on it.

The paper got out a special edition--and the troubles I had foreseen
began. First, the government stepped in, trying to hush-hush the whole
thing; but too late. The rush had started. For miles around the poor
Prof's fenced-in hideaway, cars and trailers parked in a mad senseless
jumble. People crowded against the fences and the electricity had to be
shut off. Some smart aleck produced wire cutters and made an opening.
The invasion of the new Eden had begun.

Stegner took flight, taking his secret apparatus and files with him. He
declined police escort, and vanished from his mad Eden. Where he went
was impossible to learn, but I supposed the government knew.

The area he had revitalized with his selective field was a nine days
wonder, and after just about that long it was a tramped over, paper
strewn, garbage littered wreck. The oversized animals and birds drifted
away, the huge houseflies perished or were eaten by the birds.
Apparently that was the end of the thing. Humanity had triumphed over
its savior with its usual stupid interference.

A few of us remembered, could not put out of our minds the significance
of what the old man had done. He had pointed the way to a lush
immortality, and he had been shoved aside and pawed over and written
about like some freak. If he had been a notorious criminal, he would
have gotten far better journalistic treatment.

But the years went by--four, five of them. And nothing more was heard of
Stegner and his work. Until, one day coming home from a night shift on
the paper, I found a letter in my box. It was a rather plain looking
envelope, but much larger than the ordinary. The handwritten address was
quite legible, but very big, as if a giant hand had cramped itself to
produce ordinary script:

     _Dear old friend:_

     _You may have forgotten me, but I do not forget you. If you
     would like to join me for a time, insert a notice to Harry F in
     the personal column to that effect. I am trusting you to keep
     my secret._

     _Stegner_

Needless to say, I inserted the notice.

       *       *       *       *       *

A limousine, driven by a noncommittal chauffeur, picked me up off a
street corner, whisked me to the airfield. I boarded a plane piloted by
a man I used to know as a fading stunt pilot--Harry Fredericks. The
plane lifted and took a southerly course which presently changed to an
easterly bearing. I looked below and saw we were over water.

We came down somewhere in South America and I got out of the plane as
mystified as I'd entered it. Secrecy? Fredericks wouldn't even discuss
the weather!

I had expected another Eden, hidden away from the world. But the land of
brobdignags I found staggered me. Grasses, trying to be trees, and
trees....

There were no words for the bigness, the health and vitality of Stegner
and the government bigwigs who had welcomed him here in South America.
But Stegner hustled me aside before I had time to do more than goggle at
the mammoth layout of this new Eden under government supervision. He
took me to his house, a huge thing built with huge hands, big enough to
accommodate a man ten feet tall! Yes, Stegner was a giant! _Everybody_
in that fantastic hideaway was a giant.

The second floor of the house overlooked a great, wide valley. Stegner
pointed one great finger to the horizon and I looked. There was an
endless fence out there. The same as in California, only more so. The
natives of the valley, the Indios, the rancheros, the more intelligent
animals, were trying to get in to the wonders they saw beyond that
fence. And some of them were dying against the killing electric charges
in its wires. Through a pair of glasses the Prof handed me, I saw that
some of the dead were human.

"That's murder!" I gasped.

Stegner's voice held the sadness of a great and sorrowful god. "I am in
a trap, my friend. I have pretended to acquiesce, but my cohorts are not
fully deluded as to my loyalty to the thing they plan. These government
men had gone mad with power. And the problem that now faces me seems
insurmountable. The peoples of this world are too small, morally, for so
big a life. I fear chaos. I thought that perhaps you, with your native
shrewdness, might help me unlock this prison I am in, reconcile this
Eden and its growth to the world that it must eventually overrun. It
_will_ overrun the planet, but I would prefer it not to be by violence
as these mad men plan it. They have selfishly taken my gift to mankind
to themselves, for their own aggrandizement."

I gulped. He thought I had the savvy to answer that one! "Hell, Prof. I
thought you saw that from the first. I've often wondered when the
blow-off would come. I'm a newspaperman; I know what goes on in the
world. It isn't ready for such a life as you can give it--too much
selfishness. This thing has so many angles, so many ways it can give
private groups power."

"Then what can I do?"

"As long as this is going to be a fight, let's make it an even one, so
that the chips aren't all on one side of the table. Then maybe there'll
be a balance of power, a stalemate--such as existed between Russia and
the U. S. A. for so long."

"You mean...?"

"I mean let me get the hell out of here in a hurry, with the details of
your processes, and let me spread them all over the world. Publicity can
lick this thing. Your mistake was in building fences. Put up a fence,
and somebody'll bust it."

"You are a wise man, my friend," he said.

"Then I'm making a run for it right now. They won't expect me to be
dashing off before I've even taken off my hat. Give me your formulae,
and show me the back door."

"You can only leave by plane...."

"Okay, I can fly one. I had my own crate for several years until the
finance company took it away from me. The airfield's right next to the
house...."

He gave me the papers.

"What's in 'em?" I asked.

"The formulae for the creation of the repellent anti-gravitational field
which eliminates the age-factor element. I have been working on a growth
inhibitor, but in secret. So I have had little time to develop it.
Briefly, it is a method of making the field even more selective, leaving
in the body those elements which have caused life to stop growing at
adulthood, although it is not natural to stop growing. I am sure that
any good scientist can finish my work. With this development, man can
have his cake and eat it too. He won't grow to giantism as we are doing,
yet his life and health will be prolonged."

"Why not just explain it to these men?"

He laughed bitterly. "They wish to use their gigantic size to conquer
the world. They can do it, too. Their minds have increased in power.
Growth is that way. But moral values are something different--they are
acquired by experience. Find some moral men who might use this
information to circumvent what is about to happen."

I took the papers and shook his gigantic hand. I left via the back door,
and sneaked through a clump of giant ferns to the edge of the airfield.
A little prowling revealed a parked plane, long unused because those who
had flown it here had grown too big to use it. I waited, hidden in the
lush greenery until the setting sun would hide my movements. It would
only be a few minutes now....

The hangar in which the plane was parked contained several gasoline
drums, the kind with pumps on them that worked with a crank. I got into
the hangar, finally, and before it got too dark to see, checked the
plane's gas gauge. It was about a quarter full. I connected the gas hose
and started pumping. In twenty minutes I had her full, then I climbed
into the plane....

When the motor caught, after I was sure it never would, the thunder of
the prop brought giants running toward me from the far end of the field,
their twenty-foot strides eating up the distance. But I taxied straight
toward them, giving the plane's motors all they would take. The plane
roared down the field, and they fell flat as the prop came at them. The
plane lifted, spun over them, was off. Now slugs from oversize rifles
came buzzing about me, crashing through the fuselage. But it was dark
and I was away. No serious damage had been done.

In Texas it took me four hours to get the brass to listen to me. Finally
they did. They didn't ask me to keep my mouth shut. They just turned me
loose. I went to my editor and told him the truth. He didn't believe me.
When he checked with the army, they said I was obviously trying to
perpetrate a hoax. I nearly got fired.

       *       *       *       *       *

Months went by, and I waited. I knew I'd have to wait until my chance
came. There'd have to be hellfire before anybody'd believe my story.
Then the storm broke, in sensational headlines. "Gigantic beasts wipe
out town in South America."

My editor sent for me. He showed me the headline. "Maybe I made a
mistake not believing your story about Stegner," he said. "I make a lot
of mistakes."

"You want me to cover this?" I said.

"That's it. And if you can come up with proof of what you told me when
you got back from that crazy trip, I'll print every damned word."

       *       *       *       *       *

When I got on the scene, I knew they were at last taking it seriously.
The locals had called out the army to fight the strange monsters that
were coming out of the jungle. They were such things as army ants six
feet long; anteaters looking like ambling locomotives with hairy hides
and noses; lumbering sloths vast as a houses on legs, sleepy and comic
as ever, but terrifyingly destructive; jaguars like trucks and trailers;
centipedes with stingers over their backs that would reach a man in a
third-story window; wasps and bees like buzzards. The army was lashing
at these things with machine guns, flame throwers, tanks and rockets.
Jeeps careened across the landscape with loads of ammo. It was a
madhouse on a vast scale, and being fought to the death. They waited for
the beasts to come out of the jungle, then they jumped them--or were
jumped. Nobody was allowed to fly into the hinterland to see where they
were coming from. And when I tried to get officials to consider it, they
absolutely refused. Up there, it was hinted, were secret government
projects--besides they were too far away--and radio said there was no
sign of anything unusual there. It was worth even a general's job to
poke his nose in near those projects. And how could I tell these people
traitorous men of their own government were the culprits? It just wasn't
possible--and because I had to stay on the scene, I never even hinted
it. I merely waited my chance to produce proof. I knew I'd get it,
sooner or later. Something would come out of that jungle I'd be able to
use to convey the real menace to the knowledge of a puzzled world.

[Illustration: _Only the fire-power of cannon could stop the monster._]

I wrote carefully, reporting the weird war with the animal world--and I
kept inserting paragraphs hinting about Stegner and his growth field,
adding "rumors" that maybe his work had been taken over by a power-mad
clique and it was they who were loosing this horror.

My boss liked the stuff I was putting in, because it sold papers, and I
was careful to keep my facts separate, and label my theories. Nobody--at
least so it seemed--believed the theories, but they made good reading. I
got a raise in salary.

Other reporters were knocking out stories as good as mine, but without
the insight into the facts that I had. So their stories went too far
afield. Mine became popular, and were in demand as reprints all over the
world. But officially, nobody paid any attention to me, so the important
papers nestled in the bottom of my trunk. I didn't want them confiscated
until the time came when I could publish them with proof. My boss would
back me up when that proof came. I was sure of that.

I got my chance the day the giantess came crashing out of the smoke and
dust of the circle of horror across which the beasts were constantly
lunging. She was near naked, and half mad with pain from the giant
insects plaguing her. No one fired on her as she stood with uplifted
arms, waiting for the soldiers to kill her as she expected. Beautiful as
a goddess out of an ancient myth she came forward toward the soldiers,
her face lighting with hope, her hair streaming golden in the sun. She
spoke to us then, and the silence that came over the field of carnage
was complete.

"Look at me! Look at me and believe! There are others like me, back in
the jungle; mad giants who plan to conquer your world. They are ready to
do it. I have escaped to warn you. They are mad, these giants my master
has created. They are monsters...."

I recognized her now. My senses leaped and my blood pounded in my veins.
Here was my opportunity to convince the world. This was Tilda, Stegner's
maid! I snapped several pictures of her as she went on talking.

"These men, who were once your own leaders are plotting to destroy you
and take the world for themselves. You do not know what they are
preparing for you, but I come to tell you. Make ready, for they are on
their way to destroy you. They bring huge guns, monster tanks that they
have built, machines never before seen on earth."

What more she might have told we were never to know, for she fell then,
at the end of her strength. Whatever she had dared, whatever she had
gone through to break out of that monstrous circle and come to us, had
been too much even for her giant's strength. She fell, like a tower
crashing down, and lay there, a great lax pile of pink and red flesh,
torn by thorns, the claws of animals, the stingers of terrible giant
insects.

Then the monsters came again, and we could not go to her. She lay there
as darkness came, and in the morning only her skeleton remained,
stripped of flesh in the night by the myriad devouring giant ants and
beetles.

       *       *       *       *       *

My story went in, with photos of Tilda. My editor printed the whole
story, printed my formulae, printed every word of the history of Stegner
and his creations, and the secret menace he had unwittingly loosed on
the world from his second hidden Eden in the jungle. I was called home.

They came to me then, those moral ones Stegner had said existed. Men
high in government and army circles who had the peace and welfare of the
world at heart. Selfless ones whose records were above reproach. And
they proved to be high in the powers of the world, able to command.

       *       *       *       *       *

I went back to South America, to my reporting. I wanted to be on hand
when the attack of which Tilda had warned became reality.

I was some twelve miles from the deadly circle when the giant tanks
appeared. They were larger than any moving thing ever seen on Earth
before. Tracklayers, caterpillars--and swinging above them slender
towers which bore ominous gleaming nozzles. On they came.

Then they struck at us. From the nozzles a cold brilliance leaped out,
unnamable, that swept forward like a slow lightning, a kind of crackling
sheet of cold fire that spread from tower to tower, in an arc that began
to bend toward our lines.

The fire came in mile-wide swaths. There was no outcry, no terror--just
the sweating lines of men in foxholes, the crews about the guns, heaving
ammo into their maws; the rumbling trucks and the careening jeeps. The
fire swept over all like liquid, radiance, like a pouring out of
moonlight, soft but brilliant, mild yet deadly. Then it was gone. And
when it had gone, nothing but silence remained. Dead men stretched out
where they had lain waiting, fallen where they labored; jeeps careened
on to crash into stumps or bigger trucks--and stop forever. Only silence
and death and nothingness was left.

When the silence swept across the whole front I dropped my glasses and
lit out for my own car, and headed for the coast. I wanted to file this
story in person, and I knew, too, that army would not be there in the
morning. I meant to stay alive. I knew that the hope for mankind lay in
what honest men were doing with Stegner's formulae. I had to know. So I
fled.

Next day they were dropping atom bombs on every moving thing in
Stegner's ghastly Eden. High flying bombers flew in swarms--and many of
them were being shot down by the weird fire. I saw those atom bombs
falling, on television, and the white radiance reaching up toward them.
I saw it catch them in its embrace, saw them explode harmlessly in the
air, midway in their plunge. Whatever the fire was, it was a defense
against the atom bomb, for it exploded them before they could reach
their targets.

It didn't catch them all, and it didn't intercept all the high-flying
bombers loosing their guided rocket missiles. It got enough though, to
show us we were on the losing end. What we needed was a miracle. And the
miracle did occur....

At first, even with my fingers on every tag end of information that came
out of the terrible area, it was an unnoticeable change. Then I got it.
The men doing our fighting changed in caliber and ability. I never
learned, due to the official habit of hushing everything up, just whose
technology accomplished the miracle, but it must have been started from
the first, with those army officers who had listened to me with such
lack of interest when I spoke before their inquisition at the Texas army
air field.

All I learned was that there was a new kind of man busy at the front, a
man of keener intellect, swifter of action, infinitely more able than
the former ordinary soldier.

It was Jake who first confirmed my suspicions. He brought in photographs
of men lifting trucks out of mudholes, men tearing steel cables apart
with their bare hands, men jumping over twenty-foot barriers with full
pack. "Whatta I do with that kind of pic? The people are so fed up with
the impossible news they are getting that they don't believe anything
any more! But you and I know a news camera doesn't lie ... it doesn't
have time!"

They had put the Prof's formulae to work against the giants. This time
it was the right formulae. They had growth without increase in size, a
growth of ability, of strength, of mentality, without any increase in
ponderous structure. These new soldiers were the policemen of the United
Nations made into supermen!

I began to believe in the human race again. "Great!" I said. "This is
what I've been waiting for!"

Jake tossed me his pictures and went away. I turned to the typewriter
and began batting out my story: "Mankind solves the problem of giantism!
The new weapon against the giants is--the new man!"

Those little giants waded into that circle through all the deadly fire
and the giant scorpions and vast beasts like Jack-the-Giant-Killer's
multitudinous sons--and it wasn't a month later that I typed the last
story of my life and gave up reporting for good. It was the tale of the
death of the last giant--and Jake's picture of him, armed in the end
with only his fists, huge as a tree, mad with hunger and thirst and
terrible fear of the little men who were just as mighty, a lot quicker,
and every bit as smart as any giant. They routed him out with tear gas
and shot him down with plain old GI rifle fire.

Yes, I gave up newspaper work. Why? They offered me a job making a
movie out of the "War of the Giants". The job gave me quick money,
which is what I needed. The wife and I are starting a new colony
on Malino Island. It's in the Carolinas. We're going to try this
growth-without-size business out properly.

Yes, that's my son. Eight months. He doesn't ordinarily go around
dragging a piano--it just got in his way.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Of Stegner's Folly, by Richard S. Shaver

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OF STEGNER'S FOLLY ***

***** This file should be named 32582.txt or 32582.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/5/8/32582/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
