The Project Gutenberg EBook of Stalemate, by Basil Eugene Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Stalemate

Author: Basil Eugene Wells

Illustrator: Leo Summers

Release Date: May 30, 2010 [EBook #32594]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STALEMATE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              STALEMATE

                            BY BASIL WELLS

                     _Illustrated by Leo Summers_

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science
Fiction November 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _The rules of a duel between gentlemen are quite different
from the rules of war between nations. Is it because gentlemen do not
fight wars, or is it that men in war cease to be gentlemen?_]


The bullet slapped rotted leaves and dirt into Gram Treb's eyes. He
wormed backward to the bole of a small tree.

"Missed!" he shouted. He used English, the second tongue of them both.
"Throw away your carbine and use rocks."

"You tasted it anyhow," Harl Neilson's shrill young voice cried. "How
was the sample?"

"That leaves you two cartridges," taunted Treb. "Or is it only one?"

The sixth sense that had brought him safely through two of these bloody
war duels here in space made him fling his body to the left. He rolled
over once and lay huddled in a shallow depression. He knew all the tiny
hollows and ridges--they were his insurance on this mile-wide island
high above Earth.

Something thudded into the tree roots behind him. He hugged the ground,
body flattened. His breath eased raggedly outward, and caught. The
waiting--the seconds that became hours! If the grenade rolled after him,
down the slope into his shelter, he was finished.

There was nothing he could do. His palms oozed sweat....

The grenade exploded. It was like a fist slammed against his skull. He
was numbed for a long instant. Then he checked.

Unharmed. The depression had saved his neck this time. He wanted to
shout at Neilson, tell him he was down to a lone grenade, but that was
poor strategy. Now he must withdraw, make Neilson think him injured or
dead, and trap him in turn.

They were the last of the belligerents here within Earth Satellite. For
two months, since what would be May on Earth, they had carried on this
mad duel. Of the other eighteen who had started the war in November of
the preceding year, only four had survived their wounds. The United
Nations' supervisory seconds had transported them to their homes in
Andilia and in Baryt....

Treb wormed his way as noiselessly as possible into the undergrowth,
sprawling at last in the shelter of an earthen mound thirty feet from
the grenade's raw splash. He waited--and thought.

Memories can be unpleasant. He could see his comrades of the three
battles as they had fallen, wounded or gray with death. Too many of them
had he helped bury. He remembered the treasured photos.

The draining wound in his right forearm throbbed....

The enemy dead too. He had killed several of them--more than his share,
he thought savagely. They too were young despite the ragged beards some
of them cultivated.

Treb felt like an old man. And he _was_ old. He was twenty-nine. He had
a son also named Gram, a boy of five, and little Alse, who was two. Had
little Alse's mother lived he would never have volunteered for this
third United Nations' war duel.

He would have been with her in the mountain valley of Krekar working
hard, and gradually erasing those other ugly episodes here on Earth
Satellite One....

Minutes crawled by, lumped together into hours. Birds sang in the trees
so laboriously maintained here in the satellite's disk-shaped heart.
And, a hundred feet overhead, where the true deck of the man-made island
in space began, other birds nested in the girders.

An ant crawled over Treb's earth-stained hand and passed under his
outstretched carbine's barrel.

There was a movement in the clustering trees off to his right. Neilson
had circled and was coming in from an opposite angle. Treb thumbed off
the safety and waited.

An earth-colored helmet, with a trace of long pale hair around its rim,
came slowly into view. Could be a dummy, Neilson was clever at rigging
them to draw fire. And he had exactly two cartridges. After that it
would be his three grenades, his two-foot needle-knife, that doubled as
a bayonet, and the steel bow he had contrived from a strip of spring
steel.

He held his fire. The trees made grenade lobbing a touchy business. And
his bow was back in one of the dozens of foxholes he had spotted in both
the inner and outer rings of trees.

In the fantasy stories of adventure in space that he enjoyed reading,
the hero could always whip up a weird paralysis ray, a deadly, invisible
robot bullet, or an intelligent gaseous ally from the void would appear.
And out of scrap glass, metal and his shoestrings he could contrive a
solar-powered shell that stopped any missile, deadlier than a
marshmallow, cold.

In actual life he was finding it difficult enough to contrive a
primitive sort of bow, a knife-lashed spear, and snares for the
increasingly wary rabbits. Lack of sleep and lack of food supplies were
sapping his lanky body of the whiplash swiftness and wiry strength it
once possessed. Nor was the week-old wound any aid to his dulled
wits....

The helmet advanced; he could almost see the twig-stuffed gray shirt's
pockets, and he let his nostrils expand as he sucked in a steadying
breath. Now, a yard behind the fake Andilian, he could see the moving
shoulders and skull of Harl Neilson--or so his bloodshot eyes told him.

He squeezed the trigger. There was a subdued yip, and then a derisive
jeer. Missed again--or had he?

"Sour rocketing, Grampaw," Neilson laughed. "Try again. And then I'm
coming after you."

Only Neilson wouldn't. Unless he'd miscalculated the number of grenades,
he wouldn't come charging at Treb. And he couldn't be sure of the number
of cartridges Treb possessed. He was just talking to keep his nerve up.

Especially if he was wounded now. That sudden yip....

       *       *       *       *       *

It was night again, an artificial night as artificial as the central
ten-acre pool of water, the ring of flowering green trees and grasses,
and the final outer ring of forest trees. It was here that the two
thousand UN employees and soldiers on Earth Satellite One normally took
their recreation periods.

Only the supervised war-duels, that since 1969 had been the only
blood-letting permitted between nations, could long keep a Terran from
visiting the green meadows and trees of this lowest of the three
levels....

"I'd give half that quarter million," Neilson groaned, across the
darkness, "for a cigarette."

"You mean," corrected Gram Treb, "half your ten thousand."

"It's the winner's grant or nothing, Treb. I promised Jane I'd hand it
to her. Then we'll marry."

"But not if you are the loser?"

"I wouldn't--she wouldn't--it's impossible to think of asking her to
share poverty and disgrace."

"I'd hardly say that. We lost our first war here on the Satellite. Baryt
was obligated to cede a thousand square miles to Tarrance. Most of my
ten thousand paid off my family's debts.

"Yet I married. I married Nal who had nursed me back to health. And we
were happy. Until the second war with Duristan. I wanted money for
her--for the children--for my impoverished valley."

Treb broke off. He backed away several feet and shifted noiselessly to a
new position. Every night, and sometimes in the artificial sunlight,
they talked together. But they never forgot that they were sworn foes.

"So you won it didn't you?" From his voice Neilson had shifted closer
and to the left.

"Sure. And I wish I were as poor as before. For Nal was kicked to
death--by the horse I should have been using--while I fought here."

Neilson made a sympathetic sound. Treb felt his lips twitch into a thin
crooked line. This is what it meant to be human. To feel sorrow for
another man's misfortunes--and then kill him!

Sure, Neilson was a good sort. Only twenty-four and in love with a girl,
a woman really, widow of a dead lunar explorer. And he was a
clean-living sort, nothing dishonorable or hateful about him. They even
honored the same God.

But tomorrow, or the next day, or a month from now, he would kill or
wound Neilson. Unless, as might well happen, Neilson got to him first.

He pushed aside a thought that came more and more often of late. Why not
surrender, or let Neilson capture him? He did not consider
suicide--little Gram and Alse needed him--although he had not been
thinking of them when he signed for this ugly miniature battle in space.
His wife's death had been too vivid yet.

But, why not surrender? He had enough money. The valley people could
struggle along without the machines and the dam he had hoped to grant
them with victory. And Baryt could lose the island of Daafa to Andilia
without crippling herself. The three hundred and fifty inhabitants could
be transferred to the mainland.

Treb laughed silently, a laugh that cut off with a twinge of drawing
ugly pain from his wounded forearm. He knew that he could no more
surrender without a fight than he could command his breathing to stop
forever. He was a man, and men cannot give up dishonorably....

"I'd like to see those two kids sometime, if you're still around, Treb."
Neilson had moved again. His voice was lower but he was nearer.

"Stop around anytime, Harl." Treb moved a few feet deeper into a
thicket. "We'll show you what real Baryt hospitality is."

"That's a promise, Treb."

Killing. That's what war was. So you had to kill. Or you volunteered to
kill. But you didn't have to like it. All these little wars under UN
supervision were needless--arbitration would serve as well. But the
people, the leaders--someone--wanted blood. So ten or twelve or fifteen
citizens of one nation fought an equal number of the other state's sons.

Doubtless it was an improvement over the mass bombings of innocent city
dwellers, and the horror of atomic dusts and sprays. No overwhelming
army could sweep, unchecked, over a helpless neighbor. It was fairer,
too, for those involved. Equal numbers of men, guns, supplies. Wealth if
your side won, and a fair sum if you lost.

The United Nations saw to that. After all the avenues to peaceful
settlement had been explored and turned down they finally permitted
bloodshed. Much against their better judgement, perhaps.

So he could destroy likeable young Andilians like Neilson.

"Why don't you send up a rocket?" Neilson kidded, his voice coming from
a changed direction again. "So I can see you."

"Anything to oblige."

Neilson was circling out around, as though to drive him into a trap or
trick him. They were getting back to the primitive now. Soon it would be
knives, spears, and deadfalls.

"Come on over and I'll show you Jane's picture, Treb," invited Neilson.
He laughed hoarsely. "If we weren't where we are, I'd mean that."

"I know. I feel that way myself sometimes. We've been here alone too
long. Hate hasn't lasted."

"Why aren't you a wrongo, Treb?" The young voice was cracked and savage.
"Why'd you have to tell me about--Gram and Alse?"

Treb was backing away again, cautiously. He scented a trap. No doubt
Neilson's words were sincere, at the moment, but in a second's time he
could change into a cold-blooded executioner. He knew. He had seen the
gentlest of men suddenly turn killer....

And then his foot struck a yielding branch and his aroused suspicion
sent him lunging forward.

A heavy something fell with a sickening thud, brushing as it struck the
sole of his disintegrating shoe. A cleverly rigged deadfall of small
trees and rock, doubtless.

"You're slipping, Harl," he shouted.

But he could feel the sudden sweat damping his palms, and the muscles
twitched unsteadily in his arms and across his stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

With morning he was half a mile away, in a foxhole less than sixty yards
from the massive outer perimeter of the arena. Two of his snares had
yielded a rabbit each, and so he was supplied for several days.

The foxhole had two entrances, both well-concealed, and he had rigged
elaborate warning devices should the vicinity be approached. So he was
sleeping.

His dreams were unpleasant.

In his latest dream an extremely shapely and smiling young woman with
dark hair was heaving a grenade into a pit where he lay bound and
helpless. The grenade swelled until it became a space ship heading
directly toward the frail scout craft he piloted....

And a tiny blob of dislodged mud from the dugout spatted his face. He
sat up.

Another day to hunt or be hunted. Or to lie here and try to rest and
make plans. There was slight possibility that Neilson could find him
here.

He gnawed at the scantly-fleshed ribs of the first rabbit, savoring the
raw meaty smell and flavor. Hunger was his salt.

Now that they had lost contact with one another it might require several
days to find Neilson. A wooded platter, a mile in diameter, can afford
many hiding places for one creature hiding from another hunting beast.

It was time to set some of the traps he had been contriving.

There were the two nooses, attached to bent-down triggered young trees
that could not be set until darkness fell again. The net, too, would
need darkness to conceal the four rough pulleys, and the rocks that a
tug on his rope would spill.

But the almost invisible nylon cords, set at ankle height across the
paths, and the ugly little pits with their sharpened stakes set three
feet below, could trip up a man and cripple him. He must put out several
of those.

He had no wish to kill Neilson. If he could capture him, very good. He
could go back to Andilia and perhaps his Jane would be glad to take him.
If she did not--it was worth knowing how little she really cared, was it
not?

So he would try to trap the younger man and save his life.

It would be difficult. The other man had grenades, a carbine and a keen
needle-knife. Perhaps, before the end, he would be forced to kill after
all. But regretfully.

Treb dumped the last of the _tsaftha_ antibiotic into his wound and lay
back for a few more hours of rest before going out to prepare the traps.

His head was not clear. And his eyes drew together from exhaustion....

       *       *       *       *       *

Another night and another day, and it was night again.

His traps were set and ready. All through the day he had prowled the
trees, watching for some sign of Neilson. He found he was muttering to
himself, hungry for the sound of spoken words.

It was nervous work. His muscles were jumping in faint spastic
explosions. Neilson could have been lying in ambush in any of a hundred
leafy coverts, resting there and waiting....

He had covered less than two miles of inching, crawling paths, his eyes
ever alert for deadfalls, pits and spear-traps that might flash across
the way to impale him.

And he had caught no sight of Neilson.

Now it was night again. Time to check on his traps. The rabbit traps as
well as the human traps.

He was approaching the net. And the awareness that this furtive game of
hide-and-seek might go on for weeks oppressed him. He might lie here
close by the net for days without sight of Neilson. They were too evenly
matched--and Neilson was younger. It was Neilson's youth against his
experience.

He found the thin rope of knotted nylon and plastic scraps that led to
the four balanced rocks. One stout yank and the net would jerk upward
four feet and tighten around its victim.

But, in the dim starlight from the small globes spotting the Satellite's
ceiling, the path was an indistinct blur. A moving body's exact
position.... And at fifty feet....

He saw Neilson--it could only be Neilson.

Moving on hands and knees, he was keeping low and to the side of the
little-used trail--but within the width of the hand-patched net. And he
moved slowly, probing before him with a stick or his needle-knife; Treb
could not tell which.

Another two feet and he could trip the net. Neilson would be captured,
alive, and the stalemate ended.

Now!

The net flung into the air, snapped tight about Neilson's thrashing
body! He heard the pop of parting strands as Neilson slashed with his
knife. And then he swung the butt of his carbine, twice, against the
trapped man's skull.

Neilson went limp. It was finished. He could take his prisoner to the
lock, summon the UN guards, and go home to the Krekar Hills. And an end
to all blood-letting for him.

He set about binding tight the arms and legs of Neilson, and had barely
completed his task when the prisoner groaned and struggled.

"So this is it, Treb?"

"Yes."

"You win again. And I--I lose everything."

"So?" Treb touched his pocket torch to a heap of shredded dry twigs.
"What have you lost? Your health, your life? And will not the woman
forget all else and love you?"

"Hah! She will laugh at me if I come near her. Defeated, and with a
paltry ten thousand to offer. Better that I died than this."

"Perhaps you do not--know this woman, Harl. If she is good, she will
come to you."

The growing firelight was on Neilson's bearded face. And beneath his
eyes something glistened and beaded. He laughed bitterly.

"She's not good, Treb, understand that. She's evil and money-hungry, and
ambitious. But she is beautiful and I love her. I'd sell my soul and my
body to possess her.

"That's why I volunteered. With the winners' grant I would have money.
Prestige. Honor. There would be a thousand new opportunities for a
career. And Jane could not refuse me then."

"It is wrong, Harl Neilson, to so worship a woman. Like alcohol or
Venerian fire pollen--it is unnatural."

"I know. I have tried to forget, to put her memory aside. But it is like
a disease. An incurable disease. I must have Jane."

Treb threw more wood on the little fire and checked over the lashings
about Neilson's body.

"I am going to look at my rabbit snares," he said, "and to spring the
other traps. We will eat and sleep, and in the morning try to shave and
look decent before going to the locks."

Neilson let his head sag between his shoulders, and said nothing. He was
leaning against a tree, his arms lashed behind him and to it.

"There is one more thing, Harl, that I wish to discuss. It is about the
Paul Hubble Foundation Award. Think about it."

Treb moved off into the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sunlight from the overhead "suns" of the Satellite revealed a
greatly changed Treb. He was shaved, his hair combed and hacked off
above his ears, and he was stitching the last rough patch on his dark
green trouser leg.

Now he donned the trousers and went over to the bound Andilian. He cut
the ropes, his carbine ready.

"Get down to the lake," he ordered. "You'll find a razor, soap and an
old shirt to dry yourself with."

Harl Neilson was chunky and fair-haired, with a healthy looking
red-brown skin. His eyes were wide and darkly blue. Now the wide mouth
under his shapeless nose twisted into a faint grin.

"I'll try to get away," he warned. "Aren't you afraid of that?"

"I have all the guns, grenades and needle-knives, Harl. I'll shoot you
if you attempt escape, of course, but I hope you'll listen to what I
propose first."

Neilson slowly stripped off his ragged tunic and trousers. There was the
scar of a recent bullet's path across his right shoulder blade. It was
crusted with blackened blood.

"I thought I heard you two days back, Harl," said Treb.

"Just a scratch." Neilson took up the soap and waded into the nearby
lake. "Start talking, Treb."

"I told you to think about Paul Hubble's Award, Harl. He's the American
industrialist who opposed violence in settling any issue."

"Sure. Heard about him in the lower grades. Fifty million dollars he
sunk in his worthless Peace Foundation. What about it?"

"Hear me out. Did you like what we just went through? Your friends and
comrades dying--my friends dead and wounded? And all to settle some
territorial dispute or to wipe out some imagined slur.

"Would you like to prevent your kid, or mine, from having to face this
again?"

"Stop sounding off, Treb, and say something." Neilson scrubbed
vigorously. "Of course I would--if I ever had a kid, I mean."

"We could help, Harl. By calling off the duel and making peace right
here. Of course there might be new balloting--even another battle
between our countries. But we would crack the theory that victory means
more than humanity."

Neilson snorted. He splashed water into his eyes and over his soapy
beard and hair.

"And go home penniless? To have every friend and neighbor avoid us?
What's eating you? You won. You'll get the quarter of a million."

"I want you to share equally. I want our two countries to know that
friendship means more than glory."

"I don't get it. If neither side wins we get nothing."

"You forget about the Hubble Award. Two hundred thousand to each member
of both sides, or their survivors, if they declare an armistice."

"I had forgotten. You'd give up fifty thousand so I could get the same
two hundred thousand! You're a prince, Treb.

"But I couldn't do it. Jane would turn against me. The radio, the
newswires, television and the magazines would crucify me--both of us."

"We'd ride it out. None of the participants in the twenty-two duels here
in Satellite has had the courage to admit he hates war. In years to come
our stand would be honored."

"It means losing Jane. I can't do it."

"You've lost her anyway, Harl, if she's the way you say. How about your
three wounded buddies: Wasson, Clark, and Thomason? Badly cut up aren't
they? Clark blind. Wasson with no arms.

"Couldn't they use the two hundred thousand?"

Neilson was coming ashore. A sudden resolve hardened his face, and his
blue eyes were dark and angry. His jaw jutted through the sandy fairness
of his draggled beard.

Treb felt his vitals knot at what he sensed in Neilson's expression.
He'd gambled on the essential fairness and sympathy of the Andilian's
character. But now....

"I'll do it," Neilson said tonelessly.

"I hope you'll never regret what you are doing, Harl."

"Aw, lock valves!" snarled Neilson. "Get ready to go while I finish
shaving."

So that was the way it was to be. Treb turned wearily away. He went back
through the screen of flowering shrubs and trees to where the coals of
their fire turned gray.

The grenades and the three cartridges, his own and Neilson's, he buried
in a hasty hole under a tree's sprawled roots. Afterward he tamped sod
back into place and spread leaves.

His needle-knife he laid on the turf. From his pocket he took a long
strip of cloth and some of the tough nylon cords from the net. Then he
let his trousers drop about his ankles and set about anchoring the
needle-knife securely to his upper leg.

When he had finished the keen blade projected a foot below his knee-cap.
And around it, carefully, he wound some of the cloth. He donned his
battered trousers again. The concealed knife was well hidden, although
it did impede the freedom of his stride.

Then he went down to rejoin Neilson.

Neilson was just finishing hacking at his hair with the short-bladed
safety razor. He scowled at Treb, his eyes on the carbine that the man
from Baryt yet carried.

"Not taking any chances, eh, Treb?"

"Just in case you change your mind, Harl."

"My friend--my very dear friend--Gram Treb!" Neilson laughed. "What
trust--what a faith in human nature!"

"Yes, Harl. Your friend."

They left the lake behind, Neilson in advance. Directly ahead, beyond
the outer ring of trees, the locks to the upper levels waited. They had
less than a third of a mile to traverse.

The rusting shattered debris of a machine gun, with a spilled clutter of
empty shell cases, lay just off the trail.

"Harok Dann died here," said Treb. Neilson did not turn.

"The big man, Manross, was killed by Dann's fire even as he threw the
grenade," he added.

Treb was watching the broad-shouldered figure ahead.

"Shut it off, Treb, will you?" Neilson shouted, turning. "Isn't it tough
enough without you yap-yapping all the way?"

Treb's lips thinned. The knife chafed his leg. Already he was limping
slightly. But they had covered more than half the distance. Once they
contacted the UN guards and were through the locks he could relax....

       *       *       *       *       *

The circular outer face of the lock was before them. And the button that
summoned the guards jutted redly from a shoulder-high recess. Neilson
leaned against the lock, his narrowed eyes on Treb as he reached for the
button.

Treb jabbed. And he relaxed inwardly. Too late now for Neilson to
attempt overpowering him and claiming the victory. He had feared such an
attempt--with the lust for the woman, Jane Vanne, driving him, Neilson
might have gone back on his word.

It was tough going for the kid. But he wasn't losing anything worth
keeping. And hundreds of fine young lads like him might be spared going
through this ordeal in space. They'd....

Neilson's fist caught him behind the ear. That split-second of
inattention was proving costly. Neilson clamped the carbine barrel,
wrested it away from Treb. He raised it. Treb lifted his hands.

"So now it's me at the controls," Neilson said, grinning. "Any reason
why I should go through with your Hubble Award idea?"

"The guards will be here in no more than a minute, Harl. Throw the gun
away and we'll go through together."

Neilson's eyes were shining. He was seeing the crowds waving crazy
welcome as his space ship grounded. He was seeing the adulation of the
boys, and the adoring glance of the dark-eyed girl named Jane. He was
seeing the medals and the banquets and the bundles of money.

"You were crazy, Treb," he said, "to ever trust me. In war promises mean
nothing. Study your history."

Treb squared his shoulders, his hands came down.

"If that's the way it is," he said, and then, "coming at you, Neilson."

Neilson flinched. It was the first time Treb had called him by his last
name, perhaps that was the reason. Or it could have been the sight of an
unarmed man walking directly into his carbine's ugly muzzle.

He pressed the trigger. The unloaded weapon was silent. Treb wrenched at
the gun. Neilson kicked him in the crotch. The gun came free. He brought
it down at Treb's head, but at the last second before impact Treb
dodged. The barrel smacked into Treb's right shoulder and broke the
collar bone.

Treb came on, his left hand jabbing, and his right arm dangling. Neilson
chopped at his face with the vertically held carbine, and tore a great
chunk from his left cheek.

And then Treb's knee came up. The shielded razor-sharp blade sliced
through his trouser. He drove the ugly little dagger into Neilson's
body.

Neilson went down, squirming away from the sudden pain that tore at his
vitals. The carbine went clattering.

Treb knelt beside him; tried to stanch the warm gush of red life, and
cursed, soundlessly, the ambition that is mankind's greatest boon--and
curse. He tore off the bloody knife.

"You won't die, Neilson," he said gravely. "Not with the surgeon and the
hospital here on Earth Satellite so near. You'll live to see Andilia
again.

"And about the invitation to visit us--I'm sorry you rejected it like
this. But the offer still stands. When I can call you Harl again, when
you are a _man_, visit us."

The lock behind them creaked and started to open.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Stalemate, by Basil Eugene Wells

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STALEMATE ***

***** This file should be named 32594.txt or 32594.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/5/9/32594/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
