The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Standardized Man, by Stephen Bartholomew

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Standardized Man

Author: Stephen Bartholomew

Release Date: June 2, 2010 [EBook #32658]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STANDARDIZED MAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science Fiction
    February 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.







    _The dilemma of "The Man in the White Suit" was but a minor
    irritation compared to Charles and his "all-weather" suit!_


                    THE STANDARDIZED MAN

                    BY STEPHEN BARTHOLOMEW




The turbocar swiped an embankment at ninety miles an hour; the result
was, of course, inevitable. It was a magnificent crash, and the driver
was thrown clear at the end of it for a distance of 50 feet.

Charles looked at the body and got his bright idea.

       *       *       *       *       *

The trouble had started a couple of weeks before, when Edwin, Charles'
laboratory co-ordinator, had called him into his office just before
Charles was due to leave for home. It was a distinct breach of
etiquette to cause a worker to arrive home at any time besides his
accustomed hour, so Charles knew whatever Edwin wanted must be
important. He sat down opposite the Co-ordinator and assumed a
politely questioning look.

"Charles, you know I wouldn't call you here at this hour if it wasn't
important," Edwin said, pursing his lips.

"Of course not, sir," Charles replied, waiting.

"The fact of the matter is, we are in dire straits." Edwin stared at
the other ominously. "As you well know, the Textile Industry, like
every other business firm in the world, has functioned entirely
without economic troubles of any sort for the past fifty years."

"Well, of course, sir...."

"And you are also well aware of what would be the results of any
financial deviation in any of these firms, particularly in a major
industry such as our own."

"Certainly, sir. Ours is a delicately balanced economic system. Any
slight change in the economic status of one firm would...."

"Exactly!" Edwin leaned across the desk and glared at him. "I have
just come from a Board of Directors meeting. And it was made known to
us that during the past three weeks our margin of profit has fallen
off by three tenths of a per cent!"

Charles' face turned pasty white. He swallowed and took a deep breath.

"Will that information be made public, sir?"

"Naturally not! But we aren't sure just how long we can keep it a
secret! The fact of the matter is, the IBM says that our profit margin
will continue to spiral downward at a gradually increasing rate unless
some drastic change occurs in our production set-up!"

Edwin leaned back and clasped his hands, composing himself. "The
precise reasons for the existence of the situation are quite obscure.
However, the IBM has informed us that the problem can be remedied if
we make a particular change in our production system, and it has
informed us as to the nature of that change."

He stood up and placed a finger on a capacitance switch. A panel in
the Wall slid back to reveal six sales charts. There were two each
marked _Winter_, _Summer_ and _Spring-Fall_. Three were designated
_marlons_, and three _marilyns_. Each of them showed a red line rising
steeply on the left, levelling out to a perfectly straight bar all the
way across, then dipping sharply again.

"Look here," Edwin said. "These are the sales charts for our six
suits. As you know, we make three different types for marlons, and
three for marilyns. Hot-weather, cold-weather, and medium-weather.
Each suit is designed to last a carefully calculated length of time,
and each consumer need only buy three suits a year. They are exactly
alike except for slight size differences, and because of elastic
fabrics these differences are held to a minimum. With this system the
Textile Industry attained the ultimate in Standardization, the
ultimate in efficiency."

Charles rubbed his chin thoughtfully. "Has the IBM suggested any
alternative to our system, any possible change?"

Edwin sat down again, folded his arms on the desk, and scowled.
"That's where you come in! The IBM informs us that there is only one
possible way to stabilize our economy, to raise our profit margin to
its former level--and that is by further standardization!"

Charles raised his eyebrows. "You mean a sexless wardrobe, sir? That's
been tried...."

"No, that's _not_ what I mean!" Edwin snapped. "What I mean is an
_all-weather suit_!"

Charles swallowed audibly at that and said nothing.

"You can see the advantages, of course," Edwin explained. "We'd need
only to manufacture two types of suit, marlon and marilyn. Since we'd
never have to adjust our factories, we could drop a lot of unnecessary
technicians, and with the further standardization, manufacturing would
be faster and cheaper--a _lot_ cheaper. The consumer would only
purchase one suit a year, but we could make up for that by raising the
prices somewhat."

Charles finally got a word in. "But, _sir_! An all-weather suit? How
can we design a suit that will be equally comfortable in the middle of
a Florida heat-wave or a New England snowstorm?"

"How? _How?_" Edwin's voice raised and his finger pointed. "_You're_
the research chemist, Charles! You're supposed to tell _me_ how!"

"Sir? I...."

"Listen!" Edwin poked the other in the chest. "I assume you know what
will happen to Society if the Textile Industry becomes economically
unstable?"

"Well, yes sir, but...."

"Then I assume you realize that the Board of Directors will stop at
nothing to preserve the status quo! And since you happen to be our
chief industrial chemist, the entire problem lands in your lap! Now,
we want to know how to make an all-weather suit, and we want to know
_fast_. Therefore, Charles, you're going to tell us how to do it!
Understand?"

Charles nodded unhappily. "Yes sir, I understand."

       *       *       *       *       *

Charles went to work the next day after informing his wife that she
could expect him to begin keeping rather irregular hours at the
laboratory. The idea of any kind of irregularity was enough to worry
any wife, and Ingrid was the naturally suspicious type. She was always
nagging and had, upon occasion, even gone so far as to insinuate that
Charles had individualist tendencies.

So he knew that she would, embarrassingly, call Edwin to check up on
him, but he didn't really care.

The real problem was the all-weather suit.

Charles put his small corps of assistants on the project,
investigating several lines of thought at once. Every day, someone
would drop around for a while to check on his progress, and he had no
delusions about what would happen if he failed. The entire economic
stability of his society depended on his coming up with an all-weather
suit, and he began to have trouble sleeping nights.

Eventually, he found what looked like a workable solution.

He called Edwin to tell him about it, and Edwin came down to the lab
to see for himself.

"Is _this_ it?" he asked, picking up what looked like a burlap
handkerchief.

Charles cleared his throat. "Well, that's the first sample, sir. Of
course, it's possible to obtain a finer weave once we find out a few
things about it, and when it's bleached...."

Edwin nodded impatiently. "Yes, yes. Well, what's so special about
it?"

"Well, it's made of a radically new type of fiber, sir...."

"How's it new?"

"I can show you more technical data on it, sir, but basically the
difference between this and conventional types of fiber is that this
is thermostatic."

"How do you mean, thermostatic?"

"Well, sir, basically, the diameter of the fiber is inversely
proportional with the temperature. When the temperature rises, the
fiber contracts, and when the temperature drops, it expands. So in
cold weather, you have a fine, tight weave with good insulation, and
in warm weather you have a loose weave with ventilation...."

Edwin nodded and dropped the fabric on a lab bench. "Sounds good."

"Well sir, we have to make a few more tests on it, and it'll have to
be field tested before we can decide if it's safe to use in
garments...."

Edwin tapped him on the shoulder. "Test it, Charlie."

"Sir?"

Edwin frowned. "We don't have as much time as you think. We need that
suit of yours _fast_. We can't afford to waste any more time puttering
around the laboratory. You have the fellows downstairs make up some of
this stuff into a Standard suit, and I want you to put it on yourself.
What I mean is, _today_!"

Charles' jaw dropped. "Today! But...."

"No buts! Wear it a couple of days, and if you say it checks out, we
go into production immediately."

So Charles went home that night in a new suit and a worried frown.

       *       *       *       *       *

Things were smooth for about two days. Charles continued to wear the
suit and Edwin insisted on his making the preliminary preparations for
the mass-production of thermostatic fabric. Charles was kept busy
working out specifications.

Then there were two factors that brought about a drastic change in his
life.

One was that he was worried. Charles wasn't exactly sure what he was
worried about, but at the back of his mind there was something in the
complicated molecular structure of the new fiber that bothered him.

The other factor was that Ingrid was still nagging him. Perhaps if
Charles had been able to tell her what he was working on she would
have understood why he was worried. But he didn't tell her, and she
didn't understand.

One day after Charles had come home and eaten, she started an argument
with him about something or other, and in the most heated part of the
battle she had hurled at him the supreme insult.

"Charles," she said, "I think you _look_ different!"

Coupled with the strain that Charles was under, that had been enough
to make him stare at Ingrid for a moment, wheel and stalk out of the
apartment.

After all, to say that one's face was even subtly different--even if
it really was--was an unforgivable insult.

Charles went out for a long, solitary evening walk and ended up at one
of those places that features six varieties of beer, a continuous
floor show and a loud band. Charles was not quite aware of entering,
but once inside, watching the bump-and-grinders who wore nothing but
their name tags, he found it difficult to leave.

The room was just ventilated enough to prevent suffocation, but it was
purposely kept hot and stuffy in the hope that this would induce
thirst on the part of the customers.

When he thought about it later he decided it was undoubtedly the
humidity that had caused the catastrophe, but when it happened he
hadn't the foggiest notion what was going on.

All he knew was that he had signalled a waitress for a third beer, she
had come threading her way between the postage-stamp tables, he had
looked up to give his order, she had looked down impersonally, and
then there was a scream.

It took a moment to realize that the waitress was screaming at him,
and by that time there were shouts from the surrounding tables as
well, and men and women alike were stumbling all over themselves to
get away from Charles.

In no time at all, there was a first-rate riot in progress, then the
lights went out, and Charles had brains enough to fight his way to an
exit and slip into the dark alley outside.

And then Charles inspected himself and realized the horrible truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The key concept to Charles' society was expressed in the word
_Standardization_. Standardization had had its beginning in the early
Industrial Revolution, when men first discovered that it was far more
efficient to make a thousand pieces of furniture if you made them all
exactly alike.

And since efficiency means economic predictability, and since
predictability means stability, Standardization quickly became the
watchword in the world's new industrial economy.

So, in time, virtually every product manufactured was standardized.
From the smallest bolts and screws in a wristwatch, through automobile
license plates, to clothing styles; everything manufactured was
strictly standard equipment.

Of course, the only unpredictable factor in this structure was the
human element, therefore the logical answer was a standardized
consumer.

The trend had started, undoubtedly, in Hollywood. The Art of
Cinematography had not existed long before becoming the Motion Picture
Industry. And, naturally, an industry must be efficient.

The Hollywood tycoons had decided that the best way to reduce the
margin of risk on any new movie star was to create an arbitrary
criterion, and to require the potential star to measure up to that
standard.

Charles was absently aware that the female standard of beauty had been
exemplified by a woman named Marilyn, and that the masculine standard
had been represented in someone named Marlon.

So, gradually, all of the new female stars that were selected by
Hollywood resembled Marilyn as much as possible, and male leads were
selected to look like Marlon. If anyone had a nose that wasn't quite
right, or large ears, a little plastic surgery quickly remedied the
problem, and if a female starlet happened to have brown hair, peroxide
was always handy.

And in time, it became increasingly difficult to tell one movie star
from another.

Then the standard, idealized faces and their standards, idealized
personal mannerisms became socially fashionable, and with modern
cosmetics and readily available plastic surgery, the fashionable men
and women in society began to imitate the ideal.

It became not only fashionable to wear the Standard face, but indecent
_not_ to do so. Social conformity was encouraged as much as possible,
and the end result was the closest thing to a Standardized,
predictable consumer as there ever could be.

This might have produced difficult problems, because with all women
and all men wearing identical clothing and identical faces, it might
have become impossible to tell one person from another, which was not
desirable even in a Standardized world.

Along with the Standard face had come name tags by which a person
might individualize himself to the minimum necessary degree.

These name tags were worn about the neck on a colorful plastic band,
with the tag itself, a white plastic card, on the right side of the
neck. On the tag, in gold lettering, was the person's name, address,
and Social Security number.

And--they were worn _all_ the time.

The name tag was the only means by which a person might be identified.
Without it, anyone might impersonate anyone else he pleased. So, of
course, it became obscene to appear in public without one.

And Charles, standing in the alley, looked down at himself and
realized the horrible truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

He found himself running through back streets, sidling around corners,
and darting into doorways.

After an hour or two, he realized that he was no longer within the
City Limits.

Charles took a good look around him and discovered he was standing on
a minor highway just outside of town. There were no cars or people in
sight, and he dropped off the road into some bushes to get his wind
and think.

He had _known_ there was something wrong with the molecular structure
of the suit he was wearing, but Edwin wouldn't listen.

It had undoubtedly been the humidity. The chemical process had no
doubt been going on since he'd first donned the suit, but it had been
the heat in that beer joint that had accelerated the action enough to
finish the job. Human perspiration acting on the new fiber in the
collar of his suit produced some obscure chemical reaction which had a
corrosive effect on the plastic band and plastic card of his name tag.

He had to get home, somehow, and tell Edwin to hold up production on
the new thermostatic suit. Perhaps the flaw in it could be eliminated
in a short time. If it couldn't....

He considered. The world Dollar Standard had been absolutely stable
for more years than he knew about. What would happen if it suddenly
became unstable? A fluctuation of even a fraction of a cent would
cause widespread panic; it would jolt the Public's faith in its
infallible economic system. And the panic would cause further
deviation in the Dollar's purchasing power, and--more panic.

He wiped his brow. If the situation in the Textile Industry was as
critical as Edwin said it was, then Edwin and his superiors weren't
going to be at all happy when Charles told them about the suit--and
Charles was going to be the fall guy.

But of course he had to get back and tell them. Because Edwin was all
set to start production on the all-weather suit immediately, and if he
actually went through with that and got a few million of them onto
consumer's backs, the result would be not panic, but disaster.

And Charles' present problem was how to get home without being
arrested.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was then that one individual got an extremely tough break, and
Charles got his first lucky one.

A turbocar came barreling down the highway and, without warning struck
an embankment. The driver was thrown fifty feet from the wreckage.

Under different circumstances, he would never have considered doing
what he did then. The penalty for wearing another person's name tag
was severe. But Charles was under an extreme emotional strain; and
without even thinking, he bent over the limp grey form of the other
marlon and removed his tag.

He straightened, then, clutching the plastic band and looking around
at the smoking wreck. Already, he could hear a siren somewhere in the
night.

He slipped the name tag over his head and struck out through the
bushes toward the city.

His plan was simple; he had another name tag in his apartment for
emergency purposes, and if Ingrid was in bed he'd have no trouble
getting it, destroying the one he was wearing now, and putting on his
other suit.

Briefly, he wondered what the police would think of finding a body
near a smashed car with no name tag. They'd probably decide it was the
same person that had caused the disturbance at the night club earlier
in the evening.

Charles realized that the lettering on the car had indicated it was a
public, coin-operated vehicle, so the authorities would have no means
of identifying the body.

After awhile it occurred to him that if he should go into hiding
someplace, the body might easily be identified as his own, and he
wouldn't have to worry about what Edwin and the other bosses would do
to him. It probably wouldn't be noticed that the torn and
blood-spattered clothes on the corpse were not thermostatic. But he
shook his head resolutely. Even if he were crazy enough to try it, the
body would be reported missing by somebody or other, so that would
never do.

Eventually, Charles reached a main thoroughfare in the city and hailed
a cab. He climbed in the back, told the driver briefly to take him
home, and then slumped down in the seat and brooded.

He stared out the window, watching the buildings go by, and the
emotional reaction of the evening began to set in. Morbidly, Charles
wondered what they'd do to him if he kept his mouth shut and let the
Industry put the suit into production, and waited for the millions of
ID tags to begin to drop off.

The prospect was so frightening that his apprehension over what would
happen if it was discovered he was wearing somebody else's tag almost
disappeared.

Finally, the cab rolled to a stop. Charles got out and dropped some
coins into the hand protruding from the front seat, and, head low, he
turned and entered the apartment house.

He trudged dismally up the stairs, thinking about his wife. He
wondered what would happen if she were awake and waiting for him. If
she saw that he had on somebody else's name tag.

The door was unlocked.

And the light was on.

He wondered if he could duck into the bedroom without being seen, and
then someone leaped at him and he knew it was too late.

"Oh, James dear!" she cried, throwing her arms around Charles' neck.
"When you walked out of here, I thought you'd never come back to me!"

Charles looked at the marilyn's name tag with slow horror and realized
that in his preoccupation, out of sheer force of habit, he had simply
said to the cab driver, "Take me home," and the driver had looked at
the address on his tag and complied. The apartment building so much
resembled Charles' own that he hadn't known the difference, and he
hadn't bothered to look at the number on the door.

When Charles walked in, this Marilyn, Stasia her name was, had looked
at his name tag and thought he was her James. She didn't have the
slightest idea of who he really was.

Then Charles closed his eyes, swallowed, and knew something else.

It really didn't make the least bit of difference _who_ he was. And of
course, the solution to all his troubles was obvious.

With a sigh, Charles leaned over Stasia and kissed her.


                   END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Standardized Man, by Stephen Bartholomew

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STANDARDIZED MAN ***

***** This file should be named 32658.txt or 32658.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/5/32658/

Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
