The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cold Ghost, by Chester S. Geier

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cold Ghost

Author: Chester S. Geier

Release Date: June 4, 2010 [EBook #32685]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLD GHOST ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories November 1948. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


                              COLD GHOST


                         by Chester S. Geier


     All Hager had to do was slow the dogsled to a walk, and his
     partner died. A perfect crime--no chance to get caught!

       *       *       *       *       *




In the valley, with the sheltering hills now behind them, the bitterly
cold wind drove at the sled with unchecked ferocity. Gusts of snow
came with the wind, thick and dry, the separate particles of it
stinging on contact.

[Illustration: Hager huddled before the fire, trembling with cold that
filled him with terror.]

The dogs made slow progress through the deep drifts. Hager's
smoldering irritation blazed into abrupt rage. From his position at
the rear of the sled, he lashed out with the driver's whip that he
held in one heavily mittened hand, shouting behind the wool scarf
covering the lower half of his face. The dogs lunged in their traces,
whining. A couple floundered in the powdery footing and were
immediately snapped at by their companions behind them.

The snow was falling swiftly and with a sinister steadiness. It seemed
to hang like a vast white curtain over the valley, obscuring the hills
and the fanged outline of mountains beyond. The wind seized portions
of the curtain and twisted it into fantastic shapes--the shapes of
demons, Hager thought suddenly. For the scene through which he moved
was a kind of hell, a white and frozen hell, with the howl of the wind
like the despairing shrieks of tormented souls.

Hager pictured himself as one of them. And Cahill, huddled in furs on
the sled, another. He cursed behind the scarf as he thought of Cahill.
This was Cahill's fault, their being out here in the storm. If it
weren't for Cahill, he would be back at the cabin, snug and warm, logs
blazing cheerfully in the fireplace.

It was a rotten time for Cahill to have taken sick, Hager fumed. But
it had happened. And it had left him with nothing else to do but pack
their catch of furs, harness up the sled, and start out with Cahill
for the doctor in Moose Gulch.

He almost regretted having taken the furs. With Cahill an added burden
on the sled, it was too large a load for the dogs to pull with the
necessary speed and endurance. But he hadn't dared to leave the entire
season's catch unguarded at the cabin. If some wanderer appeared in
his and Cahill's absence, the furs would be an irresistible
temptation.

Fearing, thus, to leave the furs behind, and now endangered by their
weight, Hager found the situation maddening. And the storm was making
matters worse. It was near the end of winter, but the climate had
chosen this moment to be at its most unco-operative.

Hager muttered blackly against the storm, wondering why he had allowed
his trapper's dream of wealth to lure him to this far northern corner
of Alaska. It was a cold, bleak and hostile country. Tiny settlements,
like Moose Gulch were few and far between. Of course, furs were at
their best and most plentiful here. He and Cahill had proved that, for
their catch was a large one. Hager's thoughts soared briefly above his
bitter mood as he thought of the money the furs would bring. And of
the things that the money would bring back in civilization.

Added to what he had so far managed to save, his share would make
almost enough to start a fox breeding ranch. Or a mink ranch. Almost
enough--but not quite. That meant he would have to spend another
winter in this location, and Hager flinched at the thought. He hated
loneliness and the bitter, subzero cold. Most of all he hated the
cold. Only a fur breeding ranch, with large, warm living quarters,
would have made it bearable.

Hager didn't know when the idea came to him. It must have been lying
dormant for a long time in a far, dark corner of his mind, only now
surging to the fore. Subconsciously he must have prepared himself for
this moment of inspiration. He wasn't sure. He was aware only of an
interval while he plodded behind the sled, drawn by the struggling and
panting team, cursing the dogs, cursing Cahill and the fierce cold
that mischievously searched out the most tender portions of his face
beneath the hood of his parka. There was that moment, and then--

       *       *       *       *       *

And then he found himself toying with the thought of murdering Cahill.

With the other out of the way, the entire proceeds from the sale of
furs would be his. There would be no necessity to split. He could
start the fur ranch at once. He wouldn't have to spend another winter
in this vicious cold. He--

A dozen fascinating new possibilities opened up to Hager. It was as
though he had been blind and was able to see only now. Breath-taking
vistas blossomed before his awakened eyes. There was music in what he
visioned, music and the voices of women, bright lights, color,
movement, and the warmth of gentler climes.

The brightest part of the picture was that Cahill's death need not be
outright murder. The man was sick. His life depended on getting him
into the hands of the doctor in Moose Gulch as quickly as possible.

If Hager were simply to delay in reaching the settlement, Cahill would
die as surely as though from the thrust of a knife or the impact of a
bullet. Exposure to the biting cold would finish him. And nobody would
know. Hager could always claim that he had hurried as best he could
under the difficult, hampering circumstances of the storm, but that
Cahill had died on the way. As easy as that. If Marshal Art Maddox
stuck his long nose into the matter, Cahill's unmarked body would be
proof that there had been no foul play.

Hager felt satisfied that his scheme was without loopholes. The idea
had become a definite plan. And now his square lips hardened with
determination behind the scarf. He looked at Cahill, dozing feverishly
on the sled, with deep-set gray eyes that were bleak and implacable.

Cahill would never reach Moose Gulch alive.

With his grim purpose giving new drive to his actions, Hager glanced
about him. It was difficult to see through the curtain of snow that
hung between him and the landscape, but by squinting steadily through
momentary rifts made by the frigid, lashing wind, he was able
presently to discern that they were near the pass leading out of the
valley. Beyond the pass, he knew, was a forest, dipping down to the
banks of a frozen stream. The stream ran for several miles until it
branched into a river, which in turn led directly into Moose Gulch.
With these landmarks to guide him, a traveler through the snow-bound
wilderness could reach the settlement easily and quickly. But Hager
didn't intend to do that. He now had time to kill. He chuckled darkly
over the accuracy of the phrase.

Plodding toward the pass, he deliberately slowed his steps. He no
longer used the whip or shouted at the dogs for greater speed. The
animals were grateful for the respite. They slackened their pace,
tongues lolling and bushy tails waving as they bobbed in their plowed
path through the white drifts.

Cahill dozed on. Once or twice he moved restlessly amid the furs piled
about him. It was as though some deep, vague instinct warned him that
something was wrong.

Hager watched the other sharply for a time, then desisted to give his
attention to maneuvering the sled through the pass. The forest
appeared, the trees wraith-like under their thick, white mantles of
snow. Hager didn't follow the dip in the land that led toward the
frozen stream. He guided the dogs in the opposite direction and began
watching Cahill again. He hoped that the man would not awake until
less familiar territory surrounded them.

Cahill didn't awake. He dozed and tossed, his lips moving occasionally
in a soundless mutter. His gaunt, leathery face was pale under its
growth of grizzled whiskers.

The snow-covered land rose, became rocky and difficult. The dogs began
laboring with increasing weariness in their efforts to keep pulling
the heavy sled. Hager realized he couldn't go in this direction much
longer. When a ravine suddenly presented itself, relatively free of
snow, he decided to call a halt.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unfastening the dogs, he left the ravine and began searching through
the snow for brushwood. It took time, but Hager was in no hurry. He
gathered an armful and finally returned to the sled.

Cahill was awake. He had propped himself feebly among the furs, his
gaunt face blank and drab with sickness. His filmed blue eyes fastened
on Hager.

"Water," he whispered. "Water, Matt."

"Coming up," Hager said. "Just you wait a minute, Ben, and you'll get
all the water you want."

Cahill fell back among the furs, and Hager leisurely shaved kindling
and stacked the wood and then set it ablaze. The ravine was shielded
from the wind, and the wood ignited without difficulty. At last Hager
went to the sled and removed the small pack he had fortunately thought
to bring along. His experience with the wilderness had trained him
never to overlook the smallest precautions.

Hager took a handled pan from the pack. He filled it with snow and
then held the pan over the flames. When the snow melted, he filled a
tin cup with the liquid and went over to Cahill. He had to steady the
cup as the other drank.

Finally Cahill nodded. His eyes seemed to clear. He glanced about him,
and a dim worry moved in his face.

"Matt, where are we?"

"Somewhere near Boot Valley."

"You ... you mean we're lost?"

"I sort of got mixed up in the storm. Nothing to worry about."

Cahill shivered suddenly. "We got to reach town, Matt. Got to see the
doctor."

Hager nodded. "How do you feel?"

"It's getting worse. I can feel it getting worse. I'm cold now, Matt.
Before ... before I was...." Cahill's voice trailed off. He had to
make an effort before he was able to speak again. "Got ... got to see
the doctor, Matt. Can't waste any time."

"I know," Hager said. "But the team needs a little rest. They've had a
lot of heavy hauling, and there's still a distance to go."

Cahill nodded miserably, shivering. He burrowed into the furs, still
shivering, breathing rapidly through parted lips. Slowly the chill
left him. His eyes clouded again. Then his lids fell, and he dozed
once more.

Hager brewed tea and drank it slowly, squatting before the fire. Then
he packed and lighted his pipe. He stared into the flames with
narrowed eyes, seeing his dreams pictured there. They were pleasant
dreams.

Hager remained in the ravine until the supply of wood was gone. Then
he fastened the dogs back into their traces and resumed his position
behind the sled. With shouts and cracks of the whip, he guided the
animals out of the ravine, following the downward slope of the land
this time.

The snow stopped falling after a while, but the wind and the cold
increased. The cold hung on the air like an enormous, transparent
weight. Somehow it seemed to give an impossible crystalline purity to
the snow blanketing the trees and the land. In doing so, it emphasized
and magnified its very presence. It made itself something almost alive
and sentient, icily malignant, overbearing, utterly cruel and without
mercy.

Hager cursed the cold with redoubled venom. Despite the thickness of
his fur parka and the layers of clothing beneath the cold seemed to
soak into him like an all-penetrating liquid. He had to wave his arms
and stamp his feet to fight back a creeping numbness.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the terrible chill could not subdue the flame of purpose burning
in Hager's mind. That part of him remained keenly alert. The sled was
moving in the direction of the stream, and he was careful to judge the
distance carefully. He didn't want to approach too close. At just the
right moment he turned the sled at angle back toward the way from
which it had come. It was his plan to keep zigzagging, approaching the
stream and then retreating, always at a tangent. A great deal of time
would be consumed in this way, with very little actual forward
progress toward Moose Gulch.

He repeated this maneuver again and again. Cahill roused a few times
to inquire weakly about their progress. Always Hager gave the same
answer.

"We're getting there, Ben. It won't be long now. Don't you worry."

After that Cahill was silent. It seemed evident to Hager that the man
was sinking rapidly. But not as rapidly as Hager wished. He knew he
couldn't bear the paralyzing cold much longer, and his hatred of it
grew.

The sled reached a group of slab-like rock outcroppings that offered
shelter from the slashing wind. Hager stopped the sled behind their
protection for a short rest. The additional delay suited his plans.

While the dogs huddled together in the snow, Hager went around the
sled to get the pack. He glanced at Cahill's face--and his muscles
became tense. Cahill's eyes were open. Cahill was watching him with a
terrible steadiness and a soul-searing clarity. Cahill ... _knew_.

Hager realized that Cahill must have been awake for quite some time,
watching the actions of the sled. The man had clearly discovered
Hager's deception.

Hager felt transfixed by the accusing brightness in the other's eyes.
He sensed that his guilt was written vividly and unmistakably in his
face. He fumbled for words that would form an excuse, an apology, some
sort of plausible lie--anything that would remove the dreadful
knowledge in Cahill's eyes. But no words came.

After a strained, bitter moment Cahill spoke. His voice was low, yet
somehow curiously distinct. "You're trying to kill me, Matt. I see it
now. You aren't going straight toward Moose Gulch. You're tracking
back and forth to waste time. You ... want me to die!"

"That isn't true," Hager blurted. "I ... I got lost. The storm and
cold got me mixed up."

Cahill went on as though he hadn't heard. "It's the furs, isn't it,
Matt? You want all the money for yourself. With me out of the way, you
won't have any trouble."

"I got mixed up, I tell you," Hager insisted.

Cahill said nothing further. With a burst of energy as sudden as it
was amazing, he gripped the sides of the sled and began pushing
himself erect. His strangely clear eyes were fixed on Hager.

Mastering a brief surge of panic, Hager threw himself forward, forcing
Cahill back into the sled. Cahill struggled a moment, but the reserve
strength he had managed to summon quickly gave out. He fell back into
the sled and lay limp and quiet, his eyes closed, breathing harshly
and rapidly.

Hager watched for several minutes, the cold creeping slyly into him
with the inactivity. Then, assured that Cahill would make no further
trouble, he obtained the pack. He fed the dogs this time, tossing them
pieces of dried meat. They would need renewed strength and energy to
take him the remaining distance to Moose Gulch. Finally, gathering
brushwood, Hager built a small fire and brewed tea. He ate a couple of
thick sandwiches as he drank the tea, chewing with methodic slowness
and glancing at Cahill.

       *       *       *       *       *

The other hadn't stirred since making his accusation. But when Hager
finished eating, Cahill's eyes opened once more. He looked at Hager
for a long, breathless moment. Only a vestige of the unnatural
brightness that had been in his eyes remained now. With what must have
required a tremendous effort, he spoke.

"You aren't going to get away with this, Matt. I ... I'm going to get
you. I'm going to make you pay."

A moment longer Cahill looked at Hager. And then the last remnant of
brightness left his eyes. His lids fell slowly. He looked exhausted
and seemed to be resting. But several minutes later, acting on a
sudden realization, Hager felt for Cahill's pulse and found that the
man was dead.

Triumph spread through Hager like a heady warmth. It was over. The
money from the furs would be his alone. He would have the fur ranch,
now. But there was no hurry about that. He would travel a little first
and have some fun.

The best part of it was that he would never have to worry. Cahill's
body was completely unmarked. It was very obvious that he had died of
illness. There couldn't possibly be any suspicions.

Then Hager recalled the threat Cahill had made before dying. Cahill
had promised revenge, but there was nothing he could do now. Hager
shrugged the memory away. The dead were dead. They could do no harm.

Hager now lost no time in reaching Moose Gulch. He drove the dogs
relentlessly, trotting behind the sled. Elation gave him a strength
that took him easily over the miles.

A short time before he entered the settlement it began to snow again.
Hager was pleased. The snow would cover up the tracks he had left in
the event that Art Maddox did any snooping.

He went directly to the doctor's home, carrying the body of Cahill
inside. He cleverly played the part of a man reluctant to believe that
his partner had died.

"Isn't there something you can do, Doc?" he asked anxiously. "Maybe it
isn't too late."

The other straightened from his examination of Cahill and shook his
white thatch. His round, ruddy features were sympathetic. "I'm afraid
it's all over. Ben Cahill's as dead as he'll ever be. Most likely he
passed away some time before you were able to reach town. Nothing left
to do now but turn him over to the undertaker. That's me, in case you
don't know. In Moose Gulch it takes two, three jobs to keep a man
fairly busy."

Hager sighed and looked properly grief-stricken. "Well, I'll leave you
to take care of things, Doc. Do a good job--nothing but the best, you
know. Ben was the finest partner a man could ever have."

Hager left and proceeded to visit acquaintances in the settlement,
spreading the news of Cahill's death. He was showered with
condolences, which he accepted with a suitable air of melancholy.
Later, eating supper in the tiny dining room of Moose Gulch's small,
frame hotel, he was joined at the table by Art Maddox.

The marshal was a tall, raw-boned man with a long nose and protruding
eyes that looked deceptively mild. His presence filled Hager with a
vague dread.

"Heard Ben Cahill took sick and died while you were bringing him into
town," Maddox began. "Sure is too bad. How did it happen?"

Hager explained, adhering closely to essential facts, though he
omitted certain others and stretched a point here and there. He
finished, "I tried to get Ben into town as fast as I could, but it was
snowing hard and I almost got lost a couple of times. Ben was sick
bad, and with the cold and all, he died on the way."

"It kind of looks like you expected that to happen," Maddox said.

Hager grew tense. "What do you mean?"

"The way you took the furs along kind of makes it look like you
expected Ben Cahill to die. Besides, you ought to have known that the
furs would slow you down on the trip to town."

"I was afraid to leave the furs at the cabin," Hager defended.
"Suppose somebody stole them while me and Ben were gone? A whole
season's catch. I just couldn't take a chance."

Maddox nodded with evident reluctance. "That's true enough, I guess. I
was just sort of wondering about it." He stood up. "Well, sorry to
have bothered you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Hager made a generous gesture. "No bother at all." He watched as
Maddox left the room, grinning inwardly. Maddox apparently suspected
something in his snooping, suspicious way, but the only point of
attack he'd been able to find was one for which Hager had a
satisfactory explanation. Hager felt certain that he wouldn't be
questioned again. And with the snow blotting out the erratic trail the
sled had left, he was confident that he had nothing to fear from
Maddox any longer.

The grin crept out around his square lips. He was safe. He had
committed the perfect crime.

Hager checked in at the hotel, and after a pleasant evening spent at
one of Moose Gulch's two saloons, he returned and went to bed. He had
a restless night. The hotel was warm enough, and the covers on the bed
thick, but a strange feeling of cold seemed to envelop him. And though
he emptied the bottle of whisky he had brought with him, the cold
persisted.

He slept fitfully. Once he dreamed that he was tied, naked, to the
sled and being driven by Cahill through a terrific snow storm. The
cold was so intense it seared him like fire. He awoke, shivering, a
vivid recollection of Cahill's gaunt, accusing features in his mind.
Again he seemed to hear Cahill's dying promise.

"_You aren't going to get away with this, Matt. I'm going to get you.
I'm going to make you pay._"

And now, shuddering with that weird cold that seemed to enclose him
like a huge, vengeful fist, Hager wondered.

The cold remained with him in the days that followed. It not only
remained. It grew more unbearable.

Hager began to have a persecuted feeling. The cold stayed with him
wherever he went. Even near hot stoves, or in heated rooms, he felt
chilled. No one else seemed to notice it. The cold seemed intended for
him alone. More and more, he wondered about Cahill's threat.

He was materialistic. He didn't believe in ghosts. But he knew that
he was being haunted by an unnatural cold that nobody else seemed
able to feel.

He cast about for a method of escaping the cold. The obvious solution
was to leave Moose Gulch, as he had intended all along. In his mind
the cold was somehow connected with the settlement, through Cahill,
who was buried there. A trip to one of the warm, southern regions in
the States, he decided, should bring relief.

He sold the furs and with the money took passage on a plane that
operated between the settlement and a large town some distance away.
Continuing to travel by plane, he presently arrived in Seattle.

Still the cold remained with him. The miles he had put between Moose
Gulch and himself hadn't done any good.

Nothing seemed to help. Heavy clothes, nourishing foods, whisky,
vigorous exercise--nothing brought him the warmth he was beginning to
crave as an addict craves dope.

Desperately, he resumed his trip, traveling by air and then by train,
and finally grasping at any means of transportation that happened to
be most convenient. The cold traveled with him. It enveloped him like
a shell. It was an invisible prison, shutting him away from the world
of warmth.

The climate grew increasingly mild and balmy as he progressed
southward. But the chill that always surrounded him grew worse.

More often, now, he thought of Cahill's grim promise. "_I'm going to
get you. I'm going to make you pay._" It repeated itself over and over
in his mind. It was emphasized by the invisible blanket of cold
wrapped inescapably about him.

Once, in a hotel room where he had been drinking steadily, Hager's
despair rose in him to the point of madness. He leaped from the bed,
hurling an empty whisky bottle against the wall, screaming mingled
curses and entreaties.

"Damn you, Cahill, leave me alone! Haven't you had enough? How much
longer are you going to keep torturing me? Leave me alone, do you
hear? Leave me alone!"

Cahill didn't seem to hear. Or if he did, he paid no attention. The
cold stayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hager began to lose weight. His stocky figure became gaunt, his cheeks
sunken. Dark hollows cupped his feverishly bright eyes. His hands
trembled. He jerked nervously at sudden noises.

In Los Angeles he yielded to a wild impulse and visited a doctor. He
explained his symptoms, omitting their true cause, and pleaded for
help.

The doctor gave him a complete physical examination, though it was
evident from the man's expression of perplexity that he had learned
nothing. "I can't understand it," he told Hager. "There's nothing
seriously wrong with you. All you need is plenty of food and rest.
You're probably just imagining things."

Hager groaned, paid his bill, and fled.

Several days later found him in Mexico. It was warm--but he didn't
feel it. He knew with a terrible certainty that he would never feel
warmth again. And he was tired of futilely trying to escape something
from which there was no escape. He rented a small house on the
outskirts of a town far from the Border and hired an elderly Mexican
named Pancho to attend to his needs.

Pancho was a good servant. But he was evidently greatly puzzled by
Hager. According to the stories Pancho told his cronies in the town,
his _gringo_ master insisted that a hot fire be kept going constantly
in the fireplace. And in this warm weather, too! As if that alone
wasn't enough, the _gringo_ also kept himself wrapped thickly in
blankets. It was all very strange. The _gringo_, he said, was being
tormented by a demon.

The people of the town, a simple folk to whom the supernatural was as
real as the sun in the sky, were sympathetic. A priest at the church
promptly volunteered his aid. He had, as Pancho subsequently explained
to Hager when he appeared with the man, an enviable reputation for his
skill in exorcizing devils and evil spirits.

Hager seized at the hope. He clutched at the priest eagerly.

"Try it! Pray for me! Do something--anything!"

The priest nodded gravely and began his task.

It worked.

Hager felt warm again.

A wild delight filled him. For the first time he became aware that the
room was stifling, but the mere fact that he was able to feel it
seemed the most wonderful thing in the world. He had a sense of
freedom as complete as though he had been released into the sunlight
after long confinement in a lightless dungeon.

He wrung the priest's hand, forced money on him, and then told Pancho
he was throwing a _fiesta_ for the entire town that evening. Pancho
was to take care of the details immediately. No expense was to be
spared.

For the rest of the day, Hager soaked himself in the sunlight,
reveling in the delicious warmth. And when evening came he attended
the _fiesta_ in high spirits. He ate _tortillas_, drank wine, and
danced with innumerable dark-eyed _senoritas_.

It was late when he returned to the house with Pancho. He found a
robed figure waiting patiently at the door. It was the priest.
Something about the man's solemn expression filled Hager with dread.

"What's the matter?" he demanded. "Has something happened?"

In his halting English, Pancho translated the gist of the priest's
explanation. "The _padre_ say he no can help you, _senor_. He say he
have how you call vision. It tell him you must pay."

There was more. But Hager didn't need any more to know that he was
being refused further help for the crime he had committed.

A short while after the priest left he felt the cold again.

Pancho built a fire in the fireplace, and Hager crouched before it,
huddled in blankets and shivering. He was still there when Pancho went
to bed. And he was still there when Pancho awoke in the morning. But
he was no longer shivering. He no longer felt the cold.

He was dead.

It had been a warm night. The fire had been, hot, the blankets
numerous and thick. Yet Hager had _frozen_ to death.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cold Ghost, by Chester S. Geier

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLD GHOST ***

***** This file should be named 32685.txt or 32685.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/8/32685/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
