The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. President, by Stephen Arr

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Mr. President

Author: Stephen Arr

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: June 6, 2010 [EBook #32719]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. PRESIDENT ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction November 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            Mr. President


                            By STEPHEN ARR


                     Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


     He had been overwhelmingly elected. Messages of sympathy
     poured in, but they couldn't help ... nothing could.

       *       *       *       *       *




George Wong stood pale and silent by the video screen, listening to
the election returns, a long-stemmed glass of champagne clutched
forgotten in his trembling right hand.

The announcer droned on: "--latest returns from Venus, with half of
the election districts reporting, give three billion four hundred and
ninety-six million votes for Wong, against one billion, four hundred
million for Thompson, one billion one hundred million for Miccio, and
nine hundred million for Kau. These results, added to the almost
complete returns from Earth and the first fragmentary reports from
Mars, clearly indicate a landslide vote for Wong as the next President
of the Solar Union. The two billion votes from Ganymede and Callisto,
which will be received early tomorrow morning, cannot appreciably
affect the results. The battle for the twenty-five Vice-Presidents is
less clear. It is certain that Thompson, Miccio, Kau, Singh, and
DuLavier will all be among those elected, but in what order is not
yet...."

Wong leaned over and snapped the video off. His shoulders sagged. He
leaned against the console as though too tired to move, a slight,
narrow-shouldered man with a very high forehead and thin receding
black hair. His large, sad, almond-shaped eyes and yellow-tinted skin
indicated that there was a good deal of Asiatic in the mixed blood
that flowed through his veins.

"I'm sorry, truly sorry," Michael Thompson said sympathetically,
placing a friendly arm across the narrow shoulders of the successful
candidate. They were alone in the living room of the hotel suite in
New Geneva, which they had shared for the campaign. "The people chose
well. After the wonderful job you did in organizing the colonization
of Io and Europa, you were the logical man. And then you do have the
fantastic Responsibility Quotient of 9.6 out of 10. Anyway," he added
with a weary shrug, "don't feel too bad--it looks as though I'll be
First Vice-President."

A brief ghost of a smile crossed George Wong's face. "We who are about
to die salute you," he said, lifting his glass in a bitter toast to
the blank video screen.

Thompson, the man who was to be First Vice-President, silently joined
him.

"At least," Wong sighed, putting his empty glass down on the video, "I
don't have a family. Look at poor Kau. At Miccio. With wives and
children, how they must have suffered when they learned they had been
drafted by the conventions.... Well, I guess there's nothing else to
do but to go to bed and wait until they come for me in the morning.
Good night, Michael."

"Good night, George," Michael Thompson said. He turned toward his own
room. "I _am_ sorry," he said again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wong had already eaten breakfast and was dressed in an inconspicuous
tweed suit for the inauguration when the chimes sounded, telling him
that they were at the door. Slowly, he walked to the door and opened
it.

"Good morning, Mr. President," the man outside said cheerily, flashing
his famous grin. George Wong immediately recognized Al Grimm, the man
who had been personal secretary to sixty-three Presidents. He was one
of the vast army of civil servants who kept the wheels of government
turning smoothly until Presidents were able to make the decisions
that would create policy.

"Good morning, Al," George Wong said. "I am afraid I'll have to place
myself completely in your hands for these first few days. Do we go to
the Executive Mansion for the inauguration now?"

"Yes, sir. Then, after your inauguration, to the office. Messages of
condolence have been pouring in all night, but I don't think you want
to bother with them. However, I am afraid we will have to bring up
some of the problems that have arisen in the two weeks since President
Reynolds left office."

"How is he?" Wong asked. "I knew him, you know. He taught at Venus
University at the same time I did. He was a fine man."

"I'm afraid he's no better," Al said, shaking his head. "We're doing
all we can for him, but he won't even speak to his wife. You know how
difficult it is."

"Yes, I know," Wong said.

They rode downstairs in silence and walked to the Presidential Copter
parked in the street in front of the house. A few guards loitered in
the vicinity, but there were no crowds. They entered the plush copter,
which rose smoothly under its whirling blades and carried them over
the city, landing finally on the lawn of the Executive Mansion.

Chief Justice Herz met them, dressed in a blue business suit, and
after they shook hands he administered the oath.

"Do you, George Wong," he asked, "swear to make every decision you are
asked to make as President of the Solar Union for the benefit of the
people of the Union and in accord with what you believe to be fair and
just, fully cognizant of the fact that the welfare of seventy-five
billion citizens of the Union is dependent on you?"

"I do," George Wong said, through a painfully dry throat that would
barely permit the words to come out.

       *       *       *       *       *

They all shook hands again. Then Al Grimm led the President across the
grassy lawn, into the mansion, and up to the office that had served
over a thousand Presidents. Wong entered it nervously. It was a large
plain room, severely decorated. Tentatively, he slid into the chair
behind the huge steel desk, and began opening the drawers. He found
them fully stocked with tapes, a recorder, all the other necessities.
The desk and everything else in the room was brand new. There was no
trace anywhere of his predecessors, and he was relieved to find it so.
The Psychology Department at work, he thought.

"While we are moving your effects into the living quarters, Mr.
President," Al said from the doorway, "I wonder if we could start
discussing the problem of the Gnii ... their Ambassadors have
presented an ultimatum, and they demand an answer today."

       *       *       *       *       *

So soon, President Wong thought. Couldn't he have just a few hours to
get used to his office, to wander through the building, to explore the
green garden that he could see from his barred window stretching out
behind the mansion?

For a second, he almost rebelled; but even as he thought of answering
no, he realized that he never would. The Psych Agents had measured his
Responsibility Quotient at 9.6, and they didn't make mistakes.

"Of course," he answered with forced enthusiasm. "Who do you suggest I
discuss the matter with? For that matter, who are the Gnii?"

"I have the Manager of Defense, the Manager of Trade, and the Manager
of Foreign Affairs waiting in the anteroom. With your permission, I'll
call them in and they'll explain the problem. But first, if you would
sign this order ... it has already been approved by President Reynolds
and by all of the Managers concerned."

President Wong took the paper. It was an order sending a space
platoon, 5,000 warships and 500,000 men, to the system of Altair A, to
place themselves under the command of the Grasvian fleet for an attack
against the system of Altair D.

The President frowned. "What's the story behind this?"

"As you know," Al explained patiently, "there is an unwritten
agreement throughout the Galaxy that if any system conquers too many
other systems, an intersystem police force is formed to cut the
conqueror down. Since for all practical purposes, there is an infinity
of systems in the Galaxy, and as each conqueror borders on more and
more of them as he grows larger in three-dimensional expansion, unlike
the one-dimensional conquests that used to occur on the surface of
planets, conquest of the Galaxy is an obvious impossibility. However,
the inhabitants of Altair D seem to have embarked on a policy of
reckless expansion that could reach us in time."

"I see," President Wong said. "How far away are they?"

"It will take the platoon sixteen years to get to the rendezvous. They
will remain for ten years, then return. Because of the distance, we
are not expected to send more than this token force."

       *       *       *       *       *

President Wong looked at the order. It had already been signed by
President Reynolds, by the Managers of Defense and of Foreign Affairs.
After all, even though forty-two years was a long period of time to
chop out of a man's life, only 500,000 men were involved, and it was
the duty of every citizen to give his life for his planet if required.

With an impatient motion, he rolled his thumbprint in the soft plastic
signature space, and held it for a second as it hardened. Then he
threw the order into a basket labeled OUTGOING CORRESPONDENCE.

His first official duty completed, he should have felt exhilarated;
but instead, nagging thoughts of guilt tugged at his brain.

Who were the inhabitants of Altair D, anyway? How did he know that the
police action was just? Shouldn't he get out the whole file and go
over it?

But that would take days ... and there was the matter of the Gnii,
whoever they were.

The three managers entered. President Wong stood up and shook hands
with them. They didn't waste time on other preliminaries, but rushed
straight into business.

"The Gnii," the Manager of Trade, a large, red-faced man said, "demand
that we remove our trading planetoid from their system. They allege
that the planetoid is a security risk, in that it could be used for
remote-control bombing of any of their planets. They threaten that if
we don't remove it voluntarily, they will attack it, and their
Ambassadors are here in person to take our reply to their ultimatum."

There was nothing unusual in that, President Wong knew. Since both
spaceships and any other known means of communication traveled at the
speed of light, it was now more common to send Ambassadors on
important missions than to send messages.

"What do you think we should do?" President Wong asked the Manager of
Trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I think we should tell them to go to hell," the Manager of Trade
replied, his heavy face turning redder. "After all, we have a million
trading planetoids out in the Galaxy--if we retreat here, we set a
dangerous precedent."

"I see," Wong said, frowning. "I don't recall any alien trading
planetoids in _our_ system."

"Of course not, Mr. President," said the Manager Of Foreign Affairs, a
tall, lean, distinguished-looking gentleman with blue eyes and
iron-gray hair. "We don't permit them, for much the same reason that
the Gnii want them removed from their system. Trading planetoids are
usually only tolerated in backward systems. Apparently the Gnii no
longer desire to be considered backward. I, for one, think that we
would be making a mistake not to accede to their request."

"Oh, that's very fine, decent, sporting and all that," the Manager of
Trade said irritatedly. "But I have to worry about feeding this
overpopulated system of ours, which would starve if it weren't for
intersystem trade--a significant part of which is carried on through
the planetoids."

"Can we protect the threatened planetoid?" President Wong asked the
Manager of Defense, a short, slim black man with flaming red hair.

The Manager of Defense considered his reply carefully. "Not if they
are willing to pay a terrific price to destroy it," he said finally.
"After all, it's thirty-three years away. While we can send out a
fleet immediately that would get there at the same time as the
Ambassadors, and before they could mount an attack, we hardly could
send reinforcements and replacements once the battle is joined. But
from the best information available, I think that a small force of
twenty or twenty-five thousand troops should be able to frighten the
Gnii out of doing anything foolish. They aren't very far advanced."

"Thirty-three years," President Wong said frowning. "That means a
mixed crew with facilities for children. I am told that things often
go wrong on that type of mission."

The Manager of Defense nodded. "They do," he agreed shortly. "However,
I have analyzed that problem in detail in my report."

President Wong sighed. "If you gentlemen will leave your reports with
me, I will make my decision by tomorrow morning."

Each of the Managers gave him several rolls of tape. Those of the
Manager of Trade felt by far the heaviest. President Wong slipped them
into the racks in his upper left-hand desk drawer.

"Ask the Gnii to come in," he said to Al.

       *       *       *       *       *

Al pushed a button on the arm of his chair, and the door swung open.
Four large spidery creatures entered the room, followed by a small
bald man. Their round bodies were encased in plastic globes, in which
a whitish translucent gas swirled. They walked over to the President's
desk, and the leader extended a hairy leg.

With an effort, President Wong forced himself to take the leg with his
hand and pump it up and down. He noticed that the creature withdrew
the leg as soon as it was decently possible, and smiled a bit as he
concluded that their aversion was mutual.

The Gnii stepped back and began waving his two front legs.

"He is asking for your reply to his ultimatum," the small bald man
interpreted.

"Tell him I'll give him a definite decision tomorrow," President Wong
said. "Apologize for my not being able to reply today, and point out
that since it will take him thirty-three years to get home, one day
will not make much difference."

[Illustration]

The bald interpreter waved his hands. The four Gnii went into a small
huddle, waving their spidery legs at each other. Then the leader
turned to the interpreter again and "spoke."

"They say that they agree," the interpreter said. "But they want to
emphasize that it is not because they fear the power of the Solar
System."

The Gnii leader hesitated a moment, then extended his leg again.
President Wong pumped it once. The Gnii dropped his hand and turned
and left the room, with the three others and the interpreter filing
after him.

"If you don't need me any more," the Manager of Trade said, glancing
at his watch, "I'll go back to the Trade Bureau. I have a meeting with
a number of the department heads."

President Wong nodded tiredly. "I have the tapes. I'll study all your
positions tonight."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Manager of Trade and the Manager of Foreign Affairs rose and left
the room. The Manager of Defense stayed in his seat.

"If you feel up to it," Al said, "the Manager of Defense would
appreciate it if you would present a Presidential citation to the
remains of the Third Company. They were involved in a police action in
the system of Veganea, and their morale is shattered. As you know, the
award is traditional, as is the speech. Here's the text--all you need
do is read it."

"All right," President Wong said, taking the paper from Al's hand and
scanning it. There was only one paragraph.

The door opened and four old men entered, followed by an honor guard
of eight husky privates. They approached the desk and stood at
attention. President Wong looked up from the speech and felt a wave of
sudden nausea. For a second, he was afraid that he actually was going
to be sick. None of their old lined faces was complete. The worst
wounded had less than half a face, and that discolored by purple
blotches of radiation scar-tissue. He was blind, and the others
maneuvered him into position before the desk.

"For the heroic parts which you played in the Police Action against
Veganea--" Wong stumbled over the name, then continued hastily--"I,
the President of the Solar Union, hereby...."

"Rot," said the blind one, through toothless gums in a voice that was
only a hoarse whisper. "Tell me, do you know where Veganea is? Does
anyone on Earth know where Veganea is, or care? How many men, Mr.
President, how many men, young and healthy, left for that police
action? Do you know?" His hoarse voice rose. "Four came back ... but
can any of you gentlemen tell me _how many left_?"

"That's enough," the Manager of Defense said. At his signal, two of
the honor guards gently took hold of the veteran's arms and walked him
out of the room along with the others.

"I order that he not be punished," Wong said sharply.

"He won't be," the Manager of Defense said. "Do you take me for a
barbarian? I had hoped, though, that your interest might change their
attitude. As you can imagine, it's raising hell with the morale of the
recruits."

"By the way," the President asked, "where is Veganea, and how many men
_did_ we send there?"

"It's about twenty-four years away, near Vega. The action started
before my time and I don't know how many men were involved--probably
not more than a few million. The Police Action ended successfully, but
our ships were in the first wave and were wiped out."

       *       *       *       *       *

The President sat down wearily. His hand strayed over to the order he
had signed that morning for a police action, then drifted aimlessly
away.

"What's next?" he asked Al. He slipped a few energy pills into his
mouth as Al consulted his book.

"There's the matter of the conversion bomb," Al said. "The Manager of
Scientific Research and the Manager of Defense would like you to make
a decision about it."

"The conversion bomb?" President Wong said, puzzled. "I've never heard
of it."

"It is highest level top secret," the Manager of Defense explained.
"Instead of breaking down atoms and releasing some energy as in the
standard fission weapons, it converts matter entirely into energy.
Given the matter-energy equation, the energy released by a small
amount of matter is fantastic."

Al had risen and gone to the door. He returned with an old,
gray-haired, stoop-shouldered man. The President recognized the famous
Manager of Research.

The Manager launched immediately into his argument without
preliminaries. "Mr. President, while my department has finally found a
way to convert matter directly into energy, I believe that any use of
this process would be disastrous. First, there is absolutely no
safeguard that could prevent a matter-conversion powered machine, used
for peaceful purposes, from being changed into a lethal weapon by the
simplest of alterations. And as a weapon, the conversion bomb, unlike
atomic bombs, could not only destroy planets but stars with their
entire systems. We all know that the law of the Galaxy is to prevent
its domination by any one system--and given the distances and
populations involved, that domination is obviously impossible. But if
we began to construct conversion bombs, and if word of it got out, the
whole Galaxy would rise against us, all the way to the Edge."

"But, Mr. President," the Manager of Defense said calmly. "We are not
a unique people. If we do not produce the conversion bomb, you may
rest assured that someone else will. Maybe even our friends, the Gnii.
No system has ever saved itself by refusing to manufacture the best
weapons available to it. As for the Galaxy rising against us--if we
have the conversion bomb, let them! We will be able to defend
ourselves against any or all of them and blast their suns into novae."

"Until _they_ have the bomb," the Manager of Scientific Research
interrupted. "As you say, we are not a unique people."

"Gentlemen," the President said, standing up suddenly. "I feel tired
and dizzy. The idea of a bomb that can wipe out systems is new to me.
If you will leave your tapes, I will study your arguments tonight, and
we can resume this discussion tomorrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two Managers rose immediately, shook hands with the President, and
left. They did not speak to each other as they went through the door.

"Mr. President," Al said, "it's seven o'clock. Will you join me for
dinner, sir?"

President Wong slumped back into his seat and stared dully at Al, only
half noticing his friendly grin. "What would you do about the Gnii,
Al, if you were in my place?" he asked.

"I'm sorry, sir," Al said, "but I really don't know. Better come along
for some dinner. You've had a hard day, and you have a harder one
ahead of you tomorrow. We saved a number of difficult problems that we
didn't want to throw at you on your first day in office."

A ghost of a smile crept over the President's face, then disappeared
quickly. "It's all right, Al. Go ahead and eat. I think I'll just stay
here and go over these tapes."

As Al left, President Wong saw the order for the police action on his
desk. He picked it up to call Al to take it with him, but his eyes
caught the words _500,000 men_ ... _sixteen years_, and a picture of
the terribly wounded veterans flashed before his eyes. Really, he
would have to go through the files and find out if the expedition was
necessary....

He opened the left-hand desk drawer and stared at the Gnii tapes, but
he didn't take any of them out. It seemed like too much of an effort.

And then, the conversion bomb was so much more important.

He closed the first drawer and opened the one with the conversion bomb
tapes.

But the Gnii had to be answered tomorrow--the bomb could wait. He
slammed the drawer shut.

"Gnii," he muttered to himself, and opened the other drawer.

Then he noticed that he had put the police action order back into his
OUTGOING basket. He slammed the drawer with the Gnii tapes shut again
and opened the drawer below it and pushed the order inside, so that it
wouldn't be picked up by mistake before he could check on it.

"Five hundred thousand men in here," he said as he closed the drawer.
"Going to--"

Where were they supposed to go? He couldn't remember. He opened the
drawer again and looked at the order. To Altair D. The name had no
meaning for him.

Now, let's see ... oh, yes, the conversion bomb tape.

He opened the drawer to take out the tapes, and remembered that the
Gnii ultimatum had to be answered by tomorrow.

"Gnii, Gnu, Gnuts," he said, opening a drawer. It was the wrong one,
and the tapes weren't there. Which tapes?

The door opened, and President Wong looked up to see Al's smiling face
peering in.

"I was passing by, sir," Al said, "and I wondered if I couldn't talk
you into supper--"

"_Get out!_" the President shouted.

The door closed softly.

Now where was he?... Oh, yes, the conversion bomb. Conversion,
conversion, conversation, bomb, bomb, boom, _BOOM_. But that wasn't it
either--it was the Gnii, they had to be answered by tomorrow.... Gnii,
Gnii, Gnu, Gnuts, now in what drawer had he put the gnats? And why
order a police action against Gnats? Just convert every one of them
into spiders....

       *       *       *       *       *

Al walked slowly down the hall, his grin gone, his face looking washed
out. He turned into his own little office and snapped on the
communications video.

"First Vice-President Michael Thompson," he said to the operator.

In a moment Thompson appeared on the screen.

"Mr. First Vice-President," Al said in a tired voice, "may I suggest
that you remain in the Capital for the next few weeks?"

Even though he knew that it was not polite, Al snapped off the set
without waiting for a reply--but not before he caught the white and
frightened look on Thompson's face.

                                                          --STEPHEN ARR

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. President, by Stephen Arr

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. PRESIDENT ***

***** This file should be named 32719.txt or 32719.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/7/1/32719/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
