The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Moralist, by Jack Taylor

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Moralist

Author: Jack Taylor

Illustrator: Weiss

Release Date: June 9, 2010 [EBook #32751]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MORALIST ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction June 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                             The Moralist


                            By JACK TAYLOR


                         Illustrated by WEISS


     Aye, 'tis a difficult thing to be a lady on a far world--but
     who needs them there?

       *       *       *       *       *




There are exceptions to almost every rule and Xenon was one of them.
The rule in this particular case was the old cataloguers' adage that
cataloguing duty was never pleasant, often dangerous and always hard.
Xenon is the fourth planet of one of the stars investigated some seven
or eight years ago by the battleship _Terra_ on her swing around the
edge of the Black Hole.

Unequipped for exploration, the _Terra_ hadn't bothered to land on the
planet, but instead had taken only the usual gravitational and
atmosphere readings and then had continued on her long mapping patrol.
She had slowed just long enough to send back her report on tight beam
to Venus Relay Station and propose the name of Xenon, "the unknown."
After all, a planet with point nine Earth gravity and almost twenty
per cent oxygen in its atmosphere was well worth a name rather than a
number.

About a year later, the preliminary exploration ship arrived and spent
several weeks mapping and testing this, that and the other thing.
Then she went home and wrote her report--and what a report it was! The
thing read like a Chamber of Commerce bulletin that had been sponsored
by a subdivider. All it needed was a couple of ads offering some
choice business locations for sale and it would have been complete.

The planet was perfect, the climate was perfect, the soil fertile.
There were no natives or hostile life to bother a man. The forests
were wide, the plains were broad and the numerous rivers were not only
full of fish but also emptied into blue seas that were just as full of
fish as the rivers. That report was enough to make a man quit his job
and go to Xenon to start a chicken ranch or grow oranges.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bureau of Colonization acted with its usual speed. Three years
later, a cataloguing group landed from the supply ship _Hunter_. The
duties of the groups are simple enough; they determine which of the
food crops known to Man can best adapt themselves to the conditions
found on the particular planet under examination. They list the native
flora and fauna, minerals and resources. They chart the weather and
its cycles and, in general, try to determine if Man can exist there
and, if so, if the planet is worth the expense, trouble and danger of
colonization.

Most planets are not worth it, but Xenon was.

And now the group had returned with its final report and its
recommendations. The report? Xenon was perfect, just perfect. The
recommendations? Immediate colonization, but be careful who is sent so
that place isn't spoiled by a bunch of land-grabbing exploiters who
might not appreciate the place.

They had been back nearly a week before Lee Spencer had time to come
to my place for the weekend. Due to a combination of my wife's cooking
and a sedentary desk job with the Bureau, I was beginning to have a
bit of difficulty in bending over far enough to zip on my shoes in the
mornings, but Lee was still as lean and fit as he was the day he
blasted off for Xenon nearly four years before.

He had been given the full returned-hero treatment, complete with
press conferences, testimonial dinner, audience with the
Coordinator--everything. He hadn't had a waking moment to himself
since he landed, so I suppose that might have been one reason that he
relaxed so completely in front of the library fire after dinner and
talked more than he perhaps should have. Or the generous slug of the
old brandy my grandfather left me may have had something to do with
it.

At any rate, he was in an expansive mood that night after Martha had
filled him with one of her always excellent dinners and I had nearly
floated him in Grandfather's brandy.

We had a lot of "do you remember" man talk to catch up on and after
enduring nearly two hours of conversation about people and happenings
of which she knew nothing, Martha gave up and headed for the stairs.

"You two can talk all night if you want," she announced over her
shoulder, "but I'm going to bed. Breakfast on the patio about nine or
so, Lee."

"I'll be there, Marty. Sleep tight."

"Not as tight as you will, I'll bet," she grinned. "There's another
jug in the kitchen if you think you may need it."

       *       *       *       *       *

We heard her bedroom door hiss as it slid closed and sat for a moment
looking into the fire and listening to it whispering secrets to
itself.

"She's a pretty nice wife, Sam," he told me.

"Thanks. I like her, too."

"Not at all like Prunella."

"Prunella?" I said. "I don't think--"

"Well, that's what the boys at the station began calling her a couple
of days after she landed. Behind her back, of course."

"I still don't know who--"

"You know, the niece of that windbag in World Congress that you
featherheads in the front office sent out to replace Pop Jensen when
he fell out of that tree and had to be sent back to Earth for
hospitalization."

"Oh, _that_ one. Look, Lee, I didn't have anything to do with her
selection. She was appointed by the Old Man himself. Understand there
was some kind of pressure on him from the top."

"I forgive you, Sam, but I rather doubt if some of the other people of
the group will for a while."

"How come she didn't stay?" I asked. "Political pressure or not, I
can't imagine the supervisors sending out an incompetent replacement."

"Incompetent?" he almost snorted. "Prunella was the most belligerently
competent female that it has ever been my misfortune to run across.
Prunella was efficiency personified, make no mistake about that. She
was--or is--a top-flight botanist and had led several expeditions here
on Earth, but she couldn't realize that Xenon wasn't Earth. She tried
to live by the book as she had here, but in spite of the general
excellence of the _Spaceman's Handbook_, her methods didn't work so
well."

I primed him with another two fingers out of the bottle and sat back
to listen.

"Good brandy," he said. "I made some once on Xenon, but Prunella put a
halt to that in a hurry, just as she did a lot of other things. The
trouble with her was that she was always insufferably right. Every
blasted time! And she was right again when she pointed out that if we
were to come under attack, the products of the little distillery might
impair our efforts to defend ourselves. My still went under the ax."

       *       *       *       *       *

He sighed and then went on. "She neglected to say what might attack us
or where this enemy might come from, since men are the only animals to
achieve space flight thus far and there was nothing on Xenon that was
hostile to us.

"But I'm getting ahead of my story," he told his glass. "It probably
all started when she arrived. We had been looking forward to the day,
but none of us more than Joe, our cook. Joe was that rare find, a man
who took pride in his work and worked with pride. Joe, I firmly
believe, could barbecue a spaceman's boot so that it would taste like
steak. He considered Prunella and her arrival a fine opportunity to
show what he could do when he really wanted to.

"For her first meal with us, Joe had prepared Prunella a feed from
every edible native fruit, vegetable and meat that he could lay his
hands on. It was the same stuff that we had been getting fat on for
nearly two years, but did we eat any of his cooking that night? Not a
bite," he answered himself. "I thought she was going to toss a fit
right there and then.

"'Gentlemen,' she said, 'you know as well as I that consumption of any
native product of a strange planet is expressly forbidden by the
_Spaceman's Handbook of Survival_ until these products have been
thoroughly investigated and passed upon by the proper authorities.
Therefore, we shall eat the synthetics that have been provided for us
until these have been examined by the labs on Earth.'

"She was right, of course," Lee went on. "Many poor devils have died
in agony because they were foolish enough to eat some luscious-looking
fruit before it had been checked. We tried to tell her that our lab
monkeys and cats had eaten and liked everything on the table, as had
we, but we still had to send samples to Earth. That was two years
ago and they still haven't handed back a report."

[Illustration]

He sighed again and this time didn't wait for me to pour for him.

"So we ate synthetics, but you know how they are--every morsel filled
to the brim with everything a man needs to live on indefinitely,
except one thing--taste. It almost broke Joe's spirit, he fixed the
stuff for us in every way known to mortal Man. No matter how thin he
sliced it, it was still synthetic and still had that flavor of a
well-aged glue-pot."

Lee ran his tongue over his lips, as though the taste were still in
his mouth. "There were countless little incidents such as that," he
said, "none of them important, but they all added up to a constant
irritation and resentment among the men. Maybe it was easygoing Pop
Jensen who spoiled us. I don't know."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee thought for a moment or two. "Then there was the time a water-pup
nuzzled Prunella while she was taking a lone swim in the river that
ran near the station. She spent all morning on a sandbar in the middle
of the river before the school of pups tired of their play and left
long enough for her to consider it safe enough to swim back to the
river bank."

He grinned to himself. "Sam, those pups are as harmless and friendly
and playful as any pups of Earth, but Prunella didn't know that and
none of us could convince her of it. She said that the pups might be
dangerous, under some unknown circumstances which she didn't define,
then quoted us a passage from the _Handbook_ which prohibited
fraternization with any native life-forms until friendly relations
were established. She evidently didn't consider being nuzzled a
friendly act. Ergo, no more swimming and that was an order."

He made another trip to the brandy bottle, then sank back into the
deep chair again. "But the most exasperating thing Prunella pulled on
us was the inspections every morning before we left on our daily field
trips. We had all been on Xenon long enough to know what equipment we
needed to carry, right down to the last specimen box, but what we
carried and what the _Survival Handbook_ said to carry were two
different things. That is, they were two different things before
Prunella began her inspections. We had found long before that all of
the gear prescribed by the _Handbook_ was heavy, most of it was
useless, none of it necessary on Xenon. It might be of some use on
some other planet, but we didn't need it there. So, as a consequence,
we didn't lug much of that junk around over the landscape with us."

"None of it?" I said.

"Well, almost none. But after Little Miss Efficiency began making her
morning spot checks, we left the compound each day looking like a
picture of what the well-dressed man on a strange planet will wear. We
carried everything in the book and a few more that Pruny thought up
all by her little self. In addition to all the survival, signaling and
first-aid equipment that dangled and jangled from various parts of us,
we also carried enough offensive and defensive weapons to start and
maintain a war of no small size.

"Granted, the first-aid and radio paraphernalia might be handy in some
way, but blasters, needle-guns, knives, defense shields and all the
other apparatus struck as being a little on the ridiculous side,
especially since neither we nor the men before us had found a single
life-form on Xenon that would attack Man. Or rather, with one
exception, none of them would and a blaster or needle-gun was of no
use on _that_ one."

       *       *       *       *       *

I followed my cue. "Really? And what was this mysterious exception?" I
thought I was playing straight man for some elaborate joke, but Lee
was serious.

"Damn it all, don't you people even read your own directives? I'm
talking about the powder puffs. Does _that_ mean anything to you?"

Seeing my blank look, he explained resignedly, "The powder puffs are
the way the Xenon equivalent of Earthly mushrooms takes to spread its
spores. They have some unpronounceable Latin name, but we called them
powder puffs because, oddly enough, that's what they looked like. The
puffs are little round balls of a very light fluffy material, with the
spores adhering to small fibers on the surface. The things are carried
by the winds over great distances and when they finally come down,
they bump along, leaving a dusting of spores on anything they touch."

"They don't sound very dangerous," I told him.

"They aren't then. It's the next step in their life cycle that makes
them a nuisance. You see, Sam, if they don't come in contact with some
substance containing moisture and a high percentage of nitrogen, the
spores lie dormant. Can you think of any substance fitting those
requirements better than a nice warm mess of living protein?"

He grinned at me ghoulishly. "Don't look so horrified, Sam. I'll bet
credits against chalk that you're host to at least one kind of fungus
right now. Do you have athlete's foot?"

He was thirsty again and took steps to remedy such a deplorable
situation. "The puffs are only another type of fungus, even though
they do cause more trouble than most. The animals on Xenon are immune
from them, but when they land on a man, they send out tiny rootlets
that are like minute hairs. These go into the nearest capillary and
start taking the nitrogen they need from the blood. After a week or
so, they drop off and continue their cycle. I'm told that a man can be
practically covered with the varmints and his nitrogen balance won't
be disturbed enough to bother him."

"Then why worry about them?" I asked as he paused a moment.

He didn't seem to hear me. "Those puffs would be just another
annoyance except for the fact that those little rootlets evidently
work on the nerve endings of the body just enough so they don't hurt
but itch instead and, brother, how they do itch! Makes you wish you
had four more hands and someone else to help scratch."

He squirmed in remembrance. "I understand some of the earlier men dug
out divots of flesh to get rid of the intolerable itch and to keep
from going crazy. It's that bad. Good thing, though, that the spores
can't live inside the body. Can you imagine having an itch like that
in your lungs?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Another sip and then he continued. "You'll forgive me if I seem to
wander from La Prunella, but you have to understand the powder puffs
to know why she left our bed and board so suddenly.

"Of course, it's true all of the old-timers on Xenon had been puffed
at one time or another, but just to prevent a repeat performance, we
all, including Prunella, wore that protective goo you people sent out
to us a few years ago. Works pretty well. You build up a considerable
immunity after the first attack of puffs and more after each
succeeding one, but that's the hard way. The goo is easier." His voice
trailed off as, with a surprised look, he noticed his glass, was again
empty. This time he brought the bottle back with him. "But to get back
to Pruny. Well, the men were getting pretty fed up with Prunella's
arbitrary ways and her morning inspections, but the last straw was
when she shot Johnny, the station's pet Me-too bird that we had raised
from almost an egg. Same as humans, Johnny had his little faults and
foibles, but we loved him in spite of them.

"One of those faults was the reason Johnny lived outside the dome
instead of inside with the rest of us, as he would have liked. We
never let him stay inside for any length of time because he was never
able to understand why floors should be clean and kept that way. So
Johnny's nest was on top of the ultra-wave tower and that's where he
spent most of his time when he wasn't lazily riding around on the
shoulders of one of us or pan-handling Joe, the cook, for something
extra to eat.

"He was in his nest when Prunella got him with that delicate-looking,
deadly little needle-gun of hers. I'll bet he had a hundred of those
tiny slivers of steel in him. One would have been enough, but she must
have set the gun on full automatic and then let it spew itself empty."

I made sympathetic noises.

"She said afterward that Johnny had been a possible disease carrier
and, besides, he was dirty. There was absolutely no doubt about
it--Johnny _was_ dirty and in more ways than one, but as for diseases,
Xenon seemed to have none that the human race hadn't already overcome
on some other planet far more dangerous than this one."

       *       *       *       *       *

I laid more wood on the fire as Lee paused to sip and roll the brandy.

He said, "I've always suspected, however, that the real reason for
Johnny's assassination struck Prunella, so to speak, like a bolt from
the blue when she walked under his nest in the tower. At any rate, I
saw her shoving her shirt into the disposer chute. Johnny had one bad
habit and all of us knew better than to get within his range, but
Prunella, being new with us, just didn't understand that bird."

He stopped, twirling his empty glass suggestively, with painful
memories obviously clouding his eyes while he stared into the
hypnotically flickering fire.

"Empty," he said mournfully, "just as my heart was." He bowed his head
to Johnny's memory as I hastily left him alone with his grief. I
quickly returned from the kitchen, bringing a fresh supply of the
medicinal spirits that Grandfather had advised for moments of stress
and, over Lee's feeble protests, forced a generous dosage into his
glass. He regarded it with a wan, pathetic smile, then, at my urging,
choked back his sorrow and nearly drained the goblet in a manful gulp.
Grandfather was right. The sorrow left Lee's eye and from somewhere he
found new courage to go on.

"The death of the bird seemed to crystalize the rebellion. That night,
the entire personnel of the station unanimously elected themselves as
joint chairmen of the Ways and Means Committee of the Xenon
Anti-Prunella and After-sundown Elbow-bending League and immediately
called a special meeting. The emergency session convened around a keg
of my illegal brandy which, in some miraculous manner, had escaped
Prunella's searching hatchet. Not wishing to offend the unknown gods
who had thus smiled upon us, we took small token sips as we
meditated."

Lee demonstrated with the glass in his hand. "How to throw off the
yoke of the oppressor who had come among us? How to ease the bite of
her lash on our quivering backs? How to restore our tiny, inoffensive
still whose musical, tinkling drip we loved so well? The suggestions
put before the committee that night were many and varied and
wonderful."

Lee tried to light a cigarette and nearly broiled the end of his nose
with the flame.

"Lopez, head of our camera team, wanted to pickle her in a barrel of
brandy and send her back to Venus Relay Station aboard the next
courier rocket. Sounded like a good idea, too, until Olsen, one of the
biologists, objected on the grounds that those bums on Venus never did
anything for us, so why should they get all that good brandy? The
motion was tabled as impractical when we saw the pit into which Lopez
and his wild ideas had nearly led us. A whole barrel of brandy! The
man must have been desperate to call for such extreme measures."

       *       *       *       *       *

He shook his head. "Akermann, the chemist of the bunch, proposed
smoking her as one would a ham and then hanging her over the main gate
of the compound to keep away the beasties and things that go boomp in
the night. Now _that_ was what I thought a fine idea. Functional, you
might say. Might as well get some good out of her. But then Joe
smothered it with his observation that, after one look at that face of
hers, the good beasties would stay out of the compound, too.

"The dark and devious ways of the plotter were difficult for us to
assume, scientists and technicians that we were, and the trips to the
keg became more frequent as we sought the aid of the nameless gods who
had sent it to us." He paused again as Grandpa's brandy took another
beating. "The web of our own fuzzy thinking was entangling us more and
more when I was privileged to be present during the only true flash
of genius I've ever witnessed."

The wonder, the awe was still in his voice. "Akermann's assistant, the
Kid, was singled out for the touch and I must say for him that he held
up very nicely under the blow, but one could see that his sudden
responsibility set heavy on his narrow bony shoulders. The Kid drew
additional inspiration from the glass in his hand, then leaped to his
feet and as promptly sat down again. He gave the decking at his feet a
baleful glare and tried again, first choosing his footing carefully as
a man should when the floor shows that alarming tendency to tilt."

"'Men,' he said owlishly, 'le's fix it show see--I mean so she--won't
like it here an' maybe she'll go 'way. Le's set the puffs on her.'

"'On her what?' someone wanted to know.

"'On her nuthin'. Just on _her_!' the Kid said.

"'Oh.'

"There was another mass assault on the speedily diminishing supply of
illicit brandy while the committee prayed to the gods of the spacemen
for guidance. The committee decided to consider the motion.

"'Wunnerful idea,' Akermann beamed at his protege, 'but how you gonna
get 'em to bite through that protective goo she dunks herself in every
mornin'. Just how you gonna, huh?'"

       *       *       *       *       *

I nodded. "How about that?" I asked Lee.

"The Kid was ready with an answer. 'Do y' know why we wear clothes
made only of vegetable or synthetic fibers and not any animal wool,
hide or fur?'

"'Sure, any fool knows that,' Akermann said. 'The cotton lobby had a
law passed.'

"'I'm serious,' the Kid told him disgustedly.

"'Howdy,' our learned chemist said happily, sticking out his hand.
'I'm Akermann.'

"The Kid must have finally decided that his boss was even more
advanced in brandy shock than he was if it was possible--and it was.
He picked another chemist, Harry North, as his new straight man and,
squinting one eye a bit in an effort to keep him in focus, said,
'Harry, do _you_ know why we don't wear wool 'n stuff like that?'

"'Sure,' Harry answered. 'The _Handbook_ says animal fibers are
protein an' if the puffs get a foothold on any article of clothing
made of 'em, then their rootlets c'n penetrate most any kind of goo
an' fasten into the guy that happens to be so stupid. Then someone has
to give him the treatment to keep him from scratching right down to
the liver an' lights.'

"The Kid's punch line was trying to get out so bad that he was about
to blow a tube. 'That's right, Harry,' he smiled patronizingly. 'Now
if Prunella was to wear somethin' like that, do y' spose the puffs
would get 'er?'

"Harry was still puzzled. 'Sure they would, but she's not gonna do it.
_Handbook_ says not to, n' even gives a long list of stuff _not_ to
wear. Nope, she won't.'

"'I know there's a list, but one nitrogenous fiber didn't get on it.
Silk is a protein--fibroin--but it's not on the list.'

"'Silk? Why should silk be on the list?' Martin, a big, beefy
physicist, was red-faced and indignant. 'It's too expensive and
fragile for ordinary wear an' besides, no self-respecting spaceman _I_
ever knew would be caught dead in a silk undershirt or a silk anything
else! What d'you think those guys are, a bunch of women to go around
wearing sil--' He stopped abruptly, staring at the Kid with something
like awe. 'Do you think we can get 'er into something made of silk?'
he asked humbly, as befits a man when he speaks to a superior being.

"There was a respectful silence as the group waited for Mr. Paulson,
formerly the Kid, to speak.

"Mr. Paulson clapped his hand over his mouth, said 'Urp' between his
clenched fingers, turned a remarkable shade of green and looked about
him like a trapped animal. A few of his admirers led him through a
small door, no doubt to worship silently at his feet while he rested
after his soul-shaking ordeal. It was clear that Mr. Paulson had given
his all for the cause."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee said, "The door slid shut on Mr. Paulson's pain-racked exit, its
latching hiss drowned by the simultaneous demand of the committee,
individually, for the attention of the committee, collectively. Each
of them considered himself the sole person present capable of carrying
on the great work for which Mr. Paulson had so nobly sacrificed
himself. Ordinarily sedate doctors of this or that gibbered at each
other in an arm-waving, frenzied attempt to be heard.

"In a matter of seconds, half the committee had the other half backed
into chairs, against tables and into corners, earnestly explaining in
a conspiratorial roar just how Prunella was to be enticed into wearing
the silken booby-trap.

"The committee gradually shouted itself into a red-faced, thirsty
semi-hoarseness only to find a demon--ne Shulman, our top
botanist--guarding the inspirational keg with a heavy stool and
promising a swift and personal drought to any man who didn't shut up
on the spot. I need not say that we shut nor that order was fast in
coming among us.

"In the comparative quiet that followed, there was a rapid-fire
shifting of ideas, deleting some, adding to others, and Prunella was
doomed. The plot wasn't _too_ thick. It depended only on the fact that
an expert's eye was needed to detect the difference between sheer
Enduron, the newest and best of the synthetic fibers, and sheer silk.
By the same token, the reverse was true. That is, given silk, one
could easily mistake it for Enduron.

"The services of a woman on Terra were necessary to us, so Sparks
magnanimously recruited his young sister, a writer or artist or
something of the sort, who lives somewhere in southern Europe. All she
had to do was buy a dozen pairs of the fluffiest, frilliest, most
outrageously feminine silk undies she could find in the most chi-chi
shop in Paris and then send them to Prunella with a note honoring her
as the first woman on Xenon and asking Prunella to accept them as a
token of admiration from one woman to another. Some fictitious name
was to be signed to it.

"We raided the office, obtained Prunella's file and copied out the
proper measurements from it. Sparks fed the message, measurements and
a blank signed photo-check into the coder and the automatic ultra-wave
transmitter took it with a swift _blip_ of sound and that was that."

       *       *       *       *       *

I waited for Lee to catch his breath, which he did by inhaling from a
full glass. Then he continued talking.

"All this occurred about the middle of Xenon's third month. We
expected the skivies to arrive on a supply ship due the first of the
following month, which gave us nearly three Earth weeks to wait, but
we didn't mind. After all, we had something to wait _for_.

"The ship, bless the crew, was on schedule almost to the hour. Adams
had had his wide-angle 'scope aimed at the sky above Xenon since long
before breakfast, and he and the detectors ran a dead heat when the
ship winked out of sub-space about two million or so miles out.

"By mid-morning, the ship's gravitors had floated her into the field
for the usual feather-light landing, and mail call, always the first
order of business, was over.

"Women have a well-deserved reputation for dawdling over trifles when
important matters wait, but that morning Prunella broke all previous
records. She gossiped with the ship's captain about interminable
bills of lading, she inspected the field for any possible damage by
the ship, she swallowed enough coffee to start a fair-sized shortage.
Finally, just in time to save the station from a mass nervous
collapse, she left the office for her quarters, carrying her mail in
one hand and that small, all-important package in the other.

"She reappeared for lunch wearing the tiny smile of a woman who knows
she is appreciated by _someone_ and, we hoped, also wearing something
else not quite so visible. Never was one so closely watched by so
many. If she looked distressed, we gloated. If she squirmed in her
chair, we rejoiced. Her every move was analyzed for possible puff
symptoms.

"Prunella, that evening, dined as the captain's guest aboard ship. In
the mess hall, with Mr. Paulson installed in the seat of honor, the
arguments were long, loud and heated: She had 'em on. She didn't. The
puffs had her. They didn't.

"I hadn't realized there were so many synonyms for fool and idiot or
so many genteel ways to sneer until my learned colleagues that night
debated the case of the puffs versus Prunella. We went to bed still in
an agony of indecision."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee waited for me to be appropriately sympathetic. I obliged.

"The next morning, Prunella had breakfast alone in her quarters, but
then she often did. Or I should say she ordered breakfast sent and
then ate only a little of it and sent it back. A short while later,
Prunella left her room, went to the library and returned to her
quarters with a spool of microfilm in her hand. All the people who
could cram into the tiny library cubicle were in before the hiss of
Prunella's closing door died away. A wild rape of the library files
improved our digestions, dispositions and belief in the ultimate
triumph of good over evil--Prunella had withdrawn the film on 'Effects
of Xenon Life-forms on the Human Body.'

"I learned later that some far-sighted soul had added lurid details to
the section of the film dealing with the puffs, describing minutely
what one could expect after powder puff infestation. Odd thing about a
few of those added details--some of the more horrible ones had never
been noticed before nor have they been reported since.

"Prunella went aboard the supply ship _Hunter_ shortly after noon,
scratching determinedly in several places that no lady should, at
least in public.

"The captain, most of his loading done and seeing her dire need,
blasted off for Terra immediately and flipped into sub-space much
closer to the planet than he should have. Prunella was on Terra that
same night, Xenon time. The captain told me on his next trip that
Pruny had commandeered both quarantine nurses at Polar Space Field to
work on her. It still took the two women several hours to finish,
according to him. She must have been covered with the things. Bet she
looked as though she were sprouting fur."

"One thing I don't understand," I told Lee. "You kept referring to a
'treatment' of some kind for the powder puffs. Didn't Prunella know
about it? If she did, I don't see why she didn't take it on Xenon.
Surely, at the risk of being insubordinate, you didn't deny it to her
if she had ordered it."

"Quite the contrary, Sam. Prunella knew all about the 'treatment.' And
in spite of your suspicions as to our hard hearts, many of us offered
our services after leering in what we hoped was a suggestive manner.
You see, Sam, the mysterious treatment consisted of nothing more than
a very close examination of every square centimeter of the skin with a
high-power magnifier and using a pair of fine tweezers to pull out the
puff rootlets. But in addition to all of Prunella's other faults
and/or virtues, Prunella was a prude."

We drank a silent toast to pure womanhood.

                                                          --JACK TAYLOR

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Moralist, by Jack Taylor

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MORALIST ***

***** This file should be named 32751.txt or 32751.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/7/5/32751/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
