The Project Gutenberg EBook of Once Upon A Planet, by J. J. Allerton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Once Upon A Planet

Author: J. J. Allerton

Release Date: June 12, 2010 [EBook #32785]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONCE UPON A PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          ONCE UPON A PLANET

                          By J. J. ALLERTON

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Amazing Stories December
1948. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: The mighty King Miotis came down to Earth to recapture his
lost desire for war. But what he saw on this planet, caused him to feel
differently.]


Once upon a planet there was a mighty warlord. The warlord's name was
Miotis. Some might think it an odd name, but then it is entirely
probable that the people of this planet would think the name of Smith or
Jenkovitz odd. Be that as it may, however, the important thing is that
Miotis was the name of this warlord, whatever one may feel about his
name.

Now, Miotis was not just a mighty warrior, he was the _mightiest_
warrior on the planet. As such, he controlled the life of every person
there. For isn't it a truism that war bends men's destiny in the
strangest fashions? So Miotis, with his entire life devoted to the art
of destruction, was able to direct the lives of his subjects.

But one day, to his consternation and amazement, he found that the
peoples of his planet had wearied of the sport of war. In the middle of
his last campaign, his men as well as his enemies had laid down their
arms and had refused to carry on as was their wont. And no amount of
threat or punishment could make them change.

On this particular day when our story starts, Miotis was in his palace,
his massive head leaning against a muscular palm, and his gaze intent on
the face of his vizier, Kannot. It was not the sort of face Miotis was
especially fond of seeing, for it was old, wrinkled, full of cunning and
wisdom.

The vizier was, as always, full of words, and as he spoke one blunt
finger tapped the side of his rather bulbous nose: "So you think it
strange, mighty Miotis, to find that life is boring?"

"I do not find that _life_ is boring," Miotis replied. "Life is never
boring. It is _I_ who am bored. That is the reason I called you here. I
could have called any one of my nine hundred concubines for enjoyment,
or had my warders drag forth some of my prisoners and found sport in
torturing them. Yet, I did not, and I wonder why. In the past, these
diversions made pleasant the passing of time. Now, I feel an ennui too
great to even want to bother to summon one of these which used to give
me so much pleasurable excitement.

"Tell me, vizier, have I become so full of war that I cannot live
without it?"

Kannot clasped his hands behind him and rocked back and forth for
several seconds, the while he bent a thoughtful and appraising eye upon
his King. For Kannot knew the vagaries of the man before him and knew
that a single word, a single gesture which would displease the great
Miotis, would make fewer Kannot's days. Therefore, when he spoke again,
it was with care, weighing his words so that he could give his opinion
and yet not endanger his life.

"Methinks, oh greatest and wisest of Kings," Kannot said, "that since
war has but a single end, something phenomenal in the universe must have
occurred to make that end seem less reasonable."

He lowered his eyes, yet made sure he could peer beneath the hooded lids
to see how his words were affecting Miotis. There was no sign on the
other's face to show how he felt.

Kannot continued, "By that, I mean death may have become less attractive
as a means of immortality. Is it not true, also, that you, the greatest
and most noble of warriors, has yourself felt this same reluctance
recently to even plan a war?"

The warlord's head nodded slightly in agreement.

"Therefore, I have come to the conclusion that some force of which we
have no knowledge has made its presence felt--"

"Now you have presented the problem," Miotis interrupted. "But it is not
enough. I want a solution. Already I am weary of this do-nothing life,
though it is but a week since we have laid down arms."

Kannot made a sign of obeisance.

"Now go," Miotis said, "and seek out the cause and the solution. One
week, vizier, I give you. No more! Your head shall roll, otherwise...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The trumpets announced the arrival of the vizier, and at the sound the
players stopped their tune and the dancers their dance. Miotis, looking
as though he hadn't stirred from the position Kannot had left him in the
week before, lifted his eyes to the bent figure making its way across
the immense length of the hall.

"Mighty Miotis," Kannot began, his head bent and his eyes lowered in the
correct attitude of court procedure.

"I bid you speak," Miotis said.

"My Lord, the words I have to say are for your ears alone," Kannot
continued.

The warlord waved a hand, and as if by magic the court was emptied but
for the guards who never left their posts.

"Speak, old one," Miotis commanded.

"I have found the cause, mighty one," Kannot said. "A surprising one,
however, and perhaps an unbelievable one...."

The vizier did not look up, and his face betrayed nothing of what he
felt. Yet, his aged heart was beating as if it wanted to escape the
flesh in which it was imprisoned. The next words he would utter could
spell his doom.

"I sent couriers in every direction, to all the courts of all the lands,
to our friends as well as to our enemies. And on their return I
discovered one fact in common: Not a single nation was interested in
war. Something happened to each--"

"Old one," Miotis broke in, "you weary me with these boresome details.
Come to the point! I know we are all tired dealing death. Why?"

"Because anger has fled from our minds and hearts," Kannot said, and his
head lifted. He had spoken the words which had lain in him, the terrible
words which could mean his death. And now the die was cast. The proof of
his assertion would soon be shown.

An oddly bitter smile broke on the face of the man on the throne. It was
the smile of a man who had learned the taste of utter defeat.

"So you have told me that which I knew in my heart," Miotis said.
"Strange, that I, who loved nothing better than the sound of a sword's
blow against armor, should even find the touch of steel repugnant now.
Yet, it is so. I cannot carry a knife without having my flesh crawl,
even though a scabbard protects me against its touch. Shall we all
become a nation of shepherds? Shall we never again know the glory of
battle? Tell me, vizier. Perhaps age has lent you an inner wisdom?"

"Wisdom's words are for the historian," Kannot replied. "I, Kannot, have
no time for talk. The planning of deeds is my way. And I have a plan.

"Anger must be found again!" Kannot's voice rose shrilly. "It is our
only salvation. But, mighty Miotis, we must look elsewhere than on this
planet. There is a planet called Earth...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miotis' brow knit in thought. A planet called Earth, he thought. H'mm!
But how were they to get to it? And having got there, did Kannot want
them to invade? No, that couldn't be it. Already, the very thought of
invading for purposes of conquest went against him.

"... On that planet," Kannot continued, "wars and death by violence are
commonplace. There is never a day or week that does not pass but that
somewhere men fight men. What better goal do we need?"

"You have done well," Miotis said. "I could ask for no more. Yet a
question persists in my mind. How can you arrange for anger to come to
the breasts of us here from the planet beyond the grey mists of outer
space? We have no space ships, nor for that matter, the means of making
them."

"I speak not of space ships or of men using them," Kannot responded,
"for in that matter we have no choice. My thought was in another
direction and using another means. I have discovered the way to make a
soul-transfer. To put it into words you will better understand, I can do
what death does, hold a soul in suspense."

"Which is supposed to have what meaning to me?" Miotis asked.

"Simply this," Kannot said, "I can make a single soul fly through the
vast boundaries of space and into another human body which will be
waiting for it. There is but a single man I know who can serve as
vehicle--you, mighty Chieftain."

For the first time, Miotis' features showed change from the set
expression he wore as a sign of his Kingship. Amazement made him blink,
and the hand holding his chin fell to the side of the throne, the
fingers tapping against the rich cloth. But after a minute, his face
cleared and he looked with brighter interest at his vizier.

"Of course," he said. "Who else should go? And already I have a plan of
action. Now tell me what must be done and how soon...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bly Stanton rolled over and groaned aloud. His hand shook as he lifted
it to feel a throbbing temple. His fingers felt a sticky wetness, and
memory returned to him--the raiding party of Himlo men, his discovery of
them, and the alarm he had sounded, the fight, and then the blow which
had felled him.

He rolled onto his stomach, shoved his hands under him and heaved
himself erect. A sigh of relief escaped his lips. Except for the buzzing
in his brain, he felt all right.

Stanton looked down at his dust-covered clothes, and his fingers brushed
at the dirt and mud, but when they came to his shirt they halted. There
was a hole in his shirt, high up, near the heart. It was not a hole
exactly, but rather a slit which could have been made either with a
knife or sword. There was a dried welt of blood surrounding the skin. A
shudder passed through his tall, strong frame, as he realized that it
was a miracle he was alive. For whatever had done the damage had
penetrated deep into the flesh.

The moon was full, and after a few seconds had passed, Stanton bent and
searched for his weapon which, he was sure, would be close at hand. But
as he found and picked up the long, double-edged sword, a shudder of
distaste went through him, and he dropped his weapon and let it lay
there.

Once more his fingers brushed at the wetness on his temple. He wondered
why the blood was still coming from his head wound, while the cut in his
chest had dried up.

He peered around to see if his attackers were anywhere in the vicinity,
and decided that his immediate location was clear of danger. Another
instant of orientation, and Bly Stanton bent low and scurried from one
patch of cover to another until he reached his goal, the tunnel mouth.
Here he would be safe for the present. The Himlo would not dare to
follow him here.

His eyes, long accustomed to the sight of the broken arch, passed over
the inscription worn deeply and almost illegibly on the green-with-age
metal--_Chicago Greater Subway_, 2107 A.D. He was interested only in
knowing whether or not danger lurked in the shadows. Again he sniffed. A
small smile stole across his mouth. Then the lips tightened in their
wonted thin slit, and he started forward at a long lope into the
darkness.

Here and there were offshoots, darker passages which disappeared into
the Stygian gloom. But his path led straight ahead. Then he was before a
barricade of rocks, the barrier which his men had placed against the
coming of their enemies.

"Ho, John!" Stanton shouted.

       *       *       *       *       *

The walls echoed the sound, which was followed by a dying whimper of a
voice. "Hi ... Hi! Who goes ...?"

"'Tis I, Bly Stanton," Stanton yelled.

There was a short interval of silence, then a concerted roar of glee,
and a dozen men clambered over the rock pile. They shouted his name as
they all tried to touch him at once, and there was adoration in their
welcome as they pulled and hauled at him.

At length he managed to free himself of their embraces, and as he stood
apart, he asked: "What happened? Did I manage to warn enough of our
men?"

"Warn us and knock their ambush into a cocked hat. They fell to pieces
and ran like scared rabbits when we hit them from all sides. But Mark
Smith saw you fall, and he said that the sword which was thrust into you
went all the way in to the hilt," one of them said.

"I guess Mark was looking from the wrong angle," Stanton explained. "For
sure I'm all in one piece. Got a bloody knock on the head, though. Well,
let's get back to quarters. I've got a piece I want to talk over with
you all."

A hundred torches made a smoky light of the pitch which otherwise would
have been in the vast cavern-like room. Three hundred and ten men stood
about in various attitudes of attention, all listening to the tall man
perched on a flat piece of concrete, facing them.

"I cannot explain why I feel this way," Bly Stanton was saying. "But
this I know, and for sure! No more killing for me. No more hiding in
stinking places like this, waiting for the sun to go down so a man can
venture out and be a man. No, sirs! Bly Stanton is going out, and in
broad daylight. Bly Stanton is going out and bloody well away from this
place, out to where the sun hits hills and trees and open spaces. And
Bly Stanton is going alone if he has to...."

It was an ultimatum, they knew.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mark Smith, a short, swarthy-faced man in breeches clipped short at the
knees and a leather jerkin for a shirt, stepped forward and waved a
casual hand to get his leader's attention.

"I take it, Bly," he said, "that you are bound to leave. Well, that part
may be all right. Surely you have a right to leave if you want to. But
by the same token you must grant us the right to ask why. We have been
together too long for so abrupt a leave-taking."

"And right you are, Mark," Bly replied. "I owe that and more to each and
every one of you. Three hundred odd of us, all who are left of millions.
And against us, as they have been for a hundred years, the Himlo. And
how many of them are left, would you say? A thousand? Not many more,
surely. Think, men, some thirteen hundred men, perhaps a few more. No
children, no women, just men.

"I don't have to tell you what happened three hundred years ago. History
has no meaning to us any more. For are we not eternal? Death can only
come to us by violence. Well, not any more for me. Bly Stanton has come
to life. That is how I felt when I came to back there in the ruins, that
a new life had been granted me. Well, I intend to live it fully, at
peace. I tell you, Mark, and you, John, and Abel and all the rest of
you, when I picked up the weapon which I had dropped to the ground, it
was as if I had picked up a live coal. I could not wear it, the brand of
murder. For we are all murderers, we and the Himlo----"

"Again," Mark Smith interrupted, "I agree with you. We and our enemies
are murderers. Thirteen hundred and some odd murderers. And before we
are done, there will be less. But that is how we have lived for too many
years. So many, we can no longer change our ways. Peace is a lost word
with us."

"With you!" Stanton said sharply. "But not with me! I have found it
again. And I do not intend losing it quickly. I say I leave these scenes
and these ways. Tonight. Who will leave with me?"

He looked about with expectant eyes, but the light in them died as his
gaze swept the cavernous depths and looked into face after face and saw
not a single one which agreed with him. It was not so much a sign of
revolt, but an acceptance of a fact three hundred years old.

"Then I go alone," he said with finality. "This has become a bitter
world, a world without woman or child, but it is the only world we will
ever know. And I am going to live peacefully in it. Good-bye."

They opened their ranks to let him pass. Until the last of them was
reached, Bly Stanton thought there would be no answer to his farewell.
Then a tall, thin man stepped in front of him. He was Grant Hays, one of
the four with Smith, John and Abel, who formed the inner leaders under
Stanton. Grant and Bly had always been the closest of friends.

"Bly," Hays said, his eyes steadfast and warm. "Wait. Before you go....
There is more than man to meet out there. The Himlo are one thing,
nature another. You must take weapons."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stanton shook his head hard. "No!" his voice thundered, and sent echoes
answering from the walls. "No! I will never draw a blade against even a
rat. The old races had their sayings--one I remember well--'Live and let
live.'"

"Good-bye, then, Bly Stanton," Hays said. "And good luck."

Bly Stanton did not turn as he clambered over the rock ramparts. And
after a while the night hid him in its sable fold.

The man climbed the last ridge of the giant sand dune and looked down at
a setting moon sending a long slanting fan of silver over an immense
lake. He had seen the lake many years before, had almost forgotten its
existence so long ago had it been.

He turned and looked at the ruins, rising pyramid-like from the tree
line to the north. Chicago had been the name of a vast city which had
existed here. There had been other cities as large, and some larger.
From the deepest recesses of his mind, Stanton remembered an almost
forgotten fact. There had been more than three _billion_ people on the
Earth at one time. Then, on an afternoon long gone, a bomb was dropped
on one of the cities. It had been called an atom bomb. The name of the
destroyed city was soon forgotten, as were the other cities which were
soon wiped off the face of the Earth. For man had discovered in the atom
bomb a weapon which proved to be the agency of his destruction. It led
to bigger bombs, better bombs, more efficient bombs, and at the last a
bomb which by chain reaction killed almost all the people on Earth. And
those whom it did not kill it made sterile.

That was the beginning of the end. For in the new way of life, the force
of creation died. Men thought of nothing but hatred of other men. So
they fought, first with weapons of complex design. Then, as the creative
desire was stifled, the weapons became more simple, until at the last
man went back to a sword and a knife blade for his murderous tasks.

But it was in the death of woman that man suffered his worst loss. With
sterility, woman felt their reason for existence was no longer
justified. And so they died, one by one, until now there was no record
of any.

       *       *       *       *       *

These were the thoughts of Bly Stanton as he plodded over the ridge of
another dune. Then, all thoughts were wiped from his mind. He dropped to
his knees at the sight of the blaze in the hollow between two dunes
directly below.

Their proximity to the fire and the light of the moon combined to make
their features readily discernible. There was no mistaking the Mongoloid
features of Himlo men. And if that was not enough, two of them were
dressed in garments of fur which would have identified them immediately.
The wind was coming from their direction, so Bly was safe for the
moment. They had keen senses of smell, and had the wind been otherwise,
Bly would have been discovered.

He retreated like some huge beetle, on all fours, backward, as if he had
been suddenly confronted by a larger beetle. When he had traveled some
few yards and saw only the serrated ridge of sand interposed between him
and the sky, he rose, turned, and started for the edge of the water.

Though he felt no fear of these men, Bly found it the better part of
discretion to move swiftly from their path. He ran at a trot, a long
lope which covered ground with a minimum of effort. The whole of the
night went by, and still Bly Stanton moved in the easy pace he had set
himself. The dawn found his lean figure bounding along the edge of the
sand.

Hunger forced him to pause, then, and seek food. There was wild fruit on
trees a half mile inland. He ate some apples, and washed down the meager
meal with water from a spring. Then he found shelter and lay down to
sleep. Travel by night, he reasoned, was the best way.

The sound of voices awakened him. They were voices the timbre of which
he had never heard before. He parted the brush under which he had lain
through the day, and peered out cautiously. His eyes widened at the
sight they saw. Strange creatures, a tribe of which he knew nothing,
squatted in the sand a hundred feet from the water. They wore
tight-fitting garments which hugged their bodies so tightly that every
curve was clearly outlined. And they had figures which were not familiar
to Stanton.

It was not strange, for these were women.

       *       *       *       *       *

Had Bly Stanton been less interested in what he was seeing and more
alert to what was closer at hand, he would perhaps have escaped the
noose which suddenly slipped over his shoulders and pinioned his arms
neatly to his side. Bodies encased in metal jackets leaped upon him and
made useless his struggles. He was jerked to his feet, and voices
shouted to others below to come forward. He understood the words, for
they were speaking in the same tongue that was his.

[Illustration: They flung themselves upon him from all sides and bound
him hand and foot]

There was a Naila, a Valis, another called simply She, and a tall strong
woman, older than the rest, called Mary. Mary seemed to be the leader,
or at least the one with the most authority. It was to her Bly was
brought.

"Mary," one of the guards said, "the first of what we hoped to find."

The woman looked at the man appraisingly. He was the first she had ever
seen. He seemed of good stock. She was quick to note he wore no weapons.
It surprised her, for even if he had no enemies, there would be wild
animals about.

"Yes," Mary said softly, "the first. Then the book was true. There _are_
men in this world." She made a sound of laughter deep in her throat,
stopped, then said to Bly, "We have come a long way. Do you talk? Can
you tell me whether there are others like you?"

"Like me and different," Bly replied.

The women exchanged glances.

Mary spoke again: "How do you mean?"

It did not take long for Bly Stanton to tell the history of the three
hundred men of his group, and that of the Mongoloid Himlo men, the last
of the invaders who were the remnants of those who came across from
Asia. All the while he spoke, his senses were full of these women. There
was a long silence when he finished his tale.

"The books did not lie then," the one called Naila said. "And what about
children...?" her voice faded.

"The last of the great bombs did irreparable damage," Mary said. "But we
will talk of that later. You have told us that there is a battle to the
death between you and these Himlos. Then why are you unarmed? Where are
your weapons?"

It was the first time Bly had been asked the question directly. And it
was the first time he had to think about it. He let his mind assemble
the facts in their proper order, and after a while he spoke:

"I do not _know_ why, except that I no longer want to know either the
touch or feel of a sword or knife. I do not want to harm anyone. Nor can
I explain why I feel this way."

Suddenly one of the women made a sound of horror. They turned to her and
saw she was staring in fascination at the torn part of Stanton's shirt
where the sword blade had entered. Mary and several others gathered
closer, and Mary parted the fabric to see the wound better.

"Look!" she exclaimed in wonder. "How deep it is."

For the first time, then, Bly Stanton saw the wound for what it was, a
death wound. He wondered--had he become immortal?--not in the sense he
knew, but in actuality, where death even by violence was not the end.

He put out his hand and said: "Let me have a blade."

Without hesitation, Mary handed him the blade which hung at her right
side. Placing the point against the flesh, he put both hands about the
hilt and plunged it deep into him with all his strength, until only the
hilt was to be seen.

Miraculously, he felt no pain. The blade when Stanton withdrew the steel
showed virgin as it had entered, and not a drop of crimson dyed the
entrance it had made in the flesh.

One of the women put into words what they all felt: "This is magic.
Death is gone forever now."

_It was in that very instant that the soul of Miotis entered into the
body of Bly Stanton._

       *       *       *       *       *

Stanton felt a sudden elation. More, a consciousness of vast powers. He
was immune to death. But were his companions? He looked Mary full in the
eyes as he said: "It seems that nothing can kill me now, even violence.
What of you?"

She knew what he meant. And with as little hesitation as he had shown,
did what he did with the blade in her fingers. Her face in an instant
became a grotesque mask of pain and horror. A fountain of blood poured
from the self-inflicted wound. She tried to say something as she sank to
her knees, but nothing came out.

"Only he is immortal," Naila said, awed. "For look! Mary is already
gone. Hail immortal...."

It was the acknowledgement of his supremacy.

He took advantage of it on the instant. "Good. I can use you all. We
must first rid ourselves of these men, my enemies. Come, call the others
of your tribe and I will lead you to them."

He knew without being told that there were many more of these women. For
surely not so few would have come, armed as they were, into a strange
land. At his words, several of them sped around a headland which hid the
cove beyond. Naila took his arm and led him forward. His eyes widened
when he saw the four sailing ships in the large bay beyond the headland.

There were five hundred women all armed and all ready and willing, when
they heard the situation, to do his bidding. Nor did he take long to
give his commands.

Daylight was breaking when they came to the tunnel which was the
headquarters for the tribe from which Bly Stanton had come. He deployed
his forces with the greatest of care, making sure the surprise would be
complete when he came out. Then he entered. He knew at this hour that
his men would be asleep. He was right. There were two hundred of the
women with him, and these he placed all along the tunnel length, telling
them to hide in the recesses along the walls.

       *       *       *       *       *

His voice awakened his men. They crowded round him when he clambered
over the barricade, and at the sight of the sword in the place where he
usually carried it smiles broke on their lips.

"Bly! We have you with us again," Mark exclaimed.

"But of course," Bly said. "It must have been the knock on the head I
got in the fight with the Himlos. But now it's clear. And I have news
for you. We can get rid of our enemies in one fell swoop. They are as
foolish as we. They too sleep in the daytime. Does that mean anything to
you?"

"Are you sure?" Mark asked.

"Certain. I have seen them."

"Then let us wait no longer. By the time they come to their senses, it
will be too late."

And it was. Only not as Mark had thought. For the immortal Stanton had
become battle-crazed, and whether loyal comrade or enemy, he knew only
to kill violently. It was Stanton himself who delivered the death blow
to his good friend. The rest of his group fell easy prey to the women,
who were even more savage than Stanton. It wasn't until it was all over
that Bly noticed what his women companions had done. Each and every one
of them carried a trophy hung in her belt, a horrible thing which leaked
blood. They had cut the heads from those they killed.

All that day and the next and until the last of the Mongoloids had been
eliminated, they hunted. They were no longer five hundred women when
they were finished. But there were no more men, either. Each of the
women carried a single head on her belt when they went back to the ships
which had brought them. And Bly, also, carried one.

Bly Stanton was no longer the same man as the one whom they had
discovered. The blood bath he had been in had done something to him. His
nose had become pinched, and his whole face had changed, so that his
eyes were narrowed now and his forehead, for some reason, lower. He no
longer walked erect, but stooped and shambled oddly as he moved. His jaw
jutted forward, and his teeth showed because of it. Little by little, he
had found it more comfortable to be without clothes, until by the time
they returned to the ships, the only article of clothing he wore was the
belt on which hung his sword and knife.

Naila had taken Mary's place in the scheme of things. Still, she found
she had to call Bly her superior. During the long days of slaughter,
there had been little need of talk. Muttered directions had done for
them.

But as they stood at the edge of the gangplank leading aboard, she said:
"Come immortal! There is nothing left for you here."

"Nothing?" he asked, somewhat blankly. "Nothing...?"

"Of course not," she said. "In all of this world not another like you is
left alive."

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the brain of Bly Stanton shot a thought that was like an
arrow--he, alone, of all the males in the world. What sort of world
could it be? What was he to do in this world where there was nothing but
woman, and man had no place? He peered at these women and saw them for
what they were--beasts, cruel and vicious, shaped as humans. There was
no compromising with nature. If one did not serve the purpose for which
one was intended, then one served another purpose. He looked at these
women who were the rulers of this planet and knew they had an empty
rule, and a losing fight. For immortality, in the sense in which he had
achieved it, was lost to them.

He shook his head from side to side, and slowly turning, started off
without a word of farewell.

But Naila was not as Mary. There was a cunning in her which the other
had never possessed. Before Stanton had taken more than ten steps, she
was at his side. Her sword flashed in a blinding arc as it sped toward
the man. There was a sickening sound as the steel met the flesh of the
throat. And a bloody geyser bloomed where the head had been. A vicious
grin leaped to her lips as she stooped and lifted the head.

But the grin changed to a howl of fear as the eyes suddenly opened and
the lips parted and words came from them: "You forgot, Naila. Death
comes not to me. Remember?"

She dropped the head and sped for the ship. The others, witness to what
happened, followed as quickly as possible. What they did not see, of
course, was that the eyes and lips had closed forever on the instant of
their departure.

_For it was then that the soul of Miotis left the body of Bly Stanton._

       *       *       *       *       *

Kannot removed the mask from Miotis' face. The soul-globe lay to one
side. Slowly the eyelids of the warlord raised. For a few seconds his
eyes were blank. Then reason came to them.

"Did you ..." Kannot began, and wet his suddenly dry lips. "Did you get
to where I sent you?" he finished.

The eyes of the man on the table blinked as though in signal. The lips
moved but feebly.

"Can you talk?" Kannot asked.

"Later," Miotis whispered.

Kannot nodded in understanding. He had an idea of the ordeal his King
had been through. The telling of what had happened to him could wait for
a while.

Hours went by, and the man on the table slowly gained strength. But it
was a long time later before he could talk.

"You sent my soul into the body of a mighty warrior," Miotis said. "Aye.
A mighty warrior. I saw and learned many strange things. But of all the
things I saw, only one stood out...."

"And what was that?" Kannot asked.

"War must die!" Miotis said.

"But war is already dead," Kannot said. "Remember, sire, it is the
reason why you allowed the experiment--to seek ways of bringing war back
to life."

"No! I saw what war can do to a planet, to man and to woman. It must
never come back. From this day forward, the sinews of war will be
removed. Look closely at me, Kannot. What do you see?"

It was then Kannot understood. He had transferred the souls of Miotis
and of Bly Stanton. But the unforeseen had taken place. He had not
merely transferred the two souls. He had done so permanently. And Bly
Stanton, in the body of Miotis, had come to do what he realized now too
late should have been done on the Earth long ago--abolish war forever.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Once Upon A Planet, by J. J. Allerton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONCE UPON A PLANET ***

***** This file should be named 32785.txt or 32785.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/7/8/32785/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
