Project Gutenberg's Three Thousand Dollars, by Anna Katharine Green

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Three Thousand Dollars

Author: Anna Katharine Green

Release Date: June 13, 2010 [EBook #32795]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS




[Illustration: "_Now state your problem_"]




    THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS

    BY

    ANNA KATHARINE GREEN


    AUTHOR OF

    "THE LEAVENWORTH CASE," "THE MILLIONAIRE BABY,"
    "THE MAYOR'S WIFE," "THE FILIGREE BALL,"
    ETC., ETC.


    BOSTON
    RICHARD G. BADGER
    THE GORHAM PRESS
    1910




    Copyright, 1909, by Richard G. Badger
    Copyright, 1908 and 1909, by the Crowell
    Publishing Company

    All Rights Reserved

    The Gorham Press, Boston, U. S. A.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

        I "Do you know what would happen to him"                  9

       II "Thousands in that safe"                               17

      III "How does it stand"                                    23

       IV "Stenographers must be counted"                        29

        V "I've business with him"                               35

       VI "If I could tell you his story"                        43

      VII "I'm sure that I can get them for you"                 51

     VIII "I did as you bid me"                                  59

       IX "'The safe door is opened,' I cried"                   67

        X "I have a scheme"                                      75

       XI "She will go in"                                       81

      XII "A block of steel"                                     89

     XIII "I am from headquarters"                               95

      XIV "You do not answer"                                   103

       XV "Now, if Fellows will stay away"                      111

      XVI "It was not paper I meant to have"                    121

     XVII "Now for my part of the bargain"                      129

    XVIII "What have you done among you"                        139

      XIX "So that was your motive"                             147

       XX "A jewel of far greater value"                        155




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                      OPPOSITE PAGE

    "Now state your problem"                                Frontis

    "He transferred his attention to the door"                   38

    "Grace, you have misunderstood me"                           48

    "An old man was looking up at the face of a young girl"      80

    "She was ignorant of his presence"                          100

    "The door opened and Philip Andrews came in"                144

    "'R. S. T.,' read the official"                             152

    "He was even present at the wedding"                        158




THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS

CHAPTER I

"_Do you know what would happen to him?_"


"Now state your problem."

The man who was thus addressed shifted uneasily on the long bench which
he and his companion bestrode. He was facing the speaker, and though
very little light sifted through the cobweb-covered window high over
their heads, he realized that what there was fell on his features, and
he was not sure of his features, or of what effect their expression
might have on the other man.

"Are you sure we are quite alone in this big, desolate place?" he
asked.

It seemed a needless question. Though it was broad daylight outside and
they were in the very heart of the most populated district of lower New
York, they could not have been more isolated had the surrounding walls
been those of some old ruin in the heart of an untraversed desert.

A short description of the place will explain this. They were in the
forsaken old church not far from Avenue A----, a building long given
over to desolation, and empty of everything but debris and one or two
broken stalls, which for some inscrutable reason--possibly from some
latent instinct of inherited reverence--had not yet been converted into
junk and sold to the old clothes men by the rapacious denizens of the
surrounding tenements.

Perhaps you remember this building; perhaps some echo of the bygone and
romantic has come to you as you passed its decaying walls once dedicated
to worship, but soulless now and only distinguishable from the
five-story tenements pressing up on either side, by its one high window
in which some bits of colored glass still lingered amid its twisted and
battered network. You may remember the building and you may remember the
stray glimpses afforded you through the arched opening in the lower
story of one of the adjacent tenements, of the churchyard in its rear
with its chipped and tumbling head-*stones just showing here and there
above the accumulated litter. But it is not probable that you have any
recollections of the interior of the church itself, shut as it has been
from the eye of the public for nearly a generation. And it is with the
interior we have to do--a great hollow vault where once altar and
priest confronted a reverent congregation. There is no altar here now,
nor any chancel; hardly any floor. The timbers which held the pews have
rotted and fallen away, and what was once a cellar has received all this
rubbish and held it piled up in mounds which have blocked up most of the
windows and robbed the place even of the dim religious light which was
once its glory, so that when the man whose words we have just quoted
asked if they were quite alone and peered into the dim, belumbered
corners, it was but natural for his hardy, resolute, and unscrupulous
companion to snort with impatience and disgust as he answered:

"Would I have brought you here if I hadn't known it was the safest place
in New York for this kind of talk? Why, man, there may be in this city
five men all told, who know the trick of the door I unfastened for you,
and not one of them is a cop. You may take my word for that.
Besides----"

"But the kids? They're everywhere; and if one of them should have
followed us----"

"Do you know what would happen to him? I'll tell you a story--no, I
won't; you're frightened enough already. But there's no kid here, nor
any one else but our two selves, unless it be some wandering spook from
the congregations laid outside; and spooks don't count. So out with
your proposition, Mr. Fellows. I----"




CHAPTER II

"_Thousands in that safe_"


"No names!" hoarsely interrupted the other. "If you speak my name again
I'll give the whole thing up."

"No you won't; you're too deep in it for that. But I'll drop the Fellows
and just call you Sam. If that's too familiar, we'll drop the job. I'm
not so keen on it."

"You will be. It's right in your line." Sam Fellows, as he was called,
was whispering now--a hot, eager whisper, breathing of guilt and
desperation. "If I could do it alone--but I haven't the wit--the----"

"Experience," dryly put in the other. "Well, well!" he exclaimed
impatiently, as Fellows crept nearer, but said nothing.

"I'm going to speak, but--Well, then, here's how it is!" he suddenly
conceded, warned by the other's eye. "The building is a twenty-story
one, chuck full and alive with business. The room I mean is on the
twelfth floor; it is one of five, all communicating, and all in constant
use except the one holding the safe. And that is visited constantly.
Some one is always going in and out. Indeed, it is a rule of the firm
that every one of the employees must go into that room once, at least,
during the day, and remain there for five minutes alone. I do it; every
one does it; it's a very mysterious proceeding which only a crank like
my employer would devise."

"What do you do there?"

"Nothing. I'm speaking now for myself. The others--some of the
others--_one_ of the others may open the safe. That's what I believe,
that's what I want to know about and _how it's done_. There are
thousands in that safe, and the old man being away----"

"Yes, this is all very interesting. Go on. What you want is an artist
with a jimmy."

"No, no. It's no such job as that. I want to know the person, the
trusted person who has all those securities within touch. It's a mania
with me. I should have been the man. I'm--I'm _manager_."

The hoarseness with which this word was uttered, the instinct of shame
which made his eyes fall as it struggled from his lips, wakened a
curious little gleam of hardy cynicism in the steady gaze of his
listener.

"Oh, you're manager, are you!" came in slow retort, filling a silence
that had more of pain than pleasure in it. "Well, manager, your story is
very interesting, but by no means complete. Suppose you hurry on to the
next instalment."

Cringing as from a blow, Fellows took up his tale, no longer creeping
nearer his would-be confederate, but, if anything, edging away.




CHAPTER III

"_How does it stand_"


"I've watched and watched and watched," said he, "but I can't pick out
the man. Letters come, orders are given, and those orders are carried
out, but _not by me_. I'm speaking now of investments, or the payment of
large sums; anything which calls for the opening of that safe where the
old man has stuffed away his thousands. Small matters fall to my share.
There is another safe, of which I hold the combination. Child's play,
but the other! It would make both of us independent, and yet leave
something for appearances. But it can't be worked. It stands in front of
a glass door from which the curtain is drawn every night. Every
passerby can look in. If it is opened it must be done in broad daylight
and by the person whom the old man trusts. By that means only would I
get my revenge, and revenge is what I want. He don't trust me, _me_ who
have been with him for seven years and----"

"Drop that, it isn't interesting. The facts are what I want. What kind
of safe is it?"

"The strangest you ever saw. I don't know who made it. There's nothing
on it to show. Nor is there a lock or combination. But it opens. You can
just see the outline of a door. Steel--fine steel, and not so very
large, but the contents----"

"We'll take its contents for granted. How does it stand? On a platform?"

"Yes, one foot from the floor. The platform runs all the way across the
room and holds other things; a table which nobody uses, a revolving
bookcase and a series of shelves, fitted with boxes containing old
receipts and such junk. Sometimes I go through these; but nothing ever
comes of it." He paused, as if the subject were distasteful.

"And the safe is opened?"

"Almost every week. I'm ashamed to tell you the old duffer's methods;
they're loony. But he isn't a lunatic. At any rate, they don't think so
in Wall Street."

"I'll make a guess at his name."

"Not yet. You'll have to swear----"

"Oh, we're both in it. Never mind the heroics. It's too good a thing to
peach on. Me and the manager! I like that. Take it easy till the job's
done, anyway. And now I'll take a fly at the name. It's----"

He had the grace to whisper.




CHAPTER IV

"_Stenographers must be counted_"


Young Fellows squirmed and turned a shade paler, if one could trust the
sickly violet ray that shot down from the once exquisitely colored
window high up over their heads.

"Hush!" he muttered; and the other grinned. Evidently the guess was a
correct one.

"No, he's no lunatic," the professional quietly declared. "But he has
queer ways. Which of his queers do you object to?"

"When his letters come, or more often his cablegrams, they are opened by
me and then put in plain view on a certain little bulletin board in the
main office. These are his orders. Any one who knows the cipher can
read them. I don't know the cipher. At night I take them down, number
them, and file them away. They have served their purpose. They have been
seen by the person whose business it is to carry out his instructions,
and the rest you must guess. His brokers know the secret, but it is
never discussed by us. The least word and the next cablegram would read
in good plain English, 'Fire him!' I've had that experience. I've had to
fire three since he went away two months ago."

"That's good."

"Why good?"

"That cuts out three from your list. _The person is not among the ones
dismissed._"

"That's so." New life seemed to spring up in Fellows. "You'll do the
job," he cried. "Somehow, I never thought of going about it that way.
And I know another man that's out."

"Who?"

"Myself, for one. There are only seven more."

"Counting all?"

"All."

"Stenographers included?"

"Oh, stenographers!"

"Stenographers must be counted."

"Well, then, seven men and one woman. Our stenographer is a woman."

"What kind of a woman?"

"A young girl. Ordinary, but good enough. I've never noticed her very
much."

"Tell me about the men."

"What's the use? You wouldn't take my word. They're a cheap lot, beneath
contempt in my estimation. There's not one of them clever enough for the
business. Jack Forbush comes the nearest to it, and probably is the
one. The way he keeps his eye on me makes me suspect him. Or is he, too,
playing my game?"

"How can I tell? How can I tell anything from what you say? I'll have to
look into the matter myself. Give me the names and addresses and I'll
look the parties up. Get their rating, so to speak. Leave it to me, and
I'll land the old man's confidential clerk."

"Here's the list. I thought you might want it."

"Where's the girl's name?"

"The girl! Oh, pshaw!"

"Put her name down just the same."

"There, then. Grace Lee. Address, 74 East ---- Street. And now swear on
the honor of a gentleman----"

Beau Johnson pulled the rim of Fellows's hat over his eyes to suggest
what he thought of this demand.




CHAPTER V

"_I've business with him_"


Next day there appeared at the offices of Thomas Stoughton, in Nassau
Street, a trim, well-looking man, who had urgent business with Mr.
Fellows, the manager. He was kept waiting for some time before being
introduced into that gentleman's private room; but this did not seem to
disturb him. There was plenty to look at, or so he seemed to think, and
his keen, noncommittal eyes flashed hither and thither and from face to
face with restless activity. He seemed particularly interested in the
bookkeeper of the establishment, but it was an interest which did not
last long, and when a neat, pleasant-faced young woman rose from her
seat and passed rapidly across the room, it was upon her his eyes
settled and remained fixed, with a growing attention, until a certain
door closed upon her with a sound like a snapping lock. Then he
transferred his attention to the door, and was still gazing at it when a
boy summoned him to the manager's office.

He went in with reluctance. He had rather have watched that door. But he
had questions to ask, and so made a virtue of necessity. Mr. Fellows was
not pleased to see him. He started quite guiltily from his seat and only
sat again on compulsion--the compulsion of his visitor's steady and
quelling eye.

"I've business with you, Mr. Fellows." Then, the boy being gone, "Which
is the room? The one opening out of the general office directly opposite
this?"

[Illustration: "_He transferred his attention to the door_"]

Mr. Fellows nodded.

"I have just seen one of the employees go in there. I should like to see
that person come out. Do you mind talking with this door open? I know
enough about banking to hold up my end of the conversation."

Fellows rose with a jerk and pushed the door back. His visitor smiled
easily and launched into a discussion about stocks and bonds
interspersed with a few assertions and questions not meant for the
general ear, as:

"_It's the girl who is in there. Not ordinary, by any means. Just the
sort an old smudge like Stoughton would be apt to trust. Now what's
that?_"

"_Singing. She often sings. I've forbidden it, but she forgets, she
says_," answered Fellows.

"_Pretty good music. Listen to that note. High as a prima donna's. Does
she sing at her work?_"

"_No; I'd fire her if she did. It's only when she's walking about or
when_----"

"_She's in that room?_"

"_Yes_."

"At par? I buy nothing at par. _There! She's coming. I wish I dared
intercept her, rifle her pockets. Do you know if she has pockets?_"

"_No; how should I?_"

"_Fellows, you're not worth your salt. Ah! there's a face for you, and I
can read it like a book. Did a letter or cablegram come to-day?_"

"_Yes; didn't you see it? Hung up in the outer office_."

"_I thought I saw something_. Ninety-five? That's a quotation worth
listening to. Three at ninety-five. _That girl's a trump. I will see
more of my lady._" Here he took care to shut the door. "I've been the
rounds, Fellows. Private-detective work and all that. She is the only
puzzler among the group. You'll hear from me again; meanwhile treat the
girl well. Don't spring any traps; leave that to me."

And Fellows, panting with excitement, promised, muttering under his
breath:

"A woman! That's even worse than I thought. But we'll make the old
fellow pay for it. Those securities are ours. I already feel them in my
hand."

The sinister twitch which marred the other's mouth emphasized the
assertion in a way Grace Lee's friends would have trembled to see.




CHAPTER VI

"_If I could tell you his story_"


That evening a young woman and a young man sat on one of the benches in
Central Park. They were holding hands, but modestly and with a clinging
affection. No one appeared in sight; they had the moon-light, the
fragrance of the spring foliage, and their true love all to themselves.
The woman was Grace, the young man was Philip Andrews, a candid-eyed,
whole-hearted fellow whom any girl might be proud to be seen with, much
more to be engaged to. Grace was proud, but she was more than that; her
heart was all involved in her hope--a good heart which he was equally
proud to have won. Yet while love was theirs and the surroundings
breathed peace and joy, they did not look quite happy. A cloud was on
his brow and something like a tear in her eye as she spoke gently but
with rare firmness.

"Philip, we must wait. One love does not put out another. I cannot leave
my old father now. He is too feeble and much too dependent on me.
Philip, you do not know my father. You have seen him, it is true, many,
many times. You have talked with him and even have nursed him at odd
moments, when I had to be out of the room getting supper or supplying
some of his many wants. Yet you do not know him."

"I know that he is intelligent."

"Yes, yes, that is evident. Any one can see that. And you can see, too,
that he is frequently fretful and exacting, as all old people are. But
the qualities he shows me--his strong, melancholy, but devoted nature,
quickened by an unusually unhappy life--that you do not see and cannot,
much as you like him and much as he likes you. Only the child who has
surprised him at odd moments, when he thought himself quite alone,
wringing his hands and weeping over some intolerable memory--who has
listened in the dead of night to his smothered but heart-breaking
groans, can know either his suffering or the one joy which palliates it.
If I could tell you his story--but that would be treason to one whose
rights I am bound to reverence. You will respect my silence, but you
must also take my word that he needs and has a right to all the pleasure
and all the hope my love can give him. I cannot be with him much; my
work forbids, but the little time I have is his, except on rare
occasions like this, and he knows it and is satisfied. Were I
married----. But you will wait, Philip. It may not be long--he grows
weaker every day. Besides, you are not ready yet yourself. You are doing
wonderfully well, but a year's freedom will help you materially, as it
will me. Every day is adding to our store; in a year we may be almost
independent."

"Grace, you have misunderstood me. I said that I was no good without
you, that I needed your presence to make a man of me, but I did not mean
that you were to share my fortunes now. I would not ask that. I would be
a fool or worse, for, Grace, I'm not doing so well as you think. While I
knew that my present employment was for a specified time, I had hopes of
continuing on. But this cannot be. That's what I have to tell you
to-night. It looks as if our marriage would have to be postponed
indefinitely instead of hastened. And I can't bear it. You don't know
what you are to me, or what this disappointment is. I expected to be
raised, not dismissed, and if I had had----"

[Illustration: "_Grace, you have misunderstood me_"]

"What?"

The word came very softly, and with rare tenderness. It made him turn
and look at her sweet, upturned face, with its resources of strength and
shy, unfathomable smile. "What?" she asked again, with a closer pressure
of her hand. "You must finish all your sentences with _me_."

"I'm ashamed." He uttered it breathlessly. "What am I, to say, 'If I had
three thousand dollars the Stickney Company would keep me?' I have
barely three hundred and those are dedicated to you."




CHAPTER VII

"_I'm sure that I can get them for you_"


"If you had _three thousand_!" She repeated it in surprise and yet with
an indescribable air, which to one versed in human nature would have
caught the attention and aroused strange inner inquiries. "Does the
Stickney Company want money so badly as that?"

"That's not it. They have plainly told me that for three thousand
dollars and my services they would give me ten thousand dollars' stock
interest, but insist that the man who assumes the responsibility of the
position must be financially interested as well. But I haven't the
money, and without the money my experience appears to them valueless. I
despair of getting another situation in these hard times and--Grace, you
don't look sorry."

"Because--" she paused, and her fine eyes roamed about her jealous of a
listener to her secret, but did not pierce the bush which rose up,
cloudy with blossoms, a few feet behind their bench--"because it is not
impossible for you to hope for those thousands. I think--I am sure that
I can get them for you."

Her voice had sunk to a whisper, but it was a very clear whisper.

Young Andrews looked at her in surprise; there was something besides
pleasure in that surprise.

"Where?" he asked.

She hesitated, and just at that moment the moon slipped behind a cloud.

"Where, Grace, can you get three thousand dollars? From Mr. Stoughton?
He is generous to you, he pays you well for what you do for him, but I
do not think he would give you that amount, nor do I think he would risk
it on any venture involving my judgment. I should not like to have you
ask him. I should like to rise feeling absolutely independent of Mr.
Stoughton."

"I never thought of asking him. There is another way. I'd--I'd like to
think it over. If your scheme is good--_very_ good, I might be brought
to aid you in the way my mind suggests. But I should want to be sure."

She was not looking at him now. If she had been, she might have been
startled at his expression. Nor could he see her face; she had turned it
aside.

"Grace," he prayed, "don't do anything rash. You handle so much money
that three thousand dollars may seem very little to you. But it's a
goodly sum to get or to replace if one loses it. You must not
borrow----"

"I will not borrow."

"Nor raise it in any way without telling me the sacrifice you must make
to obtain it. But it's all a dream; tell me that it's all a dream; you
were talking from your wishes, not from any certainty you have. Say so,
and I will not be disappointed. I do not want _your_ money; I'd rather
go poor and wait till the times change. Don't you see? I'd be more of a
man."

"But you'd have to take it if I gave it to you, and--perhaps I shall. I
want to see you happy, Philip; I must see you happy. I'd be willing to
risk a good deal for that. I'm not so happy myself, father suffers so,
and the care of it weighs on me. You are all I have to make me glad, and
when you are troubled my heart goes down, down. But it's getting late,
dear. It's time we went home. Don't ask me what's in my mind, but dream
of riches. I'm sure they will come. You shall earn them with the three
thousand dollars you want and which I will give you."

"I shall earn them honestly," were the last words he said, as they rose
from the seat and began to move toward the gate. And the moon, coming
out from its temporary eclipse, shone on his clear-cut face as he said
this, but not on her bowed head and sidelong look. They were in the
shadow.

There was something else in the shadow. As they moved away and
disappeared in the darkness the long, slim figure of a man rose from
behind the bush I have mentioned. He had a sparkling eye and a
thin-lipped mouth, and he smiled very curiously as he looked after the
pair before turning himself about and going the other way.

It was not Fellows; it was his chosen confederate in the nefarious
scheme they had planned between them.




CHAPTER VIII

"_I did as you bid me_"


Another meeting in the old church, but this time at night. The
somberness of the surroundings was undiminished by any light. They were
in absolute darkness. Absolute darkness, but not absolute silence.
Noises strange and suggestive, but not of any human agency, whispered,
sighed, rattled, and grumbled from far away recesses. The snap of wood,
the gnawing of rats, the rustling of bat wings disturbed the ears of one
of the guilty pair, till his voice took on unnatural tones as he tried
to tell his story to his greedy companion. They were again astride the
bench, and their thin faces were so near that their breaths commingled
at times; yet Fellows felt at moments so doubtful of all human presence
that instinctively his hand would go groping out till it touched the
other's arm or breast, when it would fall back again satisfied. He was
in a state of absolute terror of the darkness, the oppressive air, the
ghostly sounds, and possibly of the image raised by his own conscience,
yet he hugged to himself the thought of secrecy which it all involved,
and never thought of yielding up his scheme or even shortening his tale,
so long as the other listened and gave his mind to the problem which
promised them thousands without the usual humdrum method of working for
them.

We will listen to what he had to say, leaving to your imagination the
breaks and guilty starts and moments of intense listening and anxious
fear with which he seasoned it.

"I did as you bid me," he whispered. "Yesterday fresh orders came from
abroad, in cipher, as usual. (It's an unreadable cipher. I've had
experts on it many times.) I had hung it up, and though business was
heavy, my business, you know, I had eyes for our fair friend, and knew
every step she took about the offices. I even knew when her eyes first
fell on the cablegram. I had my door open, and I caught her looking up
from her work, and what was more, caught the pause in the click-click of
the typewriter as she looked and read. If she had not been able to read,
the click-click would have gone on, for I believe she could work that
typewriter with her eyes shut. But her attention was caught, and she
stopped. I tell you I've been humiliated for the last time. I'm in for
anything that will make that girl step down and out. What was that!"

Muttered curses from his companion brought him back to his story. With a
gulp he went on:

"You may bet your bottom dollar that I watched her after that, and sure
enough, in less than half an hour she had gone into the room where the
safe is. Instantly I prepared my _coup d'etat_. I waited just long
enough to hear her voice in that one song she sings, then I jumped from
my seat and rushed to the door, shouting, 'Miss Lee! Miss Lee! Your
father! Your father!' making hullabaloo enough to raise the dead and
scare her out of her wits; for she dotes on that old man and would sell
her soul for his sake, I do believe.

"Great heavens, it worked! As I live, it worked. I heard her voice fail
on that high upper note of hers, and then the sound of her feet
staggering, slipping over the floor, and in another moment the fumbling
of her hand on the knob and the slow opening of the door which she
seemed to have no power to manage. Helping her, I pulled it open, and
there beyond her and her white, shocked face, I saw--I saw----"




CHAPTER IX

"_'The safe door is opened,' I cried_"


"Go on! Don't be a fool; that was nothing."

"I don't know; it was like a great sigh at my ear. But this is awful!
Couldn't we have one spark of light?"

"And have the police upon us the next minute? Look up at that window.
You can see it, can't you?"

"Yes, yes, but very faintly," Fellows whispered.

"But you can see it. So could those outside, if we had one glimmer of
light in here. No, no, you'll have to stand the dark or quit. But you
shan't quit till you've told me what you saw in the room where the safe
is."

"The safe door opening." His voice trembled so that the other shook him
to steady his nerves. "Not opened, mind you, but opening. It was like
magic, and I stared so that she forgot her fears and forgot her
questions. Turning from me with a startled cry, she looked behind her,
and saw what I saw, and tried to push me out. 'I'll come, I'll come,'
she whispered. 'Leave me a minute and I'll come.'

"But I wasn't going to do that. 'The safe door is opened,' I cried. 'Did
you do it?' She didn't know what to say. I have never seen a woman in
such a state; then she whispered in awful agitation, 'Yes; I've been
given the combination by Mr. Stoughton. I'm duly following his orders.
But my father! What about my father? You frightened me so I forgot
that--' I waited, staring at her, but she didn't finish. She just
asked, 'My father? What has happened to him?' 'Nothing serious,' I
managed to say. I wished the old father was in ballyhack. But he'd
served his turn; I must say that he'd served his turn. 'A telephone
message,' I went on. 'He had had a nervous spell and wanted you. I said
that you could go home at noon.' She stood looking at me doubtfully;
then her eyes stole back to the safe. 'You will have to leave me here
for a few minutes,' she said. 'I have Mr. Stoughton's business to attend
to. He will not be pleased at my having given away his secret. He did
not wish it known who controlled his affairs in his absence, but now
that you do know, you will be doing the right thing to let me go on in
the way he has planned for me. His orders must be carried out.'

"She is very determined, and understands herself only too well, but I
am manager, and I paid her back in her own coin. 'That's all very well,'
said I, 'but what proof have I that you are telling me the truth? You
have opened the safe--you say you have the combination--but people
sometimes surprise a combination and open a safe from other interests
than those of their employer. You seem a good girl, but _you are a
girl_, and there are men here much more likely to be in Mr. Stoughton's
confidence than yourself. With that open safe before us I cannot leave
you here alone. What you take from it I must see, and if possible be
present at your negotiations. That I consider a manager's duty under the
circumstances.' 'Mr. Fellows,' she asked, 'can you read this morning's
telegram?' 'No,' I felt bound to reply. 'Then that acquits you. I can.'
And again she tried to urge me to go out. But I would not be urged. I
was staring across the room at the open safe and in fancy clutching its
contents. In fact, I made one step toward them. But she drew herself up
with such an air that I paused. She's a big girl, you know, and not to
be fooled with when she's angry. 'Come a step farther and I will scream
for the watchman,' she whispered. All our talk had been low, for there
were listening ears everywhere--we couldn't risk that, and I stepped
back. Immediately she saw her advantage, and added, 'If you do not think
better of it and leave the room, I'll scream.' For answer to this I said
that I----"




CHAPTER X

"_I have a scheme_"


"What?"

A yell answered him.

"Something hit me! Something hit me!"

"Yes, I hit you; and I'll hit you again if you don't go on."

Fellows shivered, attempted some puerile protest, balked, and
stammeringly obeyed his restless and irritated companion.

"I--I said--I wasn't such a fool then as I am now--that she had lied
when she told me that she had the combination. There was no combination.
The safe did not even have a lock. The door opened with a spring. How
had she induced that spring to give way? I demanded to know."

"And did she tell you?"

"No. She merely repeated, 'I will scream, and that will cause a scandal
which will lead to your discharge, not mine.' So--so, I came out."

"Blast your eyes! And when did _she_ come out?"

"Within five minutes. I watched the clock."

"And what did she have?"

"Nothing in sight."

"I see. A deep game. But I know a deeper. There is no possibility of
breaking into that safe by night, undetected by the watchman?"

"None; and that watchman is incorruptible. The whole contents of the
safe wouldn't move him to connect himself with this job."

"The job must be done by day and during office hours?"

"Yes."

"And cannot be done without the assistance of this girl?"

"You've heard."

"Very well; I have a scheme. Now listen to me."

Not even the rat which at that minute nibbled at Fellows's boot heel
could have heard what followed. The panting of two breasts was, however,
audible; and when, fifty minutes later, both crawled out of the cellar
window among the rubbish which littered the rear of this once holy
place, the one was trembling with excitement and the other with fear.
They parted at the first thoroughfare, neither having eyes to see nor
hearts to appreciate the touching scene which miles away was taking
place in a little flat not very far from Harlem. An old man, frail in
body, but with a sturdy spirit yet, was looking up from his pillow at
the loving face of a young girl who was bending over him.

"I cannot sleep to-night," he said to her; "I cannot sleep; but that
must not disturb you. I have so many things to think, pleasant things;
but you have only cares, and must rest from them. You look very tired
to-night, tired and worried. Leave me and sleep. I want to see you
bright in the morning."

[Illustration: "_An old man was looking up at the loving face of a young
girl_"]




CHAPTER XI

"_She will go in_"


The next day there was a dearth of assistants in the office. One was
sick, one had pleaded a long-delayed vacation, two had business for the
concern which took them into different quarters of the city, and Mr.
Beers, who was next in authority to Mr. Fellows, had been summoned to
serve on the grand jury. Perhaps it was this knowledge that Mr. Beers
would be absent which had led to the manager's easiness in regard to the
others. For he had been easy, or so Miss Lee thought when she arrived in
the morning and saw the office almost empty. However, it did not trouble
her much. On the contrary, the quiet and non-surveillance of the two
clerks who did the business of the day seemed rather to elate her, and
she went about her work, copying letters and taking down notes with an
alacrity and air of cheerful hope which caused the manager to cast
toward her more than one suspicious look from his desk in the adjoining
room. _He_ was not busy, though he had been the first to arrive that
morning; and he had brought with him a large square package which he had
taken into the room which held the safe. He pretended to be busy, but
any one watching him closely would have noticed that his eyes, and not
his hands, were all that were engaged, and they were anywhere but on his
desk or the letter he appeared to be reading. An observer would also
have noticed that his nervousness was of the extreme sort, and that the
trembling which shook his whole body increased visibly whenever his
glance fell on the door of Mr. Beers's private room, opening at his
back. No one was supposed to be in that room to-day, and had Miss Lee
not been one minute late this especial morning, perhaps there might not
have been. But in that one minute's grace a man had entered the office
who had not gone out again, and where could he be if not in that one
closed room?

The room which held the safe was open as usual, and many of Mr.
Fellows's glances traveled that way. He had entered it once only since
his first hurried visit of the early morning, but only to pull down the
shade over the glass in the door communicating with the outside hall.
This was his usual custom, and it attracted no attention. Why shouldn't
he enter it again? He thought he would. A fascination was upon him. The
problem he had given Beau Johnson to solve was to receive a test this
day which would make him a rich man or a felon; but before that hour why
not make his own study, his own investigation? True, he had made these
many times before, but not with such lights to guide him. He might
learn----

But no, the very conceit was folly. He knew his own limitations, else he
had not called in the services of this crook. He could learn nothing by
himself, but he might look the place over and see if all was in shape
for the great attempt. That was only his duty. Beau Johnson had a right
to expect that of him. If the scrub woman had moved anything----

At the thought that this possibly might have happened, he jumped to his
feet and hurried into the outer office; but when he turned toward the
room of the safe, he met Miss Lee's eye fixed upon him with such a keen,
inquiring look that he faltered in his determination, and went in
another direction instead. _She_ knew that he had no business in that
room, and she also knew that he knew she knew this. Any pretense that he
had would only rouse her suspicions, and these must be lulled to the
point of security, or she might not enter there herself, and on her
entering there everything depended. Almost immediately upon the thought
he was back in his seat, and the weary moments crept on. Would she never
make her accustomed visit to that room? No cablegram had come that
morning, but she would find some reason for going in. Of that he had
been assured by Johnson. Why, he had not been told. "She will go in,"
Beau Johnson had said, and Fellows believed him. He believed everything
the other said, otherwise he could not have gone on with this business.
But she was very long about it. Harlowe would be coming back----




CHAPTER XII

"_A block of steel_"


Ah, he had an idea! It was not his own, but for the moment he thought it
was. He would leave the office himself and thus give her an opportunity
to quit her work and shut herself up with the safe. But--(was his mind
leaving him?) there was something to be done first. The way must be
cleared for the man in hiding to enter that room before she did. How was
this to be accomplished? A dozen suggestions had been given him by his
confederate, but he had forgotten them all. He was in too great a whirl
to think, yet he must think; some way must be found. Ah, he had it.
Taking up the receiver at his side, he telephoned to a German friend to
call him up in five minutes, giving him the number of the telephone in
the farthest room. This he did in German, telling him it was a joke and
that he was not to insist upon an answer. Then he waited. In five
minutes this farther bell rang. Calling to Miss Lee, he asked her to
answer for him, saying he was very busy. As she rose, he gave a
preconcerted signal on the door of Mr. Beers's room. As she disappeared
in the one beyond, the dapper figure of Johnson crossed the outer office
and slipped into the one holding the safe. A minute later she was back
reporting the message and getting instructions, but the one thing she
had to fear had been done; the trap had been laid, and now for its
victim!

It was not long before that victim responded to the call. On the
departure of the manager from the room Grace Lee rose, and with a
conscious look toward the two clerks, slipped across the floor to the
open door of the safe room. Entering, she swung to the door, which
closed with a snap; then, with just a moment of hesitation, in which she
seemed to be trying to regain her breath, she passed quickly across to
the safe and took up her stand before it. So directly and so quickly had
she done this that she had not seen the slim, immovable figure drawn up
against the wall at her right behind the projection of a large bookcase.
Nor did any influence for good or evil cause her to turn after she had
reached the safe. All her thoughts, all her hopes, all the dreams which
she had cherished seemed to be concentrated in the blank, eyeless object
which confronted her, impenetrable to all appearance--a block of steel
without visible opening--an enigma among safes--the problem of all
problems to every cracksman in town but one--which was about to be
solved if one could judge from the thrill which now shook her, and in
shaking her communicated the same excitement to the silent, breathless,
determined man in her rear, watching her as the tiger watches the
quarry, and with the same tiger spring latent in his eye. In a moment
her secret would be out, and then----




CHAPTER XIII

"_I am from headquarters_"


For just a minute Grace Lee paused before the blank door of the safe,
then she passed around to an unused speaking tube in the neighboring
wall. Halting before it, in low but distinct tones she began to sing the
famous aria from "The Magic Flute."

All agog, with eyes starting and ears alert, the man behind listened and
watched. Nothing happened.

Then came a change. Gradually her voice rose, sweet and piercing, till
it reached that famous F in alt so rarely attempted, so exciting to the
ear when fairly taken and fairly held. Grace Lee could take it, and as
it hung, sweet and deliciously thrilling in the air, Beau Johnson saw,
to his amazement, though he was in a way prepared for it, the heavy safe
door slip softly ajar. She had done it with her voice. How, he could
only vaguely guess. He was better educated than most of his class, or he
could not have understood it at all. As it was, he laid it to the
vibration caused by a certain definite note acting on some delicate
mechanism set in accord with that note, which mechanism starting another
and a stronger one gradually led up to that which drew the bolts and set
the door ajar. Whether his theory were true or not mattered little at
the moment. The event for which he waited had been accomplished and
accomplished before his eyes. To profit by it was his next thought, and
to this end he held himself ready for the spring which had laid latent
in his eyes since he first saw her advance toward the safe.

She was ignorant of his presence. This was evident from the jaunty way
she turned from the tube, still singing, but in a desultory way, which
showed that her thoughts were no longer on her music. But she was not so
engrossed that she did not see him. The moment that her face turned his
way, her eyes enlarged, her body stiffened, her whole personality took
on power and purpose and _she_ sprang more quickly than he did and shut
the safe door with one quick movement of her hand that fastened it as
securely as before. Then she drew herself up to meet his rush, a noble
figure of resolute womanhood which any other man would have hesitated to
assail. But he was proof to any appeal of this kind. She had been
quicker than he who was esteemed the readiest in his class, and he owed
her a grudge, if only for that. Smiling--it was a way of his when deeply
moved or deeply dangerous--he accosted her with smooth and treacherous
words.

"Don't scream, young lady; screaming will do you no good. Mr. Fellows
has left the business to me and I am quite competent to manage it. I am
from headquarters--a detective. Yesterday you aroused the manager's
suspicions, and I was detailed this morning to watch you. What do you
want from Mr. Stoughton's safe? An honest answer may help you. Nothing
else will."

[Illustration: "_She was ignorant of his presence_"]

"I want----" she hesitated, eyeing him over with an insight and an
undoubted air of self-command which told the hardy rascal that in this
woman he was likely to meet his match. "I want some securities of Mr.
Stoughton's which he has ordered me to dispose of for him. I am in his
confidence, as I can prove to you if you will give me the opportunity. I
have papers at home that will satisfy any one of my right to open this
safe and to negotiate such papers as are designated in Mr. Stoughton's
cablegrams."

"I don't doubt it." The words came easily from the mobile lips of the
wily Beau Johnson. "But it was not to do Mr. Stoughton's business that
you opened the safe just now. You have had no orders to-day; you had no
order yesterday. Another purpose is in your mind--a personal purpose. It
is this abuse of Mr. Stoughton's confidence which brings me here. _You
want three thousand dollars badly!_"




CHAPTER XIV

"_You do not answer_"


She recoiled. Strong as she was, she was not proof against this
surprise.

"How do you know that?" she asked, her voice losing its clear tone. "I
do not deny it, but how could you know what I thought to be a secret
between----"

"You and your lover? Well--we--the police know many things, young lady.
We have a gift. We also have a kind of foreknowledge. I could tell you
something of your future if you will deign to listen to me. Your lover
is an honest man. What do you suppose he will do when he hears that you
have been arrested for attempted burglary on your employer's effects?"

He had been slowly advancing as he reeled off these glib sentences, but
he paused as he met her smile. It was not of the same sort as his, but
it was not without a certain suggestiveness which he felt it would be
best for him to understand before he threw off his mask.

"I don't know what he will do," said she, meeting the false detective's
eye as she laid her hand on the safe, "but I know what I shall do if you
carry out the purpose you threaten. Show my papers to the police and
demand evidence of my having any bad intentions in opening this safe
this morning. I think you will have difficulty in producing any. I think
that you will only prove yourself a fool. Are you so strong with the
authorities as to brave that?"

Astonished at her insight and more than astonished at her self-control,
the experienced cracksman paused, and then in tones he rarely used,
remarked quietly:

"You are playing with your life, Miss Lee. I have a pistol leveled at
you from my pocket, and I'm the man to fire if you give me the slightest
occasion to do so. I'm Beau Johnson, miss, a detective if you please,
but also a tolerably experienced cracksman, and I want a taste of those
bonds."

"And Mr. Fellows?"

The words rang out clear and fearlessly.

"Oh, he? He's a muff. You needn't concern yourself about him. The
matter's between us two. Three thousand dollars for you, and a little
more, perhaps, for me, and I to take all the blame."

Her eye stole toward the door. No one could enter that way, she knew.
Even her screams, if she survived them, might alarm, but could not bring
her help for several minutes, if not longer. Yet she did not tremble;
only grew a shade paler.

"You do not answer. What have you to say?"

"This." She was like marble now. "You will not kill me, because that
would be virtually to kill yourself. You cannot leave this room without
my help, nor fire a shot without being caught like a rat in a trap. I
want three thousand dollars, and I mean to have them, but I do not see
how you are going to get the few more which you promise yourself.
Certainly I am not going to aid you in doing so, and you cannot open
that safe. You have not the musical training."

"No." The word came like a shot, possibly in lieu of a shot, for if
ever he felt murderous it was at that moment. "I have not a musical
training, but that does not make me helpless. In a few moments I shall
have the pleasure of hearing you test your voice again. There's the
office clock ticking; count the strokes."

She stood fascinated. What did he mean by this? Involuntarily she did
his bidding.

"One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, _eleven_!"

"Yes," he repeated, "eleven! And at half past your old father dies."

"Dies?" Her lips did not frame the words; her eyes looked it, her whole
sinking, suddenly collapsing figure gave voice to the maddening query,
"_Dies?_"




CHAPTER XV

"_Now, if Fellows will stay away_"


"Yes. Such is the understanding if I do not telephone my pals to hold
off. He's not at home; he's with my friends. They don't care very much
about old men, and if I have not a decent show of money by half-past
eleven this morning the orders are to knock him on the head. It won't
take a very hard knock. He was far from being in prime condition this
morning."

She had shown great feeling at the beginning of this address, but at its
close she drew herself up again and met him with something of her old
composure.

"These are all lies," said she. "My father would never leave his house
at the instigation of any gang. In the first place, he is not strong
enough to attempt the stairs. You cannot deceive me in this fashion."

"He might be carried down."

"He wouldn't submit to that, nor would the other lodgers in the house
allow it without an express order from me."

"They got the order; not from you, but from him. He demanded to be
allowed to go. You see, Mr. Fellows sent a message that you were hurt--I
will speak the whole truth, and say dying. The old man could not be held
after that. He went with the messenger."

Her cheeks were now like ashes. She had gauged the man before her and
felt that he was fully capable of this villainy. How great a villainy
she alone knew who had the history of this old man in her heart.

"He went with the messenger," repeated Johnson, watching her face with a
cruel leer. "That messenger knew where to take him. You may be sure it
was to a place quite unknown to the police and to every one else but
myself. Five minutes more gone, miss. In just twenty-five minutes more
you will be an orphan and one impediment to your marriage will be at an
end. How about the other?"

"Oh!" she wailed. "If I could really believe you!"

"I can smooth away that doubt. If you will promise not to compromise me
with the clerks or any one inside there, I will allow you to telephone
home and learn the truth of what I have told you. Anything further will
end all business between us and wind up your father's affairs at the
hour set. I can afford to humor you for ten minutes more in this
nonsense."

"I will do it," she cried. "I must know what I am fighting before----"
She caught herself back, but he was quite able to finish the sentence
for her.

"Before you submit to the inevitable," he smiled.

Her head fell and he pointed toward the door.

"I will trust you to guard my--our interests," said he. "Open and go
directly to your own telephone."

With a staggering step she obeyed. Creeping up stealthily behind her he
watched her manner of opening the door and profited by the one quick
glance he got of the office as she stepped through and passed hurriedly
forward to her desk. There was no one within sight. Mr. Fellows had not
yet returned and the clerks were too remote to notice her agitation or
pay attention to her gait or the tremulousness of her tone as she called
for her home number.

"Couldn't be better," thought he. "Now if Fellows will stay away long
enough, I'll be able to double the boodle I've promised myself." This
with a chuckle.

Meantime Miss Lee had got in her message. The answer sent her flying
toward him.

"He's gone! He's gone!" she gasped. "My old, old father! Oh, you wretch!
Save him and----"

"You save me first," he whispered, and was about to draw her back into
the room with the safe, when the outer door opened and a stranger
entered on business.

Her agony at the interruption and the few necessary words it involved
caused the visitor to stare. But she was able to make herself
intelligible and to turn him over to one of the clerks, after which she
rejoined Johnson, closing the door quietly behind her.

His greeting was characteristic.

"You waste breath," said he, "by all this emotion. You'll need it to
open the safe."

"What guarantee have I that you will keep your part of the contract?"
she cried. "I sing--the door opens--you help yourself, and you go. That
does not restore to me my father."

"Oh, I'll play fair. In proof of it, here's my pistol. If on our going
out I do not stop with you at the telephone and let you communicate with
your father and send my own message of release, then shoot me in the
back. I give you leave."

Taking the pistol he held out, she cocked it, and looking into the
chambers, found they were all full.

"I know how to use it," she said simply.

Admiration showed in his face. He bowed and pointed toward the tube.

"Now for the song," he cried.




CHAPTER XVI

"_It was not paper I meant to have_"


With a bound she took her stand. She was white as death and greatly
excited. Watching her curiously, the crafty villain noted the quick
throbbing of her throat and the feverish grip on the pistol.

"Time is galloping," he remarked.

She gave a gasp, opened her lips and essayed to sing. An awful,
indescribable murmur was all that could be heard. Stiffening herself,
she resolutely calmed down her agitation and tried again. The result was
but little better than before. Turning with a cry, she looked with
horror-stricken eyes into the unmoved, slightly sardonic face of the man
behind her.

"I cannot sing! You have frightened away my voice. I cannot raise that
note even to save my father's life. I'm choking, choking." Then as she
caught the devilish gleam lighting up his eye, she added, "You will
never have those thousands! The safe is closed to us both."

He laughed, a very low, cautious laugh, but it made her eyes distend
with uncertainty and dread.

"You fail to do justice to my fore-*thought," said he.

"I took this into my calculations. I know women; they can be wicked
enough, but they lack coolness. Let me see now what I can do. I cannot
sing, but I have a little _aide de camp_ which can."

Walking away from her, he approached a small table on which stood an
object she had never seen in that room before. It was covered with a
cloth, and as he removed this cloth, she reeled with surprise; then she
became still with hope and the rush of fresh and overpowering emotions.

A graphophone stood revealed, one of the finest quality. It was set to
play the air so often on her lips, and in another moment that keen, high
note rang through the room,--that and no more.

It answered. Slowly, softly, after one breathless moment, the door they
both watched with fascinated gaze swung slowly ajar, just as they had
seen it do at the beginning of this interview, and Johnson, coming
forward, pulled it open with a jerk and began to fumble among the
contents of the safe.

She could have killed him easily. He had forgotten--but so had she, and
there was no one else by to remind her. Had there been, he would have
seen a strange spectacle, for no sooner had Johnson's hand struck those
shelves and minute drawers, than Grace Lee's whole attitude and
expression changed. From a terrified, incapable woman, she became again
her old self, strong, self-controlled, watchful. Creeping up behind him,
she looked over his shoulders as he examined with his quick, experienced
eye the various papers he drew out, noting his anger and growing
disappointment as he found them unavailable for immediate use. Conscious
of her presence, his rage grew till it shot forth in words. Not stinting
oaths, he whirled on her after a moment and asked where the securities
were. "_You_ meant to have them; you know where the ready money is. Show
me, show me at once or----"

Then a great anguish passed across her face, a look of farewell to
hopes sweet and dearly cherished. If he saw it he did not heed. All his
evil, indomitable will shone in the eye he turned up askance at her, and
though she held the means of killing him in her hand, she bowed to that
will, and leaning over him, she whispered in his ear:

"It was not paper I meant to have, but--but something else--I----"

She stopped, for breath was leaving her. His slim, assured hand was
straying toward a certain knob hidden partly from sight, but plain to
the touch if his fingers crept that way.

"Listen!" She was gasping now, but her hand laid on his shoulder
emphasized her words. "There are jewels at the other end; Mrs.
Stoughton's bridal jewels. They are worth thousands. I--I--meant to take
those. They are in a compartment under that lower drawer. Yes,
yes--there they are; take them and be gone. I--I have lost--but you will
give me back my father? See! there are not many minutes left. Oh, be
merciful and----"




CHAPTER XVII

"_Now for my part of the bargain_"


He was looking at the jewels, appraising them, making sure they were
real and marketable. She was looking at them, too, with a wild longing
and a bitter disappointment, which he, turning at that moment to mark
her looks, saw and rated at its full value.

"Well, I guess they'll do," he exclaimed, pausing in his task of
thrusting the gems in his pocket to hand her a bracelet ornamented with
one small diamond. "But I expected more from all this fuss and feathers.
Was it to guard these----"

"Yes," she murmured, thrusting the bracelet into the neck of her dress
and stepping quickly back. "They are priceless to the owner.
Associations you know. Mrs. Stoughton is dead--There! that will do. Now
for my part of the bargain," and bethinking her at last of the pistol,
she raised it and pointed it full in his face. "You will close that door
now and send the telephone you promised."

He rose and banged to the door.

"All right," he cried. "You've behaved well. Now hide that pistol in
your waist and we'll step into the outer office."

She did as she was bid, and in a moment more they were crossing the
floor outside. As they did so, she noticed that the two clerks had been
sent out to luncheon, leaving them alone with Mr. Fellows. This was not
encouraging, nor did she like the click which at this moment Beau
Johnson made with his tongue. It sounded like a preconcerted signal.
Whether so or not, it brought Mr. Fellows from his room, and in another
instant he was standing with them before the telephone. There was a
clock over the safe-room door. It stood at just twenty-five minutes
after eleven.

"Hurry!" she whispered as the other took up the receiver.

She did not need to say it. His own anxiety seemed to be as great as
hers, but his anxiety was to be gone. The nerve which sustained him
while the issue was doubtful gave some slight tokens of failing, now
that his efforts had brought success and only this small obligation lay
between him and the enjoyment of the booty he had won at such a risk.
She was sure that his voice trembled as he uttered the familiar.
"Hello!" and during the interchange of words which followed, the strain
was perhaps as great on him as on her.

"Hello! how's the old man?"

She could hear the answer. It swept her fears away in a moment.

"Well, but anxious about the girl."

"She's all right, everything's all right. Take the sick man home and
tell him that his daughter will be there almost as soon as he is."

"I must hear my father's voice." It was Grace who was speaking. "I will
give a cry that will echo through this building if you do not put me in
communication with him at once."

Her hand went out to the receiver.

The veins on Beau Johnson's forehead stood out threateningly.

"Curse you!" he muttered; but he gave the order just the same.

"Hello! Don't shut off. The girl's nervous; wants to hear her father's
voice. Have him up! two words from him will answer."

"Father!"

Grace's mouth was at the phone.

No reply.

She cast one look at Johnson.

"They're getting him on his feet," he grumbled. _His_ eye was on the
door.

"Father!" she called again, her voice tremulous with doubt and anxiety.

A murmur this time, but she recognized it.

"It's he! it's he," she cried. "He's safe; he's well. _Father!_"

But Johnson had no time for dilly-dallying. Catching the receiver back,
he took his place again at the phone and shouted a few final
injunctions. Then he faced her with the question:

"Are you satisfied?" She nodded, speechless at last and almost
breathless from exhaustion. He bowed and made for the door. As he opened
it, Mr. Fellows slid forward and joined him. Both were leaving. He as
well as Johnson. She caught the look which the manager threw her as he
closed the door behind them. There was threat in that look and her heart
strings tightened as she stood alone there facing her fearful duty. Mr.
Fellows was a thief! The manager of this concern was even then perhaps
walking off with the booty wrenched from her care by the devil's own
inquisition. What should she do? Send for Philip? Yes, that was all her
tortured mind could grasp. She would send for her own Philip and get his
advice before she notified the police or sent the inevitable cablegram.
She was too ill, too shaken to do more. Philip! Philip!

She was fainting--she felt it, and was raising her voice to call in one
of the clerks, when the outer door opened and Mr. Fellows came in. She
had not expected him back. She had fondly believed that he had gone with
his professional comrade; and the sight of him caused her to rise again
to her feet.

"You!" she murmured, facing him in dull wonder at his renewed look of
threat. "I cannot stay in the same room with you. You are----"




CHAPTER XVIII

"_What have you done among you_"


"Never mind me," came clearly and coldly from his lips. "It is of
yourself you must think. Here, officer!" he cried, opening the door
again and ushering in a man in plain clothes, but evidently one of the
force. "This is the young lady. I accuse her of taking advantage of her
power to open Mr. Stoughton's private safe to steal his jewels. Her
confederate has escaped. He had a pistol and I had no means of stopping
him. But she is right here and you will make no mistake in arresting
her. The booty is on her, and smart as she is, she cannot deny that
proof."

With a cry, Grace's hand went up to her throat.

Then she settled into her usual self once more.

The officer, eyeing her, asked what she had to say for herself.

"A great deal," was her low answer. "But I shall not say it here. If Mr.
Fellows will go with me to wherever you take people suspected of what
you suspect me, I can soon make plain my position. But first I should
like to send for my friend, Mr. Philip Andrews. He is with the Stickney
Company, and he is acquainted with my affairs and the understanding
between Mr. Stoughton and myself by which I have access to that
gentleman's safe and do much of his private business for him."

"That's all right. Send for Mr. Andrews if you wish, but you mustn't
expect to talk to him without witnesses. Is that your coat and hat?"

"Yes."

"Well, put them on."

Mr. Fellows advanced and whispered something in the officer's ear.
Immediately the suspicious look grew in his eyes, and he watched her
every movement with increased care. She saw this and stepped up to him.

"I shall not deny having this piece of jewelry about my person," she
said, drawing the bracelet from its hiding place. "The man whom Mr.
Fellows calls my confederate gave it to me and I took it; but it will be
hard for him or any one else to prove that it is a theft, harder than it
will be for me to prove who is the real culprit here and the man whom
you ought to arrest. Watch me, but watch him also; he is more deserving
of your close attention than I am."

Her disdain, her poise, the beauty which came out on her face when she
was greatly stirred, gave her a striking appearance at that moment. The
officer stared, then followed her glance toward Mr. Fellows. What he saw
in him made him thoughtful. Turning back to Miss Lee, he said kindly
enough, "Will you let me have that bracelet?"

She passed it over and he thrust it in his pocket.

"Now," said he, "I will go first. In a few minutes follow me and go down
Nassau Street. A carriage will be at the curb. Take it. As for Mr.
Fellows----"

"I cannot leave till some of the clerks come in."

"We will all wait till a clerk comes."

Mr. Fellows paled.

"Here is one now."

The door opened and Philip Andrews came in.

[Illustration: "_The door opened and Philip Andrews came in_"]

"Oh, Philip!"

"What is this? What have you done among you?"

It was no wonder he asked. At sight of him Grace Lee had fainted.




CHAPTER XIX

"_So that was your motive_"


Two hours later Grace was explaining herself. She was still pale, but
very calm now, though a little sad. The sadness was not occasioned by
any doubt she felt about her father. She had telephoned home and learned
that he had arrived there and was well, and had nothing but good to say
of his captors. No, there was another cause for her manifest depression,
a cause not disconnected with Philip, toward whom her eyes ever and anon
stole with an uneasy appeal which her mother would have been troubled to
see. But it comforted Fellows, who began to regard her threats as idle
in face of the evidence of her complicity as afforded by the concealed
bracelet.

The officer on duty was questioning her. Had she done this and that?
Yes, she had. Why? Then she told her story--the story you have already
read. As she proceeded with it, every eye sparkled under the graphic
tale, and the police, who had some acquaintance with Beau Johnson,
recognized his hand in all that she told. One face only wore a sneer,
and that was Fellows's. But no sneer could discredit a story told with
such vim and straightforward earnestness. As she mentioned the emptying
of the office, each person present turned and gave him a look. The
manager had undertaken a piece of work too big for him. His explanations
of the presence of the graphophone in this inner office were feeble and
contradictory.

But he had his revenge, or thought he had, when she came to the jewels.
She had pointed them out, but only to save a worse disaster. Injury to
her father? "Yes, and----" She paused and her voice thrilled. "In one of
the secret drawers," she continued, "there was an immense amount of
currency in large denominations, the loss of which would cripple the
business, if not bankrupt Mr. Stoughton. His hand was feeling its way
along the face of this drawer. In another moment he would have
discovered the tiny knob by the manipulation of which this drawer opens.
To save the struggle which would have ensued, I directed his attention
elsewhere. I don't believe I did wrong."

"But you accepted one of these articles as your share. Do you believe
you did right in this?"

"Yes. I will not mention the smallness of the share, for that makes the
portion saved for the owner of little account. Yet that portion is
saved. I wish it had been a larger one."

"No doubt. So that was your motive--to save this souvenir for Mr.
Stoughton?"

Casting a proud look at Philip, she moved a step nearer to the table on
which the bracelet lay. "Will you be good enough," she asked her
interrogator, "to take up that bracelet and read the initials on the
inner side?"

"R. S. T.," read the official.

"Does any one here know Mrs. Stoughton's maiden name?"

Evidently not, for all remained silent.

"Does any one here know my mother's maiden name?"

Philip started.

"Yes," he cried, "I do. Her name was Rhoda Selden Titus."

[Illustration: "_'R. S. T.' read the official_"]

"R. S. T.," smiled Grace. "This bracelet was my mother's. Mr. Stoughton
allowed me to place this keepsake and some other valuables of mine in
his private safe. Gentlemen, the whole of those jewels were mine--my
sole and only fortune. I was keeping them for"--her eyes stole toward
Philip--"for my marriage portion, the secret and great surprise I had
planned for my future husband. They are worth some five thousand
dollars--my mother was the daughter of a wealthy man. They would have
given us a home if I could have kept them; they would also have given my
husband a start in business, and this I should have preferred, but I
could not let Mr. Stoughton's securities be endangered, and so they had
to go. Philip, cannot you forgive me when you think that it was through
my folly the secret of the safe became known?"

"I forgive you?" He could not show his feelings, but his eyes were
eloquent; so were Fellows's; so were those of the various officials.

"You can prove these statements, Miss Lee?" asked one.

"Easily," she replied.

Then they turned to Fellows.




CHAPTER XX

"_A jewel of far greater value_"


Grace never got back her jewels. The wily Johnson was not caught, though
Fellows turned state's evidence and did all he could to have the
professional netted in the same manner as himself. But she did not
suffer from this loss. When Mr. Stoughton learned the full particulars
of this daring robbery, he made good to her the value of those jewels,
and the prosperity of this young couple was secured. He was even present
at the wedding. Grace wore her mother's bracelet, but on her breast was
a jewel of far greater value. On its back was engraved,

    To brave G. L.
    From her grateful friend, T. S.

[Illustration: "_He was even present at the wedding_"]




Transcriber's Note:

Changes have been made to the original publication as follows:

    Page 12

    which for some inscrutible _changed to_
    which for some inscrutable

    Page 15

    you're proposition, Mr. Fellows _changed to_
    your proposition, Mr. Fellows

    Page 69

    window You can see it _changed to_
    window. You can see it

    Page 77

    attempted some purile protest _changed to_
    attempted some puerile protest

    Page 78

    done by day and duing _changed to_
    done by day and during

    Page 100

    screaming will do no you good _changed to_
    screaming will do you no good

    Page 113

    drew herself up againand met him with _changed to_
    drew herself up again and met him with

    Page 123

    horrorstricken eyes into the unmoved _changed to_
    horror-stricken eyes into the unmoved

    Page 133

    stood at just tw nty-five _changed to_
    stood at just twenty-five

    Page 134

    want's to hear her _changed to_
    wants to hear her

    Page 153

    Gentlemen the whole of those _changed to_
    Gentlemen, the whole of those





End of Project Gutenberg's Three Thousand Dollars, by Anna Katharine Green

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS ***

***** This file should be named 32795.txt or 32795.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/7/9/32795/

Produced by Suzanne Shell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
