The Project Gutenberg EBook of Perchance to Dream, by Richard Stockham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Perchance to Dream

Author: Richard Stockham

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: June 17, 2010 [EBook #32859]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERCHANCE TO DREAM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          PERCHANCE TO DREAM

                          By Richard Stockham

                       Illustrated by Kelly Freas

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science
Fiction May 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _If you wish to escape, if you would go to faraway places,
then go to sleep and dream. For sometimes that is the only way...._]


All along the line of machines, the men's hands and arms worked like the
legs of spiders spinning a web. They wound wire and hammered bolts, tied
knots and welded pieces of steel and fitted gears. They did not look at
each other or sing or whistle or talk or laugh.

And then--he made a mistake.

Instantly he stepped back and a trouble shooter moved into his place.
The trouble shooter's hands flew over the controls.

The trouble shooter finished and the workman took his place. His arms
moved ceaselessly again.

He was a tall man, slim and wiry, his dress identical to that of the
others--grey coveralls that fit like tights.

Suddenly a red light flashed in his eyes and he began to tremble. He
took two steps backward. The trouble shooter moved into the empty space.

The man stood for a moment, like a soldier at attention, turned and
walked smartly toward the mouth of a corridor.

The silence was like a motion picture with a dead sound track. There was
only motion--and him walking down the line of machines where the hands
reached out, working, working.

In the corridor now, he looked straight ahead, marching. The walls
glowed like water beneath a shallow sea.

He raised his arm, felt the door strike and the heel of his hand; felt
it swing open; saw the desk suspended from the ceiling by luminous,
silver chains.

A man with a massive, white-maned head and a pink, smiling face rose
from behind the desk. His suit was like that of a general.

"Well, Twenty-three." The Superfather stared down at the dossier on his
desk. "Two mistakes in three months. Too bad. Just when you were on your
way to the head of the machine room."

"I don't know what's the matter with me," said Twenty-three.

"I'm afraid we'll have to drop you back to a less responsible position."

"Of course."

The Superfather looked up quickly. "You accept this? No depression? No
threat of suicide?... You _are_ in bad shape." He handed a packet of
cards to Twenty-three. "Put these in your dream machine tonight. Go to
your new job tomorrow."

Twenty-three stood motionless, staring over the other man's shoulder.

The Superfather sat down. "Tell me about the dreams you have when you
don't use the machine."

Twenty-three made a quick decision. He couldn't tell him he didn't use
the standard dream cards anymore. And he certainly couldn't tell about
the _other_ dream cards he'd been getting from the little man he'd met
on the street. He'd simply answer the factual truth to the question that
had been asked.

"Well," he said, as though he were confessing a crime. "I dream I'm
walking in the city. It's dark. I feel like I've got to find something.
I don't know what. But the feeling's very strong. All of a sudden I
notice the city's empty. There're just buildings and streets and a faint
glow of light. And it comes to me that everybody's dead and buried. Then
I know what I'm looking for. I've got to find something alive or I'll
die too. So I start running around, in and out buildings, up and down
streets. But there's nothing. I'm breathing so hard I think my heart's
going to burst. Finally I fall down. I feel myself beginning to die. I
try to get up but I can't! I try to yell! I've got no voice! I'm so
afraid, I can't stand it! Then I wake up."

The Superfather frowned. "Incredible. Several other cases like yours
have turned up in the last month. We're working on them. But yours is
the worst yet. You had such high capabilities. Your tests showed, when
you first began to work, ten years ago, that you were capable of going
to the head of your production line. But you're not doing it. Also your
normal dreams should correspond to the ones on the cards. And they
don't.... Are you using the standard cards every other night?"

Twenty-three lied. "Yes."

"And the nights you don't use them, you have a dream like the one you
just told me."

"That's right."

"Incredible." The Superfather shook his head. "It just doesn't add up.
As you know, you get the prescribed dreams every other night and that's
supposed to condition your mind to dreaming those same dreams, by
itself, on the nights you don't use the machine. The prescribed dreams
merely show you the true way of life. And when you're on your own you're
supposed to follow that way of life whether you're asleep or awake.
That's what the dream machine is for. I'm sure you're aware of all
this?"

"Yes," said Twenty-three. "Yes."

"Now we Superfathers _never_ have to use the dream machines. We're so
filled with the way of life they advocate and it's become such an
integral part of us, we simply _are_ what our prescribed dreams are. And
the more successful a person is in the city, the less he has to use the
dream machine. Now you have to use it every other night. That's entirely
too much for a man of your potential. You realize this, of course.

"Oh I do," said Twenty-three shaking his head sadly.

"Well now," said the Superfather, "that means something's wrong. _Very_
wrong." He rubbed his chin, thinking. "Your prescribed dreams show you
working faster and faster on the machines, going on month after month
year after year, with one hundred percent accuracy. They show you happy
in your work, driven by ambition on up to the end of your capabilities.
They show you contented there to the end of your working life." He
paused. "And you're _doing_ just the opposite ... I suppose your wife
is--concerned?"

Twenty-three nodded.

"After all, the marriage center assured her your index was right for
her. _Her_ sleep cards were coordinated with yours. The normal dreams of
both of you, without the machine, should be identical.... Yet you come
up with this horror--running through the city, alone, falling, dying."

Twenty-three's mouth twitched.

"Well." The Superfather stood. "If you can't adjust to normal, we'll
simply have to send you to the pre-frontal lobotomy men. You wouldn't
want that."

"Oh no!"

"Good!" The Superfather held out another packet of cards. "Use these
_tomorrow_ night. It's a concentration pattern which should be dense
enough to make you dream of being, well--perhaps even President, eh?"

"Yes." Twenty-three hesitated.

"Well?" said the Superfather.

"I'd--like to ask a question."

The Superfather nodded.

"What--what use," went on Twenty-three, "is all this--work being put
to--that we do--along the machine lines--every day? We don't, seem to
really be _making_ anything. Just working."

The Superfather's eyes narrowed. "You're kept busy. You get paid. You
live. The city is here. That's all. That's enough."

"Yes, sir. Thank you, sir." Twenty-three turned abruptly, marched to the
door and stepped into the empty, silent corridor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-three looked up at the glowing dome of the city that curved away
to the horizon. He wondered if there really was a white ball beyond it
sometimes and tiny dots of light, set in blue black. And at other times
did a ball of fire flame up there, giving light and heat and life? And
if there was this life and light up there, _why_ the great dome over the
city? _Why_ the factories and machine lines replacing it section after
section, generation after generation? The slabs that the workers fused
together this year and the next and the next, pushing back this life and
light and heat. Why not let it pour down into the city and warm all the
people? Why not go to the space out there and the depth and freedom? Why
this great shell that closed them away? For the sake of the Superfathers
maybe? And the Superfathers-plus? For the sake of the ones, like himself
maybe who worked and built? For the sake of them, so they wouldn't
become dangerous maybe and tear the great wall down and rush out into
whatever was beyond? Why else?

But it could be all a farce. They could all be working in the great dome
because they didn't know what was beyond. Who could know if they'd never
been beyond?

And so they were held under the domes with the buildings and the
machines that carried them all around in the city; held with the
plumbing and the theatres and all the intricate mechanisms that spoke to
them and fed them, that washed them and poured thoughts into their
minds, that healed them when they were sick and rested them when they
were tired. The same as they were held with the great dome. Held and
shackeled with the replacing of parts that didn't need replacing; the
making over and over again of the tiny and large pieces of the
mechanisms and the taking of the old mechanisms and the melting of them
or smashing of them to powder so that this dust or molten metal could be
fashioned again and again into the same pieces that they had been for so
many thousands of years. All this to keep them busy? All this to keep
something outside that was supposed to be destructive because once it
had been so five thousand years ago or ten or fifty? All this because
that was the way it had been for as long as the hundreds and the
thousands of years that history had been recorded?

He walked on through the silence, dimly aware now of the people moving
about him, of the automobiles rolling past, as though moved by some
invisible force. He passed row upon row of movie theatres that called to
him with invisible vibrations. He turned away.

Where was the little man?

He stopped, moving only his eyes. After a moment, he saw the little man
step out of a shop-front and stand waiting. Twenty-three, a cigarette in
his mouth, walked over and asked for a light. The little man touched a
lighter to the cigarette, at the same time dropping a packet of cards
into Twenty-three's pocket.

Twenty-three moved on. He felt the pounding of his heart. If only his
wife were asleep so he would not have to wait to look at these new
cards.

As he walked, his thoughts cried out against the silence. He glanced
suspiciously from side to side. If only he could hear the sounds of the
city. But except for human voices and music, the city had always been
silent. The human voices spoke only words written by the Superfathers,
and the music came from records that had been composed by them--all this
back when the city had first come into being. Other than these sounds
there could be only the quiet all around. No chugging motors or scraping
footsteps. No crashing engines in the sky, or pounding of steel on
stone. No shrieking of factory whistles or clanging steeple bells or
honking automobile horns. None of this to pluck and pound at nerves, to
suggest that this place was not the most soothing and gentle of all
places to be in. There were no winds to swirl and moan away into the
distance. The chirp of birds had long since been stilled, and so had the
patter of rain and the crash of thunder. There must not be any of these
sounds either to lure the imagination into some distance where danger
and excitement might be waiting.

Now he was walking toward the door of his apartment house. It swung
open. Thirty seconds later he stopped before another door. It too swung
open.

His wife stood in the middle of the room, between two traveling bags. He
moved slowly toward her and stopped just out of arm's reach.

"What's this?" He gestured toward the bags. "Where're you going?"

She stared at him for a long moment, her face set. She was of his height
and build and wore a suit the same light grey as his. Their hair cuts
were identical, their faces sharp featured and pale. They might have
been brother and sister--or two brothers, or two sisters.

"I'm going to the marriage center."

"What for?" He had tried to inject surprise into his voice. But the tone
was listless.

"The Superfather called about your dream."

Twenty-three turned away, lighted a cigarette. He should beg her to
stay, should promise to change. But the silence was in him, like a
sickness.

"A terrible thing's happening to you. I don't want any part of it." She
picked up the bags. "When you come to your senses, you know where to
reach me.... _If_ I haven't already made another contract, I _might_
come back to you."

She hesitated at the door.

"There's one thing I don't understand. You haven't begged me to stay.
You haven't broken down. You haven't threatened suicide." She paused.
"It's standard procedure, you know. It might even make me decide to wait
awhile."

"I don't want you to stay," he said. He felt a shock of surprise. It was
as though a voice had spoken from behind him.

He watched the door shut between them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dressed in his pajamas, he stood beside the metal tube, in which for so
many years he had slept his regulation sleep and dreamed his regulation
dreams. There was something of the finely made casket about this
tube--the six foot length and three foot diameter; the lid along its top
and the dull shine of the metal and the quiet of it, as though it were
asleep and lying in wait for a tired body to bring it awake so that it
could put the body to sleep and live in the dreams it would give to the
sleeper.

Beside his own tube stood its twin, where his wife had also slept and
dreamed through the years.

Leaning slightly forward, he felt the press of metal against his hip
bones, felt the tube roll an inch with his weight. He rested one hand on
the metal top, felt its warmth and smoothness, was aware of its
cleanness, like that of a surgical instrument.

Now he glanced at the glistening black panel that stood two feet high at
the tube's head; quickly checked its four illuminated dials and three
gleaming arrows and at the same time raised his hand to drop the cards
into the softly glowing slot at the panel's top.

Suddenly his hand stopped.

He bent forward.

What was this? A feeling of strangeness. Vague. Like sensing some subtle
change in a picture that has hung for twenty years above the fireplace
in one's home.

He drew closer, squinting. The dials and meters seemed to be the same as
they had yesterday and the day before and the year before.

And yet?

The dials. Larger? By a fraction? And the tiny gleaming arrows of the
meters. Barely longer? And the marks on the dials and meters? One extra
each, very faintly, like a piece of hair.

He was very still for a long moment. Then he moved around the foot of
his own sleeping tube, pushed between the two and stood at the head of
the other one.

He checked its dials and meters. They were as they had been for many
years. He stepped back to the panel of his own and pressed a button. As
the glistening metal top rose, silently, he ran his hand around the
yawning interior, felt the downy softness and the body-like warmth. Then
his hand touched a pliable metal plate. That should not be there. He
stood back, remembering the workmen who had come into the house that
morning for the routine checkup of the tubes. His wife had already left
for work and he had just stepped through the door when they had met him
in the corridor. They had gone on into the rooms and he had sensed
vaguely that something was wrong. Then he had put the feeling out of his
mind and gone to his work.

Now suddenly, he turned to the illuminated four inch square panel above
the door, read April 15, 2563. The workmen had checked a day early. He
frowned. Either the Superfather had ordered the machine changed, which
was highly improbable, because every object in the city was standardized
and any change would upset the established order, or the workmen were
tied up with the man who had given him the different dream cards.... In
any event he had to sleep in the tube that night and he definitely
wanted to dream the dreams on the cards he had just gotten from the man
on the corner.

He dropped the cards into the slot at the top of the panel, climbed into
the tube and pressed a button. The top closed over him, like a hand. He
lay still, feeling the warm clasp wash over his body. There was darkness
and silence and a cool motion of antiseptic air. He could try the first
dream. If it wasn't right, he could shut it off and sleep without
dreams.

He pressed another button.

Silence.

The sound of his regular breathing.

Then a sighing came into his mind, and a green haze. The sighing became
a soft breeze; the green, tree-covered hills rolling off to the horizon.
He relaxed, aware in a fading, sinking part of his consciousness that
the machine worked as usual. He would dream and wait and hope....

And so the wind was breathing across the land from off a vast stretch of
blue water, which broke along a sandy beach in foamy white breakers. The
surf thundered all through his body. The wind brushed against him like a
great, purring cat. He looked up at the blue sky and seemed to feel
himself rising and sinking, both at the same time, up into its depths.
As his sight touched the sun there was an explosion of brightness which
blinded him. He turned away then to the rolling green sea of hills, saw
the trees bending from the surge of wind and heard the rustling of
leaves.

And then a deep voice moved through his mind.

"Outside the city," it said, "all this exists. During the terrible
burning of the Earth back in the wars of its antiquity, the city was
built as a place of life for those who yet lived. But those people were
not aware that the Earth would come alive again and they made the city
so that no death could enter it from without and no life could escape
from within. And they turned away from the Earth and lived only with the
city so that it became their universe--to all but a very few of us. We
still held a faint awareness of what the Earth had been--this passed
down to us for many generations, in whisperings, by the wise ones of our
people, back in the beginning of the city. And in those times, we had
been in the city too long, for thousands of years. We knew that there
must be freedom beyond the walls, if we could get through. But the walls
were thick and high and without a flaw, making a sky over us. We worked
for five hundred years on a machine to get us through the wall. Now a
few of us have succeeded and more will follow us to the freedom out here
in the good land. There is room for everyone here, there are no
boundaries and no ceilings and no walls anywhere. And you may join us
some time in the near future, if you wish."

Twenty-three sighed in his sleep.

Now a great city faded into his mind. There were long, tree lined
streets and buildings, some built in rising spirals, some in spreading
squares, others in ovals, domes and curved half circles. The wind
wandered among the buildings and the bursts of green. People, dressed in
white, flowing robes or black tights, walked the streets. He could hear
their footsteps on the stone or grassy walk, could hear the hum of
vehicles rolling along the streets or flying through the air. They were
long and streamlined or short and round, or they were curved like
gondolas or squat like saucers. And they were moving at many speeds. Yet
there was order. And the air was sweet and clean. A black line of clouds
was rising across the horizon. Soon there would be lightning and thunder
and cool rain.

The deep voice touched him again. "This is the city that can be. A city
of life, open to the sky and the earth, a city in which people can find
and follow their own lives. After the wars, the cities were built to
shut out the death of Earth. But the Earth has come to life again. And
so can the cities."

The silence came while the picture changed and Twenty-three stirred,
waiting.

A figure grew in his mind, wavered, and became a woman. Twenty-three saw
the long body and the softness; saw the flowing hair and the smile as
she watched him. He saw the gentleness in her face; saw a strength under
the softness, like the storm that lies below the charged quiet of a
summer evening. Her lips moved.

"Paul. Dream your dreams for _us_." The words seemed to fall on him. He
trembled and cried out. And he felt a violent stirring in his body and a
breaking away as though he had flung himself through the walls of a
tomb.

The picture blew away while the voice continued: "She is a woman, not a
woman who half resembles a man." A pause. "When you wish to leave the
city, ask for the final card. You are welcome."

There was silence and darkness. Twenty-three stirred. He opened his
eyes. The glow from the city outside filtered into the room through the
translucent walls. He lay motionless. Paul. He was Paul. Not
Twenty-three. A man with a name. Wonder came into him, and a sense of
strength, and a willingness to remember without fear.

His mind ran back to the first mistake, almost a year past. He
remembered the horror of failure then and the terror at his being
subjected to a mistake. He remembered the inference from the Superfather
that there might be a bad strain in his blood line. He remembered taking
the dream cards that were to have set him straight, that were to have
shown him working over the machines with super speed, moving up along
the production line to its pinnacle and on up to the position of
Superfather and on up to Superfather-plus and on up to the place of
Father of The City. But the cards had been sabotaged, so that from them
into his mind had come the dreams of the trees and the oceans and the
green earth spreading off to the horizon and the expanse of blue sky.

And then the words had directed him to the little man who had given him
the cards on the street corner. They had known him, the words had said,
through what was called telepathetic screening, for ones suitable to
leave the city. He was one of those chosen, because he, like a few
others, had been unable to adjust completely to the demands of the city.
He was one of those in whom a rebellious nature had been passed down
from generation to generation, by attitudes and acts of his ancestors,
by a word spoken here and one there, by an intangible reaching out
toward the sky and the green growing things and the need to understand
who and what he was. But in him now this feeling was weak and close to
death and would die in him if it were not brought out into life of the
Earth.

Now the memories receded; he lay motionless, listening to his breathing
and his heartbeat, feeling his body press against the softness that held
him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly a shaft of light fell on him through the transparent square.
Opening his eyes, he saw his wife's face staring down at him.

She moved her hand. The lid of the tube raised. He lay watching her,
feeling naked and, for a moment, helpless.

"I talked for a long while with your Superfather," she said. "I feel
better. He told me you'd promised to take the prescribed dreams
tonight."

Twenty-three turned his face away from her.

She began to undress.

"I'm going out for a walk." He stepped from the machine.

She watched him dress, her look a mixture of curiosity and fright.

When he left it was as though he were leaving an empty room and she
watched him as though he were not quite human.

The glow of the city was all around him as he walked toward the corner
where the little man stood. The telepathic advertisers reached out from
the places of entertainment, pulling at him. The voices enveloped him
for a moment so that he almost turned back to them. But then he saw, in
his mind, his arms working over the machines, saw them make a wrong
motion that smashed a gear, saw the flashing red light and the heavy,
expressionless face of the Superfather. He was aware that his memory
would be erased and the skies, and the ocean, and the green hills. His
name would be gone. Paul would die. And the city would be his tomb.

Quickly he turned down a side street, saw the small figure leaning
against the corner of the building.

Walking rapidly toward him, as though he were being chased, he saw the
lean, ruddy face smile and the deep, blue eyes look at him; heard the
voice gently say:

"Welcome, Paul."

"The last card," said Twenty-three.

The little man handed it to him, quickly. "Good luck. Turn the dials one
extra point on the control panel. Our men have made the machine ready.
It's time now."

Twenty-three thrust the card into the inner pocket of his jacket. So
that _was_ it. They _had_ changed the machine.

"One extra point," he repeated, glancing up and down the street.

"And remember," said the little man. "Destroy all the cards you've used
before. They were designed particularly for you. If you don't make it
across to us, the Superfathers will use the cards against you."

Twenty-three whirled around. The little man had gone. Twenty-three
suddenly felt weak. My God! The other cards! Left in the machine! If his
wife--!

He stood very still for a long moment, then he ran!

The door to his apartment swung open. The room beyond was empty. A light
shown faintly. He stood for a moment, listening. Silence. He stepped to
the bedroom. The top of his wife's sleeping tube was closed. He could
see her face through the transparent square, could hear her quiet
breathing.

In one quick, silent motion, he stepped to the side of his own tube,
pulling the last card from his pocket, and dropped it into the glowing
slot at the top of the black control panel. Then he turned the dials to
the extra point.

Several minutes later he pressed the button at the bottom of the control
panel. The top opened. At the same moment, he heard a step behind him.
He whirled around. The Superfather stood in the doorway. At his back
hovered the dark bulks of two other men. Twenty-three felt his muscles
lock. He saw the Superfather's dead smile and then his wife stepping
down to the floor and hurrying to the side of the Superfather.

"Those pictures," she said, shuddering. "They were so--strange."

The Superfather held his eyes on Twenty-three but spoke to the woman.
"Thank God you were strong. It was commendable of you to call us."

"I don't know what made me look at his dreams," she cried. "Maybe it was
when I asked him if he'd taken the prescribed dreams and he didn't
answer.... Anyway, I tested his machine. It was insane!"

"Dreams made by some twisted mind," the Superfather said. "Remember.
They've no real existence. Nothing lives or moves outside the city.
There were old myths but they've been dead for countless generations."
He paused. "Where _are_ the pictures?"

"I burned them."

"Good." He motioned to the men behind him. They came forward and stood
on each side of Twenty-three.

"Twenty-three," said the Superfather, "we may have to erase your
memories and your present individuality." He cleared his throat. "Our
records show that some two thousand people have disappeared in the last
five years. Your case has much to do with it.... Where'd you get the new
cards?"

Twenty-three was silent.

The Superfather pulled out a pack of cards. "Before we leave this room,
you'll be a different man. If you tell us,"--he waggled the cards in his
right hand--"this'll be your new life. You'll have dreams of outdoing
every man on the machine lines and fix your body so you'll have the
capacity to do it. You _will_ do it. You'll become a Superfather. You'll
burn to excel them. You'll push on up, become a Superfather-plus. You'll
work with ideas, ways of increasing efficiency, pushing the workmen
faster and faster. And you'll find ways of conditioning them to meet the
greater and greater demands for speed. The city and people'll be at your
fingertips. There'll be rooms of marble and gold for you. Soft carpets
and buttons to push that'll give you any desire instantly. You'll _have_
everything and _be_ everything!" He paused and took a deep breath. "All
this'll be yours if you'll tell us where you got the cards, without
forcing us to probe your mind with the electric-scalpel...."

With an effort, Twenty-three raised his eyes to the Superfather's face.

"And if I don't tell you?"

"Moving a lever back and forth twice a minute hour after hour, year
after year. Living in a bare cubicle. No entertainment. No desires." He
paused. "And no _memories_."

Twenty-three looked over the Superfather's shoulder. The last card, he
thought, is in the machine. Escape from the city. They said that, from
outside. I've got to know. No matter what they put in the machine, that
card will show first. Even if it's only for ten seconds or thirty or
sixty, or however long--I'll know.

"No," he said, "I won't tell you...."

The woman gasped and hid her face. The Superfather, scowling, made a
motion.

The two dark men took hold of Twenty-three. They lifted him into the
tube.

The Superfather dropped the second pack of cards into the panel and
pressed the button. The top closed silently, like a mouth.

Twenty-three's eyes closed; his body waited.

       *       *       *       *       *

For an instant--blackness, and silence, like a moment after death, or a
moment before birth. Then twilight, or dusk, over an ocean. A sky of
pale blue. A shine on the gently surging waters. A scent of clean air.
Sea spray. The cool sound of wind.

Then a man's voice, deep and flowing: "You know that there is no
entrance or exit to this city. It is sealed off and will always be so.
But the dream machine in which you lie has been changed by our agents
inside the city. The last card you dropped into it is different from the
others. These changes have been made so your dream will become a
reality. Your mind will be transmitted to us here among the hills and
under the trees and by the ocean. And a new body, that we have grown,
artificially, from all the elements, a body like the one you will leave
behind, will be waiting for you. You need not be afraid."

Twenty-three felt himself moving forward. Sight and hearing and
sensation, without a body. Time dropping away, like a forgetting of
yesterday and tomorrow. There was only this moment. And then he felt the
great humming surging power of the machine, like an ocean rushing him
toward some unseen shore. He was caught in a gigantic tingling shock
wave, and felt like a tremendously outsized torch, lit and flaming, and
carried, still burning, in the green tide of sizzling electricity. The
machine screamed. The machine chanted. The machine raved. Dimly, he
heard his wife cry, and above him felt the Superfather scrabbling at the
machine, the guards shouting. The machine shrieked and the great tidal
wave of power jolted and flung him, white-hot kindling, through air,
through sky, up and down! Down upon a white shore, upon creaming sands,
leaving him to quiet, to silence, to a pulling away of the tide....

Now the scent of sea came strong into him. He heard the crash and roar
of surf and the rustling of leaves and the sweep of wind. There were
bird songs and the cries of animals. He saw the spread of rolling hills,
saw a stream searching its way among great rocks and swelling and
rolling full into a river and the river flowing and sinking into the
sea. He felt the earth upon his feet and the touch of grass. Breezes,
heavy with green from the land eddied all around him and filled his body
and washed him. He heard his name--saw people coming toward him saying,
"Welcome." He felt their arms, embracing him. He saw an open city
growing among the hills. Its buildings rolled away with the hills of the
Earth and became a part of the Earth. The people took him by the hand
and led him toward it speaking to him of no one hurting the other, and
no one locked in a cell and all the walls of this world outside, tumbled
down....

He was happy and repeated the name they spoke to him.

"Paul."

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in the city, in the room, the wife cried out.

The Superfather, too, seeing the strange look on the face of the man
inside the chrysalis of the dream-maker, quickly touched the button that
raised the lid. He bent down and took the wrist of the cold man lying
there.

"Dead."

"Are you sure?"

The Superfather bent still further down and listened to the chest, and
the wife came close, and they both stood there, half-bent. The mouth of
the dead man was open and the Superfather listened for any faint whisper
of breath. The wife listened. They both looked at each other for a long
time.

Because, from the open mouth of the cold man lying there, faintly, far
away, and fading slowly into silence, they heard quiet laughter, and the
sound of many birds and voices, and trees rustling in the late
afternoon. Then it was gone and no matter how the two people bending
there waited and listened, it was like putting their ear to a white
stone.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Perchance to Dream, by Richard Stockham

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERCHANCE TO DREAM ***

***** This file should be named 32859.txt or 32859.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/8/5/32859/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
