The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Merchants of Venus, by A. H. Phelps

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Merchants of Venus

Author: A. H. Phelps

Illustrator: FREAS

Release Date: June 19, 2010 [EBook #32901]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MERCHANTS OF VENUS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        The MERCHANTS Of Venus

                         By A. H. PHELPS, Jr.

                         Illustrated by FREAS

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
March 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _A pioneer movement is like a building--the foundation is
never built for beauty!_]


The telephone rang. Reluctantly, Rod Workham picked it up. Nothing good
had come from that phone in six years, and his sour expression was
almost an automatic reflex.

"Workham here," he said.

He held the phone an inch away from his ear, but the tirade exceeded his
expectations--it would have been audible a foot away:

"Workham! How long do you think we're going to stand for this! At the
rate you're going, there won't be a man left on Venus or a dollar in the
budget! What kind of a personnel director are you? Don't you know this
project is vital to every person on Earth? Thirty more resignations came
in on this last mail flight."

Rod put the receiver gently on his desk. General Carlson raved and
ranted this way every time a colonist quit, and Rod knew he was not
expected to answer, even if given the chance. The general would carry on
for about five minutes and then would slam down the phone himself.

He dialed another number on the other phone.

"This is Rod, Dave," he said when he got an answer. "Carlson is on the
other phone, yelling at my desk blotter. He says thirty more
resignations came in just now. That right?"

"Close enough, Rod--twenty-three pulled out. That makes seventy-eight
per cent resigned in less than--"

"Spare me the statistics--Carlson's probably blatting them right now.
How do they break down? Are they mostly farmers or technicians?"

"There were only nine technicians left, and all of them quit with this
bunch. The rest were farmers." Dave Newson must be smoking his pipe, Rod
decided--grinding sounds were coming over the phone. "That doesn't leave
very much on Venus to start a colony with--a few farmers, some trappers.
And the scientific personnel--damn it, they seem to stick it out all
right--"

"Their contracts are different," Rod reminded him. "They go on a two
year hitch and then come back to Earth if they want to. The ones who are
there are the ones who can take it and are signed up again."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a speculative pause on the other end of the line. "Say, Rod,"
Newson said slowly. "Why not leave this last batch of quitters right
where they are? Every one of them. They signed up for the project with
their eyes open. Why don't you just refuse to bring them home? ...
they'd have to make a go of the colony to save their filthy necks!"

Rod grinned nastily. "I'd like to do it--but even General Carlson
wouldn't dare. We'd never get another colonist off Earth, once it got
out. They wouldn't trust us. Our first problem is to get a
self-supporting society on Venus--and that might do it, all right. But
our main job is to relieve the crowding on Earth, and that means large
numbers of people will have to go willingly later on. If we get tough
with these babies, who will take a chance later on that we won't repeat
the trick?"

"But we lose a hundred potential colonists every time one of these
quitters starts talking about why he left! More harm is done by letting
them come back than would result from leaving them where they are."
Again the speculative pause. "Maybe you could shoot them on arrival?"

"I'll suggest it to the general when I see him," Rod said, "if he
doesn't shoot me first. Now, can you get me the files on this latest
group? And I'd like to see the staff psychologist here, along with all
the interviewers who handled and passed the group. We'll see what we can
salvage out of this. And if you see Jaimie, send him along too, will
you? Maybe our gambling historian can find us something useful in the
Project Record."

"The files are already on the way. And I told Biddington you'd probably
want to see him--he said he'd be along in about ten minutes. I haven't
located all the interviewers yet. Jaimie's been right here, trying to
talk me into a game of Nim and protesting he never heard of binary
numbers. I'll send him up, but keep your hand on your wallet. If you
need anything else, I'll be right here."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rod thanked him and hung up, shaking his head. Dave Newsom was too good
a man to be stuck on a government project--he ought to get out before
the trouble started. Anyone who worked for Rod Workham on Project Venus
was likely to end up with a bad name. They lived under the ax. The only
person who could be sure of his job was Rod himself. He'd been
recommended by a committee of top men in his field, and no other
personnel man would accept the job if he were removed. Also, most of his
men would leave the project if General Carlson bounced him, for they had
been telling him so ever since the job had gotten hot.

But there was the danger that the general might decide to bypass
Personnel in selecting colonists--or, what was more probable, might try
to tame the planet with a military outpost.

Rod could hardly blame the man for his feelings. The job was vital, and
everyone was intensely interested in making a go of it. Scientific
agriculture had gone about as far as it could; hydroponics had already
begun to shoulder the load required by an overpopulated planet. But the
fact known to most intelligent people on Earth was that either new room
was found in this kind of emergency, some place where people could go
and live under nearly the same standards, or else some drastic changes
in living standards would be required of all. And absolute and rigidly
enforced birth control would have to go into effect. And all the
attendant causes for race wars, nationalist wars, and have-not wars
would crop up.

But the majority of the people wouldn't move to an undeveloped planet.
You couldn't send ordinary citizens as pioneers. For one thing, they
wouldn't want to go. For another, the new community wouldn't last long
if you forced them to go--the average person had neither the attitudes
nor the physique needed to make over a wilderness.

The problem was to find people who would create a community on a new
planet and develop an integrated society there. This had meant rigid
selection, careful psychological preparation and a terrifically
expensive transportation system to get the people there and keep them
supplied. And the job had to be done soon. Economists predicted that
thirty years were left on Earth under present standards, maybe fifty. If
the population couldn't be thinned out one way by then, it would have to
be done by another.

       *       *       *       *       *

For six years, now, Rod had worked on the job of establishing a
self-supporting colony on Venus. Three different colonies had been
started, and each had died out in less than two years. Resignations
would come in slowly at first, and then in a rush, until only twenty or
thirty people would be left, of which the majority would be short-term
scientific teams. By the terms of the colonists' contracts no man could
be left on Venus more than a month after his resignation; so the bulk of
two colonies had simply had to be shipped back to Earth, and plans made
for another try.

And now the third colony was quitting, rushing home, leaving nothing on
the jungle planet but a few small clearings soon to be taken over by the
vegetation.

Several times in the last year Rod had thought of volunteering himself;
but he knew it for a futile gesture. He wasn't five hundred men. He
didn't even have the special skills or physique that were needed.

His gloomy thoughts were interrupted by the arrival of the men.

Biddington was first. Then in twos and threes came the interviewers, all
looking like the home team at the half, three touchdowns behind and just
waiting for their coach.

If psychologists made good colonists, Rod thought, here would be a dozen
more volunteers.

The arrival of Homer Jaimison brought the only cheerful face in the
group. The project historian was a young man, just over thirty, and
considerably over six feet. He wore the expression of a man who is
itching to do something. Jaimie had never really been busy yet on the
project--the colonies had died out so quickly that his work had been
mostly clerical, and he'd had to fill in time as best he could. So far
he had done it making up improbable contests of skill for drinks, with
such a weird assortment of shifting rules and scoring that he hadn't
paid for a drink since his arrival. He made a valuable contribution to
the project, however, since he helped to keep the group's minds off
their troubles a part of the time.

Rod genuinely liked Jaimie, and expected to miss him strongly when Venus
became self-supporting to the point where the historian would have to
complete his work in residence.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they were all seated, Rod leaned against his desk and said, "I can
see you all know why we're here. To begin with, I'm not going to accuse
anyone of mistakes. Each of you is the best possible man in the country
for his job. If you weren't, you wouldn't be here. I wouldn't have asked
for you; and General Carlson wouldn't have kept you. So there's nothing
to feel bad about. If you can't do this work, no one can.
Self-recrimination is foolish when you've been put on an impossible
problem. I didn't call you in to bawl you out, but to ask you if we
should continue spending project funds for nothing."

Jaimie raised his eyebrows at this speech, but said nothing.

"What do you mean, impossible problem?" one of the interviewers
objected. "We know what we need--it's just that we're still making some
mistake in selection that we haven't corrected."

"That's right, Rod." Biddington, the project psychologist, took up the
dissension. "We know something is wrong with the selection techniques,
or in the personality patterns we consider necessary. But it's only a
problem of finding out what it is. The problem is by no means
insoluble."

"As long as you're not ready to give us up," another interviewer said,
"we aren't going to quit."

"You can't afford to get defeatist about this, Rod," Biddington went on.
"This project is too important to fail. Whether you like it or not, your
experience is too valuable for you to back out."

Rod grinned and held up his hands. "All right. That's the reaction I
wanted. If you all still think we can get somewhere, we may as well try
to analyze this last group." He sat down at his desk. "I have the files
here, along with the tapes of the interviews. Let's see what difference
we can find between those who hung on this long, and the ones that quit
after the first three months."

       *       *       *       *       *

The group settled down to trying to differentiate between a man who
couldn't do a job but could try for six months longer than the next.
They took the colonists carefully apart, trait by trait, and put them
all back. They reviewed the colonists' records from birth, and compared
them in endless combinations. Jaimie came into the discussion to show
what the status of the colonies had been at the time each colonist had
resigned: what diseases had been encountered when one man quit; how much
jungle had been cleared before another did.

Files came and went in a continuous flux; coffee and sandwiches came and
grew cold and stale. The air became gray with smoke.

Nothing.

The same results had come out of every investigation: You needed a man
who was unstable to get him to leave Earth. You needed a man who was
stable to have him stay on Venus. You needed initiative and
resourcefulness to survive on a new planet. You needed a man who had so
little initiative and resourcefulness that the competition on Earth
wouldn't be profitable. You needed a young, healthy, vigorous specimen.
You needed an older, experienced, more mature person.

You needed A and you needed non-A.

And even if you found people with the factors balanced just right,
assuming you knew what the balance should be, where did you find five
hundred of them?

The discussion went on. The solutions got wilder and more absurd. Take
whole orphan asylums and bring them up on Venus under military guard.
Build a development in the steamiest, nastiest jungle, and test recruits
for the colony there. Send African natives.

The men were beginning to make the whole thing look impossible again, so
Rod decided to call a halt until they could get a better perspective.
Tired himself, he dismissed them. They left quietly, not arguing in
little groups or mumbling half-formed ideas to themselves, the way a
team that has been progressing will do.

       *       *       *       *       *

Only Jaimie stayed. He remained sitting hunched up near the desk, in the
same position he'd held for the last hour. When the others had all left,
he grinned at Rod.

"You know, for a group of practicing psychologists, this is the softest
bunch of suckers I've seen."

"You've proved that to your own profit several times so far," Rod
answered, rubbing his face as though smoothing the wrinkles could remove
the tension. "Who have you robbed lately?"

"I'm talking about your performance just now. Here comes the whole crew,
walking in with their heads hanging to the floor. Every last man was
ready to tell you he was quitting--that the problem was insoluble. And
before anyone can say a word, you tell them that the whole thing is
impossible and imply that _you_ want to quit. Even Biddington fell for
it. You can't back out now, Rod, they say. Let's not have defeatist talk
out of you, of all people--"

"I did feel that way," Rod said. "I'm just about ready to quit. I think
that whatever our mistake has been, we can't do any better than we have.
We just don't know enough."

Jaimie wasn't grinning now. "What will happen if you quit?"

"My guess is that Carlson will set up a military outpost there. Make a
clearing, build a fort, maybe a town. Then he'll try to get people to
come and live in it." Rod sighed. "It won't work. They'll want to know
why the planet had to be colonized that way--why wouldn't the _first_
colonists stay?"

"I agree. The military outpost is a fine method for spreading a culture
to an existing civilization. Rome did much for Europe that way; the most
powerful cities sprang up near the Roman forts and roads. But as a
method for inducing the populace to a new place, it doesn't work. A free
people will not willingly move into a military township." Jaimie looked
sharply at Rod. "So what do you intend to do--run out and turn it all
over to Carlson?"

"I don't know, Jaimie. I just don't know. Six years is a long time."

"Damn it, Rod, you had much worse jobs than this one in industry! How
did you select a computer man, a communications man, an engineering
physicist, out of a group of men with similar backgrounds? It seems to
me a harder problem than this."

"We don't really know much, as I said," Rod said. "Ours has often been
an imitation science. When we had to select a computer man, we just gave
a battery of tests to successful computer men--structural vision,
vocabulary, tri-dimensional memory, ink-blots, syllogisms, practically
everything. Then we weeded out the tests whose scores appeared to have
no statistical relevance. Any future computer man had to duplicate those
results, whatever they were. If we had a recently pioneered civilization
around, Jaimie, you'd find this whole staff running through it like
pollsters before an election."

"What was all this talk about balance, instability, initiative and all
the rest?" asked Jamie.

"That's what we do when we don't know, Jaimie. We try to predict what we
need; then we try to find ways of finding it in people."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jaimie made an explosive sound. "But I thought you _must_ have
progressed from empirical methods! I would have said something long ago,
if I hadn't thought you knew what you were doing all the time!" The
historian was on his feet, stalking about the room. "Why didn't you tell
me about this before?"

"Why? What difference would it have made?" Rod frowned, failing to
understand the other's excitement. "Sure, we've progressed from the
older methods, in that we now have pretty complete data for all present
job descriptions. And we can synthesize data for a new job, if it's not
too different. But there isn't any information on the kind of person
needed in a new world. What the devil are you getting so upset about?"

The historian threw himself into a chair and glared at Rod. "If you
couldn't find the kind of people you needed to test, you could have
asked a historian if he knew anything about them!"

Rod shook his head puzzledly. "Subjective data, such as that--"

"Don't bring subjectivity into this, damn it! We get enough of that from
physical scientists." Jaimie held himself in the chair, almost shaking
with the intensity of his feeling. "Look, Rod, you know I want to see
the project succeed. And you admit that you haven't got an answer. Well,
baby, I think I have! It's an idea that has about a fifty-fifty chance
of being right in this case ... would you be willing to try it?"

"If I had been betting on your side for the last few months, I'd be
several dollars richer," Rod smiled. "Yes, I think I might go along with
your idea, if you can convince me it has an even chance for success.
Three failures out of three tries makes for poorer odds than that. What
do you have in mind?"

"H'm," Jaimie said. "I imagine your stock isn't so high with old
scabbard and blade right now, is it?"

Rod laughed. "I don't think he'll shoot on sight, but I'm not positive
enough to stand in front of a lighted window."

"Well, then--if I had an idea you agreed with, the surest way to kill it
would be to have you present it to him, right? And if you _fight_ it,
that's sure to convince Carlson!" Jaimie thought hard for a moment,
tapping the chair-arm. "Rod, I have to do something you aren't going to
like. Do you trust me?"

"You mean you're going to try this without even discussing it with the
personnel group?"

"That's right. If I don't tell you what I'm doing, I know you'll fight
it. And I'll need that kind of help from you to push Carlson into doing
it.

"But I have to do something far worse than that, Rod. I'm going to tell
the general that you knew my plan from the start, and have been sitting
on it because I'm not a psychologist. I'm going to ruin your reputation
with the worst set of lies since the Red purges. I'll say you're
fighting me, because you can't accept an idea that came from a man
outside of your own group. If the scheme doesn't work you'll be ruined,
because there'll be no way to retract the lies. If it does work, we can
announce that we put on an act to sell the plan to Carlson. Can you take
it?"

Rod was thoughtful for a few minutes. He liked and trusted Jaimie, but
the man had no experience in this field--and this sounded like an
all-or-nothing shot.

Then he remembered his despair over the latest set of resignations. He'd
been ready to quit--he had nothing to offer, and neither did his men.
Even a wild idea was worth a try, he thought grimly--he would be risking
nothing but a plan that had already failed.

"Go to it, boy," he said. "And if you need a fight, you'll get a damn
good one."

       *       *       *       *       *

The fight with Carlson was short, and Rod was abruptly overruled. After
that Jaimie moved fast. The new colonists flocked in. Three months after
Rod's talk with him, the compounds started to fill. A shipload was a
hundred men, and each new man had to wait in a group until it was
filled. But there was no waiting now except for processing; the
compounds were full before the ships were ready.

Rod had paid no attention to Jaimie's recruiting methods, thinking that
the historian's idea differed mainly in control over the colonists.

Until he saw the crowds.

Even from a distance, they didn't have the young look of the previous
groups. Up close, they looked like the sweepings of the slums.

[Illustration]

He and Biddington talked to a few before they fully realized what Jaimie
had done. All the men were sure that Venus was a mineral paradise--gold
in the streams, uranium lodes so pure you had to wear a shield to get
near them, diamonds, silver--every treasure that had ever excited men on
Earth was scattered around the new world waiting to be picked up. That
was what Jaimie had told them.

Rod got to a phone, fast.

"Jaimie, you fool! I know what you're doing, and I won't put up with it!
You've told these dupes they can get rich on Venus! You intended to
attract large numbers of recruits, in the hope that some of them will be
what we need--but look at what you attracted! Crooks, gangsters, bums,
hoboes, sharecroppers and I don't know what. You got recruits all
right ... but what the hell kind of a society are you going to start
with them! And who will go and live there among them later?"

"What's the matter, Workham?" Jaimie asked coldly. "Are you a racial
purist? Want only your kind of people to get to Venus?"

"I don't care _who_ goes, as long as they fit some standards. But to
make a decent place, you need decent people--morally clean and healthy.
Not this collection of mental cripples, alcoholics and thieves. Probably
half of them are wanted men!"

He argued further, unable to believe that this was Jaimison's great
fifty-fifty chance. He said many things ... and regretted every one; for
that night the telecasts carried a recorded version of his outburst.
Jaimie had maneuvered him into saying things he didn't quite mean, so
that it looked as if he was trying to hide the all good things on Venus
and save them for his own friends. One commentator said outright that if
you weren't a college graduate recommended by one of Workham's friends,
it would cost you a thousand dollars to get on an outgoing ship. By the
next morning, half the papers in the world were after Workham's scalp.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rod could only take the abuse and grind his teeth. How did you fight a
thing like that? You were condemned if you kept silent, and if you
answered, people nodded their heads and said, "See--he's still trying to
deny it."

The failures from the old colonies were Rod's only allies. They tried to
tell people what Venus was like, and what lies Carlson and his stooge
Jaimison were using for bait. But it was pointed out that these men
naturally had a stake in the secret ... and, after all, everyone knew
how well off the returning colonists were! This was actually due to the
high premium paid to get men to go to the planet, but no one believed.

Days passed. Weeks. The compounds filled, and emptied, and filled again.
People stood in lines to apply. They walked miles to appear at a
recruiting center. They fought for a place on the next ship, or the one
after that. Farmers, clerks, ragged families, hoboes, armed men,
teen-age boys and old men. Four thousand people applied in the first few
months and were shipped out. Then the crowds thinned, even though the
Get Rich propaganda continued. Soon, only a few hundred appeared where
there had been thousands; then twos and threes; at last only a dozen or
so a day, many of whom changed their minds before the full shipload had
been assembled.

Rod clung to his job throughout. He had little to do, though his
department had never been formally discontinued. Sooner or later, he
knew, their services would be needed--when this cheap trick had failed.
So he and his staff remained. Studying old files, making up test
batteries, discussing survival factors, they readied themselves for the
project again. From time to time they interviewed and tested a few of
those waiting in the compounds. There was too much time to just sit
around--even this activity was a welcome diversion.

As the year passed, the number of prospective colonists stopped
decreasing and held steady at about five a day. But slowly something
else changed. Among the new arrivals there began to appear engineers who
had tossed up good jobs to emigrate, farmers with their families,
school-teachers, storekeepers, lawyers, even doctors. All of them young.
Not in any great number; but their appearance was a surprise still. Then
there came two former colonists who had resigned on one of the earlier
attempts, now trying to get back to Venus without inducement of bonus,
high pay or guaranteed return.

That was the day Rod decided to call on Jaimie.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have here a bottle of eight-year-old rye, Jaimie," he began. "I think
you're entitled to a drink, and I'm entitled to an explanation. Want to
swap?"

"Rod!" Jaimie's bony face lit up. "It's good to see you. I've been
afraid to call you until we could admit to the hoax. Come in, come in."

"Well, you did it," Rod said, after they had settled down. "I met two
former colonists in the compound today. They know there isn't gold on
Venus, and still they want to go out for free. No contract. And lately
we've been getting professional people. There was even a kid fresh out
of journalism school who wants to start up a paper. Jaimie, how did you
do it? Were we so far wrong as that?"

"You did it yourself, Rod. You told me how--but you wouldn't have
believed, then. Or if you had, we never would have sold it to Carlson.
Remember, you said if there were only a recent pioneer civilization
around, you'd run to them with ink-blots and vocabulary tests? All you
needed to do was duplicate the kind of person who settled America or
Australia or California.

"Well, as a historian I _knew_ those people. And I knew what brought
them. So I merely put out the same kind of bait."

"The same kind of bait!" Rod exclaimed. "What about freedom of religion
and freedom from oppression? Isn't that what brought people to this
country? There's no oppression to flee from these days! And even if it
was the same bait, why weren't the same kind of people attracted? You
saw that first compound full--where in that cesspool was Thomas Paine,
or Franklin, or Miles Standish?"

"Franklin was born here," Jaimie grinned. "Paine didn't come over in the
first wave. And I suppose General Carlson was Miles Standish. Maybe that
kid journalist you saw was Paine's counterpart. No, Rod--the bait I held
out attracted the same kind of people initially as it always has. You
have been compromising all along on the factors you really wanted in
order to get young, healthy, moral people to Venus. The answer is simply
this: Pioneers are not necessarily young, healthy, or moral. So you
didn't get what you wanted.

"You see, America wasn't only founded by pilgrims. They were actually a
minority here. We were settled by promoters, trappers, bonded servants,
exiled British deportees, pickpockets and thieves. We were explored by
French and Spanish pirates. The better element in Europe didn't come
here at first--why should they? It was dangerous. Pioneering was to the
advantage of the worst elements. They came by court order, out of
necessity, for adventure. They came for gold more than for freedom; for
a new chance more than for a new religion.

"Australia was set up as a penal colony. Others went there for gold, or
to start over where they weren't known. That's the kind of person who
settles a new land--the misfits: too impulsive, drunkards, weaklings,
convicts, and fugitives from justice. Too sick in mind and body to make
a go of it where they are.

"So we announced that there was a brand new world with a new chance for
everyone on it. We implied that there was wealth. We told them
everything about Venus that brought the English to America, the Spanish
to South America, the Easterners to the West, and the Middlewesterners
to California. We didn't hunt for pioneers. They came to us."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rod refilled his glass thoughtfully. "But what kind of a society will
men like that create? A fighting, lawless structure...."

"That's right. And the lawless will eliminate themselves by their very
activities. Like the early West. While the doctors come in to treat
wounds, and the lawyers to plead their cases; while their wives and the
other wives will start schools and bring in school-teachers. That
society will purge itself, Rod--many of the worst will become good
citizens out of meeting the challenge of a new planet, and the rest will
disappear."

"Well, then, what about the gold story?" Rod asked. "Won't they be angry
with everyone connected with the project because of the hoax?"

"That was a little raw, but no worse than other gold rushes--few of the
stampeders ever found the gold they went after. The captain of one of
the rockets told me that the first few months the colonists were trying
to stow away on the returning ships. Now they send messages to friends
and relatives to come before the opportunity is gone--that's why you've
seen this better element. Our lies will soon be forgotten, and crops and
foods and minerals will be coming from Venus, and better people will go
to meet the diminished challenge on our brave new world."

Rod stood up. "Well, my compliments for a job well done, Jaimie. When do
you expect to go and live there yourself? You'll have to soon, won't
you, to complete the Project Record in residence?"

Jaimie nodded. "About six months from now, I think. Why?"

"Good," Rod exclaimed. "We can all go together."

"What are you planning to do? Volunteer?"

"The whole personnel staff will be going. Here's just what we need--a
young pioneer society! We can get adequate data for future selection, a
better idea of what kind of person a colony needs at different stages of
growth." Rod grinned. "After all, your method was pretty sloppy, even if
it did work. And you sent far too many wrong people. Once we have some
good data ... anything you can do, we can do better!"






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Merchants of Venus, by A. H. Phelps

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MERCHANTS OF VENUS ***

***** This file should be named 32901.txt or 32901.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/9/0/32901/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
