The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Marvelous Exploits of Paul Bunyan, by W.
B. Laughead


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Marvelous Exploits of Paul Bunyan
       As Told in the Camps of the White Pine Lumbermen for Generations During Which Time the Loggers Have Pioneered the Way Through the North Woods from Maine to California; Collected from Various Sources and Embellished for Publication


Author: W. B. Laughead



Release Date: June 28, 2010  [eBook #32994]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARVELOUS EXPLOITS OF PAUL
BUNYAN***


E-text prepared by David Edwards, Ernest Schaal, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from scanned
images of public domain material generously made available by Microsoft's
Live Search Books



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 32994-h.htm or 32994-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32994/32994-h/32994-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32994/32994-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages were available through the
      Microsoft Search Book project, which was discontinued by
      Microsoft in 2008. These images, or a remarkably similar
      set, are now available though Internet Archive. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/marvelousexploit00laugiala


Transcriber's note:

      This book has no table of contents, since it has no chapters.
      It has no list of illustrations, since most of the
      illustrations lacked captions. Instead, it is a book of short
      stories about Paul Bunyan, which is part advertising for a
      lumber company and part stories of "America's only myth."

      Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

      A detailed list of corrections is at the end of the e-book.





[Illustration: PAUL BUNYAN AND HIS BIG BLUE OX (book cover)]


_The Marvelous Exploits of_

PAUL BUNYAN

AS TOLD IN THE CAMPS
OF THE WHITE PINE LUMBERMEN FOR
GENERATIONS

DURING WHICH TIME THE LOGGERS
HAVE PIONEERED THE WAY THROUGH
THE NORTH WOODS
FROM MAINE TO CALIFORNIA

_Collected from Various Sources and
Embellished for Publication_

[Illustration]

Text and Illustrations
By
W. B. Laughead


_Published for the Amusement
of our Friends by_

The RED RIVER LUMBER COMPANY
MINNEAPOLIS, WESTWOOD, CAL., CHICAGO,
LOS ANGELES-:-SAN FRANCISCO

_NINETEEN TWENTY-TWO_


PAUL Bunyan is the hero of lumbercamp whoppers that have been handed
down for generations. These stories, never heard outside the haunts of
the lumberjack until recent years, are now being collected by learned
educators and literary authorities who declare that Paul Bunyan is "the
only American myth."

The best authorities never recounted Paul Bunyan's exploits in narrative
form. They made their statements more impressive by dropping them
casually, in an off hand way, as if in reference to actual events of
common knowledge. To over awe the greenhorn in the bunkshanty, or the
paper-collar stiffs and home guards in the saloons, a group of
lumberjacks would remember meeting each other in the camps of Paul
Bunyan. With painful accuracy they established the exact time and place,
"on the Big Onion the winter of the blue snow" or "at Shot Gunderson's
camp on the Tadpole the year of the sourdough drive." They elaborated on
the old themes and new stories were born in lying contests where the
heights of extemporaneous invention were reached.

In these conversations the lumberjack often took on the mannerisms of
the French Canadian. This was apparently done without special intent and
no reason for it can be given except for a similarity in the mock
seriousness of their statements and the anti-climax of the bulls that
were made, with the braggadocio of the _habitant_. Some investigators
trace the origin of Paul Bunyan to Eastern Canada. Who can say?

[Illustration: _Logging Road near Westwood, California. White Pine and
Old Fashioned Winters made Paul Bunyan feel at home._]

       *       *       *       *       *

PAUL Bunyan came to Westwood, California in 1913 at the suggestion of
some of the most prominent loggers and lumbermen in the country. When
the Red River Lumber Company announced their plans for opening up their
forests of Sugar Pine and California White Pine, friendly advisors shook
their heads and said,

  "Better send for Paul Bunyan."

Apparently here was the job for a
Superman,--quality-and-quantity-production on a big scale and great
engineering difficulties to be overcome. Why not Paul Bunyan? This is a
White Pine job and here in the High Sierras the winter snows lie deep,
just like the country where Paul grew up. Here are trees that dwarf the
largest "cork pine" of the Lake States and many new stunts were planned
for logging, milling and manufacturing a product of supreme
quality--just the job for Paul Bunyan.

The Red River people had been cutting White Pine in Minnesota for two
generations; the crews that came west with them were old heads and every
one knew Paul Bunyan of old. Paul had followed the White Pine from the
Atlantic seaboard west to the jumping-off place in Minnesota, why not go
the rest of the way?

[Illustration: TRADE MARK REGISTERED]

Paul Bunyan's picture had never been published until he joined Red River
and this likeness, first issued in 1914, is now the Red River trademark.
It stands for the quality and service you have the right to expect from
Paul Bunyan.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHEN and where did this mythical hero get his start? Paul Bunyan is
known by his mighty works; his antecedents and personal history are lost
in doubt. You can prove that Paul logged off North Dakota and grubbed
the stumps, not only by the fact that there are no traces of pine
forests in that State, but by the testimony of oldtimers who saw it
done. On the other hand, Paul's parentage and birth date are unknown.
Like Topsy, he jes' growed.

Nobody cared to know his origin until the professors got after him. As
long as he stayed around the camps his previous history was treated with
the customary consideration and he was asked no questions, but when he
broke into college it was all off. Then he had to have ancestors, a
birthday and all sorts of vital statistics. For now Paul is recognized
as a regular Myth and students of folk-lore are making scientific
research of the Paul Bunyan Legend.

R. R. Fenska, Professor of Forest Engineering, New York State College of
Forestry, Syracuse University, an authority on Paul Bunyan, writes: "He
is not only an all-American myth but as far as can be determined, the
only myth or legend in this country. It is all-American because Paul's
exploits are all accomplished on this continent and there is no
counterpart in the Old World. The origin of Paul is as much a myth as
the legend itself. There are some who feel that he was known in the
Northeastern forest back in the early 19th century but the best
available evidence points to the pineries of the Lake States as the
"Mother" of Paul Bunyan. It is certain that he developed to the zenith
of his powers in that region during the '80s and '90s."

Professor Fenska points out that Paul was a "Northerner" for when the
virgin forests of the Lake States began to wane and the lumberjack
shifted to the Southern Yellow Pine region, little was heard of him for
nearly a decade. Noting his reappearance on the Pacific Coast, this
authority discounts the rumors that Paul has gone to Alaska and
expresses the opinion that his greatest exploits will take place in the
vast forests of the west.

Esther Shepherd, Department of English, Reed College, Portland, Oregon
has traced the Paul Bunyan legend back to Maine but finds evidence of
beginnings that antedate the Maine epoch and is still carrying on her
painstaking search for the ultimate source. Writing in the _Pacific
Review_, Mrs. Shepherd relates this one about Paul's babyhood.

"Paul Bunyan was born in Maine. When three weeks old he rolled around so
much in his sleep that he destroyed four square miles of standing
timber. Then they built a floating cradle for him and anchored it off
Eastport. When Paul rocked in his cradle it caused a seventy-five foot
tide in the Bay of Fundy and several villages were washed away. He
couldn't be wakened, however, until the British Navy was called out and
fired broadsides for seven hours. When Paul stepped out of his cradle he
sank seven warships and the British government seized his cradle and
used the timber to build seven more. That saved Nova Scotia from
becoming an island, but the tides in the Bay of Fundy haven't subsided
yet."

"Seeing that this North American Continent has only one myth that is
entirely it's own" J. M. Leever of the Pacific Lumber Company writes in
a San Francisco paper, "It is a pity that it should have been in danger
of being forgotten." After paying tribute to the work of Prof. Fenska
and the University of Oregon Mr. Leever continues, "Where the tradition
of this Davy Crockett of the axe, this superman of the camps originated,
nobody can tell exactly. But it is probable that the stories of his
courage and impossible feats started on the St. Lawrence among the
French Canadians and filtered into the woods of the Adirondacks,
Michigan and Wisconsin. Although at times very human, Paul Bunyan in his
bigger moments far surpassed any of the figures of classical
Scandinavian or Celtic legend. For the sake of the young of the land his
memory ought to be kept forever fresh."

[Illustration]

Lee J. Smits conducted a "Paul Bunyan" column in _The Seattle Star_ and
published many entertaining contributions from oldtimers. These were
turned over to the University of Washington for preservation.

"Standing alone in his might and inventiveness is Paul Bunyan, central
figure in America's meager folklore" Mr. Smits says editorially, "Only
among the pioneers could Paul thrive, his deeds are inspired by such
imagination as grows only in the great outdoors. For hours at a time,
lumberjacks will pile up the achievements of their hero. Each story is a
challenge calling for a yarn still more heroic. The story teller who
succeeds in eliciting a snicker is an artist, indeed, as the Paul Bunyan
legends must always be related and received with perfect seriousness.
Paul Bunyan has become a part of the every day life of the loggers. He
serves a valuable purpose in giving every hardship and tough problem its
whimsical turn."

Mr. Harry L. Neall, of Harry L. Neall & Son, Mining Engineers of Eureka,
Cal., a student of the history of the lumber industry, has written that
beneath the phrase "invented lumbering" used in connection with Paul
Bunyan, there exists a basis of fact. Tracing the beginnings of the
industry from the cutting of "The King's Spars" in what is now the State
of Maine, before the Mayflower came to Plymouth Rock, Mr. Neall states
that "modern lumbering, as a separate industry was really invented in
New York in 1790 and that most of the oldtime lumbermen trace their
ancestry to forefathers who were a part of this beginning of lumbering."
The Red River people were interested to learn from Mr. Neall that a
Walker built a mill in Maine in 1680; another Walker sold a two-thirds
interest in this mill in 1716 and three Walkers were saw mill owners in
New Hampshire in 1785. Following the Pine Cutters across New York and
Pennsylvania, Mr. Neall found that the land records enable one to pick
them out by their names "as distinguished from the Palatinate settlers
who came solely for the farm lands upon which the hardwoods grew." That
the Paul Bunyan stories go back to the beginnings of the industry is the
belief of Mr. Neall who heard them in his grandfather's logging camps in
Pennsylvania and quotes this ancestor as connecting Paul with the early
traditions.

DeWitt L. Hardy, "column conductor" on the Portland _Oregonian_, ran a
Paul Bunyan series for several months and received many more
contributions than it was possible to print, though they were featured
almost daily, writes Mr. Hardy:

"Paul Bunyan is, as your folklore sharks doubtless will inform you,
about the only true fable of this character we have in this country. I
do not attempt to dip into any of the real sub-surface studies of its
development, my experience with Paul having been severely practical. I
first heard of him in a soddy in North Dakota, where I was told of his
great logging operations when he stripped that country and removed the
stumps. In the mass of correspondence I received while handling the Paul
Bunyan yarns here, answers came from all corners of the globe and from
all classes of people."

Ida V. Turney, Department of Rhetoric, University of Oregon, and
President of the Oregon Council of English, has written a chapbook of
Paul Bunyan stories,--"gang-lore" Miss Turney classifies them, citing
technical reasons why they cannot be called "myth" "legend" or
"folk-lore."

"It is distinctly American" she writes, "No other country could possibly
produce a literary type just like it; for it is, at least so I think, a
symbolic expression of the forces of physical labor at work in the
development of a great country. The symbolism is, of course,
unconscious, but none the less accurate."

Miss Turney, the daughter of a lumberman, has known these stories from
childhood. "All Paul Bunyan stories start in a gang" she says, "others
are imitations ... Perhaps Paul Bunyan is the great American epic; but
if so it is _in the making_. In that case it seems to me that any gang
has a perfect right to create new stories.... Paul has become
astonishingly versatile in the West. He has tried his hand at almost
everything, just as the former laborers in the camps of Michigan and
Wisconsin branched into whatever big wild untamed hard work they came
across."

       *       *       *       *       *

BABE, the big blue ox, constituted Paul Bunyan's assets and liabilities.
History disagrees as to when, where and how Paul first acquired this
bovine locomotive but his subsequent record is reliably established.
Babe could pull anything that had two ends to it.

[Illustration]

Babe was seven axehandles wide between the eyes according to some
authorities; others equally dependable say forty-two axehandles and a
plug of tobacco. Like other historical contradictions this comes from
using different standards. Seven of Paul's axehandles were equal to a
little more than forty-two of the ordinary kind.

When cost sheets were figured on Babe, Johnny Inkslinger found that
upkeep and overhead were expensive but the charges for operation and
depreciation were low and the efficiency was very high. How else could
Paul have hauled logs to the landing a whole section (640 acres) at a
time? He also used Babe to pull the kinks out of the crooked logging
roads and it was on a job of this kind that Babe pulled a chain of
three-inch links out into a straight bar.

They could never keep Babe more than one night at a camp for he would
eat in one day all the feed one crew could tote to camp in a year. For a
snack between meals he would eat fifty bales of hay, wire and all and
six men with picaroons were kept busy picking the wire out of his teeth.
Babe was a great pet and very docile as a general thing but he seemed to
have a sense of humor and frequently got into mischief. He would sneak
up behind a drive and drink all the water out of the river, leaving the
logs high and dry. It was impossible to build an ox-sling big enough to
hoist Babe off the ground for shoeing, but after they logged off Dakota
there was room for Babe to lie down for this operation.

Once in a while Babe would run away and be gone all day roaming all over
the Northwestern country. His tracks were so far apart that it was
impossible to follow him and so deep that a man falling into one could
only be hauled out with difficulty and a long rope. Once a settler and
his wife and baby fell into one of these tracks and the son got out when
he was fifty-seven years old and reported the accident. These tracks,
today form the thousands of lakes in the "Land of the Sky-Blue Water."

       *       *       *       *       *

BECAUSE he was so much younger than Babe and was brought to camp when a
small calf, Benny was always called the Little Blue Ox although he was
quite a chunk of an animal. Benny could not, or rather, would not haul
as much as Babe nor was he as tractable but he could eat more.

Paul got Benny for nothing from a farmer near Bangor, Maine. There was
not enough milk for the little fellow so he had to be weaned when three
days old. The farmer only had forty acres of hay and by the time Benny
was a week old he had to dispose of him for lack of food. The calf was
undernourished and only weighed two tons when Paul got him. Paul drove
from Bangor out to his headquarters camp near Devil's Lake, North Dakota
that night and led Benny behind the sleigh. Western air agreed with the
little calf and every time Paul looked back at him he was two feet
taller.

[Illustration]

When they arrived at camp Benny was given a good feed of buffalo milk
and flapjacks and put into a barn by himself. Next morning the barn was
gone. Later it was discovered on Benny's back as he scampered over the
clearings. He had outgrown his barn in one night.

[Illustration]

Benny was very notional and would never pull a load unless there was
snow on the ground so after the spring thaws they had to white wash the
logging roads to fool him.

Gluttony killed Benny. He had a mania for pancakes and one cook crew of
two hundred men was kept busy making cakes for him. One night he pawed
and bellowed and threshed his tail about till the wind of it blew down
what pine Paul had left standing in Dakota. At breakfast time he broke
loose, tore down the cook shanty and began bolting pancakes. In his
greed he swallowed the red-hot stove. Indigestion set in and nothing
could save him. What disposition was made of his body is a matter of
dispute. One oldtimer claims that the outfit he works for bought a hind
quarter of the carcass in 1857 and made corned beef of it. He thinks
they have several carloads of it left.

Another authority states that the body of Benny was dragged to a safe
distance from the North Dakota camp and buried. When the earth was
shoveled back it made a mound that formed the Black Hills in South
Dakota.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE custodian and chaperon of Babe the Big Blue Ox was Brimstone Bill.
He knew all the tricks of that frisky giant before they happened.

[Illustration]

"I know oxen" the old bullwhacker used to say, "I've worked 'em and fed
'em and doctored 'em ever since the ox was invented. And Babe, I know
that pernicious old reptyle same as if I'd abeen through him with a
lantern."

Bill compiled "The Skinner's Dictionary", a hand book for teamsters, and
most of the terms used in directing draft animals (except mules)
originated with him. His early religious training accounts for the fact
that the technical language of the teamster contains so many names of
places and people spoken of in the Bible.

The buckskin harness used on Babe and Benny when the weather was rainy
was made by Brimstone Bill. When this harness got wet it would stretch
so much that the oxen could travel clear to the landing and the load
would not move from the skidway in the woods. Brimstone would fasten the
harness with an anchor Big Ole made for him and when the sun came out
and the harness shrunk the load would be pulled to the landing while
Bill and the oxen were busy at some other job.

The winter of the Blue Snow, the Pacific Ocean froze over and Bill kept
the oxen busy hauling regular white snow over from China. M. H. Keenan
can testify to the truth of this as he worked for Paul on the Big Onion
that winter. It must have been about this time that Bill made the first
ox yokes out of cranberry wood.

       *       *       *       *       *

FEEDING Paul Bunyan's crews was a complicated job. At no two camps were
conditions the same. The winter he logged off North Dakota he had 300
cooks making pancakes for the Seven Axemen and the little Chore-boy. At
headquarters on the Big Onion he had one cook and 462 cookees feeding a
crew so big that Paul himself never knew within several hundred either
way, how many men he had.

[Illustration]

At Big Onion camp there was a lot of mechanical equipment and the
trouble was a man who could handle the machinery cooked just like a
machinist too. One cook got lost between the flour bin and the root
cellar and nearly starved to death before he was found.

Cooks came and went. Some were good and others just able to get by. Paul
never kept a poor one, very long. There was one jigger who seemed to
have learned to do nothing but boil. He made soup out of everything and
did most of his work with a dipper. When the big tote-sled broke through
the ice on Bull Frog Lake with a load of split peas, he served warmed up
lake water till the crew struck. His idea of a lunch box was a jug or a
rope to freeze soup onto like a candle. Some cooks used too much grease.
It was said of one of these that he had to wear calked shoes to keep
from sliding out of the cook-shanty and rub sand on his hands when he
picked anything up.

There are two kinds of camp cooks, the Baking Powder Bums and the
Sourdough Stiffs. Sourdough Sam belonged to the latter school. He made
everything but coffee out of Sourdough. He had only one arm and one leg,
the other members having been lost when his sourdough barrel blew up.
Sam officiated at Tadpole River headquarters, the winter Shot Gunderson
took charge.

After all others had failed at Big Onion camp, Paul hired his cousin Big
Joe who came from three weeks below Quebec. This boy sure put a mean
scald on the chuck. He was the only man who could make pancakes fast
enough to feed the crew. He had Big Ole, the blacksmith make him a
griddle that was so big you couldn't see across it when the steam was
thick. The batter, stirred in drums like concrete mixers, was poured on
with cranes and spouts. The griddle was greased by colored boys who
skated over the surface with hams tied to their feet. They had to have
colored boys to stand the heat.

At this camp the flunkeys wore roller skates and an idea of the size of
the tables is gained from the fact that they distributed the pepper with
four-horse teams.

Sending out lunch and timing the meals was rendered difficult by the
size of the works which required three crews--one going to work, one on
the job and one coming back. Joe had to start the bull-cook out with the
lunch sled two weeks ahead of dinner time. To call the men who came in
at noon was another problem. Big Ole made a dinner horn so big that no
one could blow it but Big Joe or Paul himself. The first time Joe blew
it he blew down ten acres of pine. The Red River people wouldn't stand
for that so the next time he blew straight up but this caused severe
cyclones and storms at sea so Paul had to junk the horn and ship it East
where later it was made into a tin roof for a big Union Depot.

[Illustration: _MT. LASSEN, CALIFORNIA

The only active Volcano in America. Where Big Joe cooks the beans._]

When Big Joe came to Westwood with Paul, he started something. About
that time you may have read in the papers about a volcanic eruption at
Mt. Lassen, heretofore extinct for many years. That was where Big Joe
dug his bean-hole and when the steam worked out of the bean kettle and
up through the ground, everyone thought the old hill had turned volcano.
Every time Joe drops a biscuit they talk of earthquakes.

[Illustration]

It was always thought that the quality of the food at Paul's Camps had a
lot to do with the strength and endurance of the men. No doubt it did,
but they were a husky lot to start with. As the feller said about fish
for a brain food, "It won't do you no good unless there is a germ there
to start with."

There must have been something to the food theory for the chipmunks that
ate the prune pits got so big they killed all the wolves and years later
the settlers shot them for tigers.

A visitor at one of Paul's camps was astonished to see a crew of men
unloading four-horse logging sleds at the cook shanty. They appeared to
be rolling logs into a trap door from which poured clouds of steam.

"That's a heck of a place to land logs" he remarked.

"Them aint logs" grinned a bull-cook "them's sausages for the teamsters'
breakfast."

At Paul's camp up where the little Gimlet empties into the Big Auger,
newcomers used to kick because they were never served beans. The bosses
and the men could never be interested in beans. E. E. Terrill tells us
the reason:

Once when the cook quit they had to detail a substitute to the job
temporarily. There was one man who was no good anywhere. He had failed
at every job. Chris Crosshaul, the foreman, acting on the theory that
every man is good _somewhere_, figured that this guy must be a cook, for
it was the only job he had not tried. So he was put to work and the
first thing he tackled was beans. He filled up a big kettle with beans
and added some water. When the heat took hold the beans swelled up till
they lifted off the roof and bulged out the walls. There was no way to
get into the place to cook anything else, so the whole crew turned in to
eat up the half cooked beans. By keeping at it steady they cleaned them
up in a week and rescued the would-be-cook. After that no one seemed to
care much for beans.

[Illustration]

It used to be a big job to haul prune pits and coffee grounds away from
Paul's camps. It required a big crew of men and either Babe or Benny to
do the hauling. Finally Paul decided it was cheaper to build new camps
and move every month.

The winter Paul logged off North Dakota with the Seven Axemen, the
Little Chore Boy and the 300 cooks, he worked the cooks in three
shifts--one for each meal. The Seven Axemen were hearty eaters; a
portion of bacon was one side of a 1600-pound pig. Paul shipped a
stern-wheel steamboat up Red River and they put it in the soup kettle to
stir the soup.

Like other artists, cooks are temperamental and some of them are full of
cussedness but the only ones who could sass Paul Bunyan and get away
with it were the stars like Big Joe and Sourdough Sam.

[Illustration]

The lunch sled,--most popular institution in the lumber industry! It's
arrival at the noon rendezvous has been hailed with joy by hungry men on
every logging job since Paul invented it. What if the warm food freezes
on your tin plate, the keen cold air has sharpened your appetite to
enjoy it. The crew that toted lunch for Paul Bunyan had so far to travel
and so many to feed they hauled a complete kitchen on the lunch sled,
cooks and all.

       *       *       *       *       *

OVER thirty years ago The Red River Lumber Company, foreseeing the end
of their White Pine which was reached in 1915, set out to find the pine
that would supply a trade that demands the qualities found in White
Pine. All the forests of North America were examined and exhaustively
studied and the selection was Sugar Pine and California White
Pine,--"the largest pines that ever grew" and production started at
Westwood in 1914.

[Illustration]

SUGAR PINE,--"cork pine's big brother," is botanically a White Pine with
all the family virtues that have made White Pine the standard from the
days of the Pilgrim Fathers to the period of "cork" White Pine in the
Lake States. It is light, soft, even-textured, easy-to-work, durable and
will not warp or check.

CALIFORNIA WHITE PINE ranks second only to Sugar Pine in size and is
close to it in White Pine qualities. Botanically a Yellow Pine, its
texture has been so changed by climate and altitude that it in no way
resembles the Yellow Pines and is so much like White Pine that its trade
name is necessary to prevent confusion on the part of the consumer.

WHITE FIR is light, straight grained and easily worked. A smaller
percentage of upper grades than the big pines, but with knots so small
that the commons offer exceptional values and advantages. It is used for
concrete forms, sheathing, studding and for dairy containers and
packages that must be odorless and tasteless. It also makes a handsome
interior finish.

INCENSE CEDAR is used chiefly for pencils and chests--a soft,
straight-grained red cedar.

The Red River people strive for a quality of manufacture worthy of such
magnificent trees. The Westwood plant, electrically operated throughout,
is a new departure in its field, with a capacity of 200 million feet a
year. Planned by our own engineers, much of the machinery and equipment
is of our own design and new standards of efficiency, economy and
precision of cutting have been set. Modern dry-kilns handle a large
part of the output and yield perfectly seasoned lumber, free from drying
defects, in a few days instead of the months required for air drying.

[Illustration: _One of the Westwood Crane Crews Piling Lumber for
Air-drying. One board at a Time is Too Slow. The Record for One
Crane--10 Hours is 678,900 Feet, Board Measure._]

The plant operates the year 'round, logging, sawing, manufacturing and
shipping. Handicaps of a severe winter climate are overcome and frozen
logs are thawed in a steam-heated pond. Continuous operation gives
steady employment to skilled and experienced men and a rapid replacement
of stocks that makes Westwood a dependable source of supply for the
trade.

The large Red River factories at Westwood are equipped to supply every
known need of the trade and made-to-order specialties are quickly turned
out. The most modern machinery is used for cutting, finishing, glueing
and other operations.

Our moldings, sash and doors and similar products are superior in their
clean-cut workmanship as well as the texture of the wood. Box shooks,
sash and door cuttings, boards for winding fine textiles or making organ
pipes, piano keys and key-beds, curtain poles and shade rollers are some
of our products. Cutting out the knots and waste at the source of supply
affords economies that are profitable to all wood consuming industries.

[Illustration: _One of the Edgers, Westwood Mill, California._]

       *       *       *       *       *

WHEN Paul invented logging he had to invent all the tools and figure out
all his own methods. There were no precedents. At the start his outfit
consisted of Babe and his big axe.

[Illustration]

No two logging jobs can be handled exactly the same way so Paul adapted
his operations to local conditions. In the mountains he used Babe to
pull the kinks out of the crooked logging roads; on the Big Onion he
began the system of hauling a section of land at a time to the landings
and in North Dakota he used the Seven Axemen.

At that time marking logs was not thought of, Paul had no need for
identification when there were no logs but his own. About the time he
started the Atlantic Ocean drive others had come into the industry and
although their combined cut was insignificant compared to Paul's, there
was danger of confusion, and Paul had most to lose.

At first Paul marked his logs by pinching a piece out of each log. When
his cut grew so large that the marking had to be detailed to the crews,
the "scalp" on each log was put on with an axe, for even in those days
not every man could nip out the chunk with his fingers.

The Grindstone was invented by Paul the winter he logged off North
Dakota. Before that Paul's axemen had to sharpen their axes by rolling
rocks down hill and running along side of them. When they got to "Big
Dick," as the lumberjacks called Dakota, hills and rocks were so hard to
find that Paul rigged up the revolving rock.

This was much appreciated by the Seven Axemen as it enabled them to
grind an axe in a week, but the grindstone was not much of a hit with
the Little Chore Boy whose job it was to turn it. The first stone was so
big that working at full speed, every time it turned around once it was
payday.

The Little Chore Boy led a strenuous life. He was only a kid and like
all youngsters putting in their first winter in the woods, he was put
over the jumps by the oldtimers. His regular work was heavy enough,
splitting all the wood for the camp, carrying water and packing lunch to
the men, but his hazers sent him on all kinds of wild goose errands to
all parts of the works, looking for a "left-handed peavy" or a "bundle
of cross-hauls."

[Illustration]

He had to take a lot of good natured roughneck wit about his size for he
only weighed 800 pounds and a couple of surcingles made a belt for him.
What he lacked in size he made up in grit and the men secretly respected
his gameness. They said he might make a pretty good man if he ever got
any growth, and considered it a necessary education to give him a lot of
extra chores.

[Illustration]

Often in the evening, after his day's work and long hours put in turning
the grindstone and keeping up fires in the camp stoves--that required
four cords of wood apiece to kindle a fire, he could be found with one
of Big Ole's small 600-pound anvils in his lap pegging up shoes with
railroad spikes.

It was a long time before they solved the problem of turning logging
sleds around in the road. When a sled returned from the landing and put
on a load they had to wait until Paul came along to pick up the four
horses and the load and head them the other way. Judson M. Goss says he
worked for Paul the winter he invented the round turn.

All of Paul's inventions were successful except when he decided to run
three ten-hour shifts a day and installed the Aurora Borealis. After a
number of trials the plan was abandoned because the lights were not
dependable.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE Seven Axemen of the Red River" they were called because they had a
camp on Red River with the three-hundred cooks and the Little Chore Boy.
The whole State was cut over from the one camp and the husky seven
chopped from dark to dark and walked to and from work.

[Illustration]

Their axes were so big it took a week to grind one of them. Each man had
three axes and two helpers to carry the spare axes to the river when
they got red hot from chopping. Even in those days they had to watch out
for forest fires. The axes were hung on long rope handles. Each axeman
would march through the timber whirling his axe around him till the hum
of it sounded like one of Paul's fore-and-aft-mosquitoes, and at every
step a quarter-section of timber was cut.

The height, weight and chest measurement of the Seven Axemen are not
known. Authorities differ. History agrees that they kept a cord of
four-foot wood on the table for toothpicks. After supper they would sit
on the deacon seat in the bunk shanty and sing "Shanty Boy" and "Bung
Yer Eye" till the folks in the settlements down on the Atlantic would
think another nor'wester was blowing up.

[Illustration]

Some say the Seven Axemen were Bay Chaleur men; others declare they were
all cousins and came from down Machias way. Where they came from or
where they went to blow their stake after leaving Paul's camp no one
knows but they are remembered as husky lads and good fellows around
camp.

[Illustration]

After the Seven Axemen had gone down the tote road, never to return,
Paul Bunyan was at a loss to find a method of cutting down trees that
would give him anything like the output he had been getting. Many trials
and experiments followed and then Paul invented the two-man saw.

The first saw was made from a strip trimmed off in making Big Joe's
dinner horn and was long enough to reach across a quarter section, for
Paul could never think in smaller units. This saw worked all right in a
level country, in spite of the fact that all the trees fell back on the
saw, but in rough country only the trees on the hill tops were cut.
Trees in the valleys were cut off in the tops and in the pot holes the
saw passed over the trees altogether.

It took a good man to pull this saw in heavy timber when Paul was
working on the other end. Paul used to say to his fellow sawyer, "I
don't care if you ride the saw, but please don't drag your feet." A
couple of cousins of Big Ole's were given the job and did so well that
ever afterward in the Lake States the saw crews have generally been
Scandinavians.

It was after this that Paul had Big Ole make the "Down-Cutter." This was
a rig like a mowing machine. They drove around eight townships and cut a
swath 500 feet wide.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE Winter of the Deep Snow everything was buried. Paul had to dig down
to find the tops of the tallest White Pines. He had the snow dug away
around them and lowered his sawyers down to the base of the trees. When
the tree was cut off he hauled it to the surface with a long parbuckle
chain to which Babe, mounted on snowshoes, was hitched. It was
impossible to get enough stove pipe to reach to the top of the snow, so
Paul had Big Ole make stovepipe by boring out logs with a long six-inch
auger.

[Illustration]

The year of the Two Winters they had winter all summer and then in the
fall it turned colder. One day Big Joe set the boiling coffeepot on the
stove and it froze so quick that the ice was hot. That was right after
Paul had built the Great Lakes and that winter they froze clear to the
bottom. They never would have thawed out if Paul had not chopped out the
ice and hauled it out on shore for the sun to melt. He finally got all
the ice thawed but he had to put in all new fish.

The next spring was the year the rain came up from China. It rained so
hard and so long that the grass was all washed out by the roots and Paul
had a great time feeding his cattle. Babe had to learn to eat pancakes
like Benny. That was the time Paul used the straw hats for an emergency
ration.

[Illustration]

When Paul's drive came down, folks in the settlements were astonished to
see all the river-pigs wearing huge straw hats. The reason for this was
soon apparent. When the fodder ran out every man was politely requested
to toss his hat into the ring. Hundreds of straw hats were used to make
a lunch for Babe.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

TALK about a job for Paul Bunyan! In 1913 the site of Westwood was
primeval forest, sixty mountainous miles from the nearest railroad.
Tractors, trucks and hundreds of horses freighted in materials before
the railroad was extended and when the future residents arrived the town
was complete to the last detail.

[Illustration]

Not a shack in the town. Modern houses, sanitary sewers, waterworks,
electricity, grade and high schools, hospital, church, clubs, up-to-date
department store, cafeteria, dairy, packing house, and cold storage,
theatre, soda fountains, garage and ball park--the 5,400 citizens of
Westwood enjoy comfortable homes, good schools, year 'round employment
at good wages, low living costs, and form one of the most-up-and-coming
communities in the progressive State of California.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

LUCY, Paul Bunyan's cow, was not, so far as we can learn, related in any
way to either Babe or Benny. Statements that she was their mother are
without basis in fact. The two oxen had been in Paul's possession for a
long time before Lucy arrived on the scene.

No reliable data can be found as to the pedigree of this remarkable
dairy animal. There are no official records of her butter-fat production
nor is it known where or how Paul got her.

Paul always said that Lucy was part Jersey and part wolf. Maybe so. Her
actions and methods of living seemed to justify the allegation of wolf
ancestry, for she had an insatiable appetite and a roving disposition.
Lucy ate everything in sight and could never be fed at the same camp
with Babe or Benny. In fact, they quit trying to feed her at all but let
her forage her own living. The Winter of the Deep Snow, when even the
tallest White Pines were buried, Brimstone Bill outfitted Lucy with a
set of Babe's old snowshoes and a pair of green goggles and turned her
out to graze on the snowdrifts. At first she had some trouble with the
new foot gear but once she learned to run them and shift gears without
wrecking herself, she answered the call of the limitless snow fields and
ran away all over North America until Paul decorated her with a bell
borrowed from a buried church.

[Illustration]

In spite of short rations she gave enough milk to keep six men busy
skimming the cream. If she had been kept in a barn and fed regularly she
might have made a milking record. When she fed on the evergreen trees
and her milk got so strong of White Pine and Balsam that the men used it
for cough medicine and linament, they quit serving the milk on the table
and made butter out of it. By using this butter to grease the logging
roads when the snow and ice thawed off, Paul was able to run his logging
sleds all summer.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE family life of Paul Bunyan, from all accounts, has been very happy.
A charming glimpse of Mrs. Bunyan is given by Mr. E. S. Shepard of
Rhinelander, Wis., who tells of working in Paul's camp on Round River in
'62, the Winter of the Black Snow. Paul put him wheeling prune pits away
from the cook camp. After he had worked at this job for three months
Paul had him haul them all back again as Mrs. Bunyan, who was cooking at
the camp, wanted to use them to make the hot fires necessary to cook her
famous soft nosed pancakes.

[Illustration]

Mrs. Bunyan, at this time used to call the men to dinner by blowing into
a woodpecker hole in an old hollow stub that stood near the door. In
this stub there was a nest of owls that had one short wing and flew in
circles. When Mr. Shepard made a sketch of Paul, Mrs. Bunyan, with
wifely solicitude for his appearance, parted Paul's hair with a handaxe
and combed it with an old crosscut saw.

From other sources we have fragmentary glimpses of Jean, Paul's youngest
son. When Jean was three weeks old he jumped from his cradle one night
and seizing an axe, chopped the four posts out from under his father's
bed. The incident greatly tickled Paul, who used to brag about it to any
one who would listen to him. "The boy is going to be a great logger some
day," he would declare with fatherly pride.

The last we heard of Jean he was working for a lumber outfit in the
South, lifting logging trains past one another on a single track
railroad.

       *       *       *       *       *

IT is no picnic to tackle the wilderness and turn the very forest itself
into a commercial commodity delivered at the market. A logger needs
plenty of brains and back bone.

[Illustration]

Paul Bunyan had his setbacks the same as every logger only his were
worse. Being a pioneer he had to invent all his stuff as he went along.
Many a time his plans were upset by the mistakes of some swivel-headed
strawboss or incompetent foreman. The winter of the blue snow, Shot
Gunderson had charge in the Big Tadpole River country. He landed all of
his logs in a lake and in the spring when ready to drive he boomed the
logs three times around the lake before he discovered there was no
outlet to it. High hills surrounded the lake and the drivable stream was
ten miles away. Apparently the logs were a total loss.

Then Paul came on the job himself and got busy. Calling in Sourdough
Sam, the cook who made everything but coffee out of sourdough, he
ordered him to mix enough sourdough to fill the big watertank. Hitching
Babe to the tank, he hauled it over and dumped it into the lake. When it
"riz", as Sam said, a mighty lava-like stream poured forth and carried
the logs over the hills to the river. There is a landlocked lake in
Northern Minnesota that is called "Sourdough Lake" to this day.

[Illustration]

Chris Crosshaul was a careless cuss. He took a big drive down the
Mississippi for Paul and when the logs were delivered in the New Orleans
boom it was found that he had driven the wrong logs. The owners looked
at the barkmarks and refused to accept them. It was up to Paul to drive
them back upstream.

No one but Paul Bunyan would ever tackle a job like that. To drive logs
upstream is impossible, but if you think a little thing like an
impossibility could stop him, you don't know Paul Bunyan. He simply fed
Babe a good big salt ration and drove him to the upper Mississippi to
drink. Babe drank the river dry and sucked all the water upstream. The
logs came up river faster than they went down.

       *       *       *       *       *

BIG Ole was the Blacksmith at Paul's headquarters camp on the Big Onion.
Ole had a cranky disposition but he was a skilled workman. No job in
iron or steel was too big or too difficult for him. One of the cooks
used to make doughnuts and have Ole punch the holes. He made the griddle
on which Big Joe cast his pancakes, and the dinner horn that blew down
ten acres of pine. Ole was the only man who could shoe Babe or Benny.
Every time he made a set of shoes for Babe they had to open up another
Minnesota iron mine. Ole once carried a pair of these shoes a mile and
sunk knee deep into solid rock at every step. Babe cast a shoe while
making a hard pull one day, and it was hurled for a mile and tore down
forty acres of pine and injured eight Swedes that were swamping out
skidways. Ole was also a mechanic and built the Downcutter, a rig like a
mowing machine that cut down a swath of trees 500 feet wide.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

IN the early days, whenever Paul Bunyan was broke between logging
seasons, he travelled around like other lumberjacks doing any kind of
pioneering work he could find. He showed up in Washington about the time
The Puget Construction Co. was building Puget Sound and Billy Puget was
making records moving dirt with droves of dirt throwing badgers. Paul
and Billy got into an argument over who had shovelled the most. Paul got
mad and said he'd show Billy Puget and started to throw the dirt back
again. Before Billy stopped him he had piled up the San Juan Islands.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHEN a man gets the reputation in the woods of being a "good man" it
refers only to physical prowess. Frequently he is challenged to fight by
"good men" from other communities.

[Illustration]

There was Pete Mufraw. "You know Joe Mufraw?" "Oui, two Joe Mufraw, one
named Pete." That's the fellow. After Pete had licked everybody between
Quebec and Bay Chaleur he started to look for Paul Bunyan. He bragged
all over the country that he had worn out six pair of shoe-pacs looking
for Paul. Finally he met up with him.

Paul was plowing with two yoke of steers and Pete Mufraw stopped at the
brush-fence to watch the plow cut its way right through rocks and
stumps. When they reached the end of the furrow Paul picked up the plow
and the oxen with one arm and turned them around. Pete took one look and
then wandered off down the trail muttering, "Hox an' hall! She's lift
hox an' hall."

       *       *       *       *       *

PAUL Bunyan started travelling before the steam cars were invented. He
developed his own means of transportation and the railroads have never
been able to catch up. Time is so valuable to Paul he has no time to
fool around at sixty miles an hour.

In the early days he rode on the back of Babe, the Big Blue Ox. This had
it's difficulties because he had to use a telescope to keep Babe's hind
legs in view and the hooves of the ox created such havoc that after the
settlements came into different parts of the country there were heavy
damage claims to settle every trip.

Snowshoes were useful in winter but one trip on the webs cured Paul of
depending upon them for transcontinental hikes. He started from
Minnesota for Westwood one Spring morning. There was still snow in the
woods so Paul wore his snowshoes. He soon ran out of the snow belt but
kept right on without reducing speed. Crossing the desert the heat
became oppressive, his mackinaws grew heavy and the snowshoes dragged
his feet but it was too late to turn back.

When he arrived in California he discovered that the sun and hot sand
had warped one of his shoes and pulled one foot out of line at every
step, so instead of travelling on a bee line and hitting Westwood
exactly, he came out at San Francisco. This made it necessary for him to
travel an extra three hundred miles north. It was late that night when
he pulled into Westwood and he had used up a whole day coming from
Minnesota.

Paul's fast foot work made him a "good man on the round stuff" and in
spite of his weight he had no trouble running around on the floating
logs, even the small ones. It was said that Paul could spin a log till
the bark came off and then run ashore on the bubbles. He once threw a
peavy handle into the Mississippi at St. Louis and standing on it, poled
up to Brainerd, Minnesota. Paul was a "white water bucko" and rode water
so rough it would tear an ordinary man in two to drink out of the river.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHNNY Inkslinger was Paul's headquarters clerk. He invented bookkeeping
about the time Paul invented logging. He was something of a genius and
perfected his own office appliances to increase efficiency. His fountain
pen was made by running a hose from a barrel of ink and with it he could
"daub out a walk" quicker than the recipient of the pay-off could tie
the knot in his tussick rope.

[Illustration]

One winter Johnny left off crossing the "t's" and dotting the "i's" and
saved nine barrels of ink. The lumberjacks accused him of using a split
pencil to charge up the tobacco and socks they bought at the wanagan but
this was just bunkshanty talk (is this the origin of the classic term
"the bunk"?) for Johnny never cheated anyone.

       *       *       *       *       *

HAVE you ever encountered the Mosquito of the North Country? You thought
they were pretty well developed animals with keen appetites didn't you?
Then you can appreciate what Paul Bunyan was up against when he was
surrounded by the vast swarms of the giant ancestors of the present race
of mosquitoes, getting their first taste of human victims. The present
mosquito is but a degenerate remnant of the species. Now they rarely
weigh more than a pound or measure more than fourteen or fifteen inches
from tip to tip.

Paul had to keep his men and oxen in the camps with doors and windows
barred. Men armed with pike-poles and axes fought off the insects that
tore the shakes off the roof in their efforts to gain entrance. The big
buck mosquitoes fought among themselves and trampled down the weaker
members of the swarm and to this alone Paul Bunyan and his crew owe
their lives.

Paul determined to conquer the mosquitoes before another season arrived.
He thought of the big Bumble Bees back home and sent for several yoke of
them. These, he hoped would destroy the mosquitoes. Sourdough Sam
brought out two pair of the bees, overland on foot. There was no other
way to travel for the flight of the beasts could not be controlled.
Their wings were strapped with surcingles, they checked their stingers
with Sam and walking shoes were provided for them. Sam brought them
through without losing a bee.

The cure was worse than the original trouble. The Mosquitoes and the
Bees made a hit with each other. They soon intermarried and their
off-spring, as often happens, were worse than their parents. They had
stingers fore-and-aft and could get you coming or going.

[Illustration]

Their bee blood caused their downfall in the long run. Their craving for
sweets could only be satisfied by sugar and molasses in large
quantities, for what is a flower to an insect with a ten-gallon stomach?
One day the whole tribe flew across Lake Superior to attack a fleet of
ships bringing sugar to Paul's camps. They destroyed the ships but ate
so much sugar they could not fly and all were drowned.

[Illustration]

One pair of the original bees were kept at headquarters camp and
provided honey for the pancakes for many years.

       *       *       *       *       *

IF Paul Bunyan did not invent Geography he created a lot of it. The
Great Lakes were first constructed to provide a water hole for Babe the
Big Blue Ox. Just what year this work was done is not known but they
were in use prior to the Year of the Two Winters.

The Winter Paul Bunyan logged off North Dakota he hauled water for his
ice roads from the Great Lakes. One day when Brimstone Bill had Babe
hitched to one of the old water tanks and was making his early morning
trip, the tank sprung a leak when they were half way across Minnesota.
Bill saved himself from drowning by climbing Babe's tail but all efforts
to patch up the tank were in vain so the old tank was abandoned and
replaced by one of the new ones. This was the beginning of the
Mississippi River and the truth of this is established by the fact that
the old Mississippi is still flowing.

The cook's in Paul's camps used a lot of water and to make things handy,
they used to dig wells near the cook shanty. At headquarters on the Big
Auger, on top of the hill near the mouth of the Little Gimlet, Paul dug
a well so deep that it took all day for the bucket to fall to the water,
and a week to haul it up. They had to run so many buckets that the well
was forty feet in diameter. It was shored up with tamarac poles and when
the camp was abandoned Paul pulled up this cribbing. Travellers who have
visited the spot say that the sand has blown away until 178 feet of the
well is sticking up into the air, forming a striking landmark.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT is camp without a dog? Paul Bunyan loved dogs as well as the next
man but never would have one around that could not earn its keep. Paul's
dogs had to work, hunt or catch rats. It took a good dog to kill the
rats and mice in Paul's camps for the rodents picked up scraps of the
buffalo milk pancakes and grew to be as big as two year old bears.

[Illustration]

Elmer, the moose terrier, practiced up on the rats when he was a small
pup and was soon able to catch a moose on the run and finish it with one
shake. Elmer loafed around the cook camp and if the meat supply happened
to run low the cook would put the dog out the door and say, "Bring in a
moose." Elmer would run into the timber, catch a moose and bring it in
and repeat the performance until, after a few minutes work, the cook
figured he had enough for a mess and would call the dog in.

Sport, the reversible dog, was really the best hunter. He was part wolf
and part elephant hound and was raised on bear milk. One night when
Sport was quite young, he was playing around in the horse barn and Paul,
mistaking him for a mouse, threw a hand axe at him. The axe cut the dog
in two but Paul, instantly realizing what had happened, quickly stuck
the two halves together, gave the pup first aid and bandaged him up.
With careful nursing the dog soon recovered and then it was seen that
Paul in his haste had twisted the two halves so that the hind legs
pointed straight up. This proved to be an advantage for the dog learned
to run on one pair of legs for a while and then flop over without loss
of speed and run on the other pair. Because of this he never tired and
anything he started after got caught. Sport never got his full growth.
While still a pup he broke through four feet of ice on Lake Superior and
was drowned.

As a hunter, Paul would make old Nimrod himself look like a city dude
lost from his guide. He was also a good fisherman. Oldtimers tell of
seeing Paul as a small boy, fishing off the Atlantic Coast. He would
sail out early in the morning in his three-mast schooner and wade back
before breakfast with his boat full of fish on his shoulder.

About this time he got his shot gun that required four dishpans full of
powder and a keg of spikes to load each barrel. With this gun he could
shoot geese so high in the air they would spoil before reaching the
ground.

Tracking was Paul's favorite sport and no trail was too old or too dim
for him to follow. He once came across the skeleton of a moose that had
died of old age and, just for curiosity, picked up the tracks of the
animal and spent the whole afternoon following its trail back to the
place where it was born.

[Illustration]

The shaggy dog that spent most of his time pretending to sleep in front
of Johnny Inkslinger's counter in the camp office was Fido, the watch
dog. Fido was the bug-bear (not bearer, just bear) of the greenhorns.
They were told that Paul starved Fido all winter and then, just before
payday, fed him all the swampers, barn boys and student bull-cooks. The
very marrow was frozen in their heads at the thought of being turned
into dog food. Their fears were groundless for Paul would never let a
dog go hungry or mistreat a human being. Fido was fed all the watch
peddlers, tailors' agents, and camp inspectors and thus served a very
useful purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHEN Paul Bunyan took up efficiency engineering he went at the job with
all his customary thoroughness. He did not fool around clocking the crew
with a stop watch, counting motions and deducting the ones used for
borrowing chews, going for drinks, dodging the boss and preparing for
quitting time. He decided to cut out labor altogether.

[Illustration: Paul Bunyan says: "I'm going to change "Babe's" name to
"Faith" since he moved the mountain."]

"What's the use," said Paul, "of all this sawing, swamping, skidding,
decking, grading and icing roads, loading, hauling and landing? The
object of the game is to get the trees to the landing, ain't it? Well,
why not do it and get it off your mind?"

So he hitched Babe to a section of land and snaked in the whole 640
acres at one drag. At the landing the trees were cut off just like
shearing a sheep and the denuded section hauled back to it's original
place. This simplified matters and made the work a lot easier. Six trips
a day, six days a week just cleaned up a township for section 37 was
never hauled back to the woods on Saturday night but was left on the
landing to wash away in the early spring when the drive went out.

Documentary evidence of the truth of this is offered by the United
States government surveys. Look at any map that shows the land
subdivisions and you will never find a township with more than
thirty-six sections.

[Illustration: Westwood, Cal. Dec. 32 (Special) Hauling in the last
section 37 in California today. Brimstone Bill, the bullwhacker in
charge of Babe, the Big Blue Ox, met with an accident that would have
been fatal but for the prompt action of Paul Bunyan. The section skidded
on a bad turn and buried Brimstone against the mountain side. Mr. Bunyan
hitched Babe to the mountain and pulled it away, releasing Brimstone who
is recovering in the Westwood Hospital.]

The foregoing statement, previously published, has caused some
controversy. Mr. T. S. Sowell of Miami, Florida wrote to us citing the
townships in his State that have sections numbered 37 to 40. He said
that the government survey had been complicated by the old Spanish land
grants. We put the matter up to Paul Bunyan and from his camp near
Westwood came this reply:

    Red River Advertising Department.


     Dear Sir: Yes sir, I remember those sections and a lot of
     bother they made me too. One winter when I was starting the
     White Pine business and snaking sections down to the Atlantic
     Ocean, a man from Florida came along and ordered a bunch of
     sections delivered down to his place. He wanted to see if he
     could grow the same kind of White Pine down there. I yarded out
     a nice bunch of sections and next summer when my drive was in
     and I wasn't busy I took a crew of Canada Boys and Mainites and
     poled them down the coast. When I come to collect they said
     this man was gone looking for a Fountain of Youth or some fool
     thing.

     I don't know what luck he had with his White Pine ranch. I
     never seen them again. I had a lot of other things to tend to
     and clean forgot it till you sent me Mr. Sowell's letter. Maybe
     that man was a Spaniard I don't know.

                                         Yours respectively,

                                                        P. BUNYAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM 1917 to 1920 Paul Bunyan was busy toting the supplies and building
camps for a bunch of husky young fellow-Americans who had a contract on
the other side of the Atlantic, showing a certain prominent European
(who is now logging in Holland) how they log in the United States.

After his service overseas with the A. E. F., Paul couldn't get back to
the States quick enough. Airplanes were too slow so Paul embarked in his
Bark Canoe, the one he used on the Big Onion the year he drove logs
upstream. When he threw the old paddle into high he sure rambled and the
sea was covered with dead fish that broke their backs trying to watch
him coming and going.

As he shoved off from France, Paul sent a wireless to New York but
passed the Statue of Liberty three lengths ahead of the message. From
New York to Westwood he travelled on skis. When the home folks asked him
if the Allegheney Mountains and the Rockies had bothered him, Paul
replied, "I didn't notice any mountains but the trail was a little bumpy
in a couple of spots."

       *       *       *       *       *

BACK in the early days, when his camps were so far from anywhere that
the wolves following the tote-teams got lost in the woods, Paul Bunyan
made no attempt to keep in touch with the trade. What's the use when
every letter that comes in is about things that happened the year
before?

Since he came to Westwood Paul has renewed old friendships, formed new
ones and kept close contact with the world. Everyone expects great
things of Paul Bunyan and with the Red River outfit back of him he has
the chance of his life to make good. Continuous production keeps a full
assortment of stock on hand. Customers in all parts of America find
Westwood a dependable source of supply.

Here is an instance. This old friend of Paul's, a prominent furniture
manufacturer in the Lake States, was disappointed because an item he
wanted for immediate shipment was not in stock in the grade and
thickness required. He wrote the letter shown below and was given an
explanation of the facts in the case in the accompanying reply.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

  PAUL
  BUNYAN'S
  PINE

  CALIFORNIA WHITE
  _And_ SUGAR PINES

"_Specified where economy is a vital factor, or where the best is used
regardless of cost._"

  WHITE FIR
  INCENSE CEDAR

[Illustration]

"_The old-fashioned White Pine our grandfathers used!_"

How often have you wished for it, the soft, even textured, easy-working
wood that took so well and weathered the years without a warp or a
check?


     Here it is, friends, better than ever,--clear plank 48 inches
     wide if you want them. Red River products excel in workmanship,
     precise cutting, perfect seasoning. YARD STOCKS, all items and
     grades, boards, dimension, moldings, lath and sidings. FACTORY
     LUMBER, sash and door cuttings and industrial cuttings for any
     requirement. BOX SHOOKS and crate stocks of every description.
     SASH AND DOORS, standard and made to order. PATTERN STOCK,
     large sizes, easy working, durable.

     Saving in working-up costs, by hand or machine; light weight
     and the superior quality,--grade for grade, make PAUL BUNYAN'S
     PINES the most profitable to buy, to work or to sell.
     Distributed to all parts of America and to foreign countries.


             _Largest Manufacturers of California Pines._

          "Producers of White Pine for over Half a Century."

                         The RED RIVER LUMBER CO.

                        T. B. WALKER, President.
    GILBERT M. WALKER, Vice President FLETCHER L. WALKER, Treasurer
      WILLIS J. WALKER, Vice President ARCHIE D. WALKER, Secretary

    Mills, Factories & Sales Office,
    R. F. Pray, Resident Mgr.
    WESTWOOD CALIF.

    General Office and Sales,
    807 Hennepin Ave.,
    MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.

    Yards and Sales Office,
    2452 Loomis St.,
    CHICAGO, ILL.

    Sales Office,
    307 Monadnock Bldg.,
    SAN FRANCISCO, CALIF.

    Sales Office,
    832 Union Oil Bldg.
    LOS ANGLES, CALIF.


         _Extra Copies of This Book Mailed Free Upon Request._




       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's note:

The use of "its" and "it's" has been preserved as in the original
publication.

Errors in punctuation were not corrected unless otherwise noted below:

List of Corrections:

On page 3, a comma was added after "1914".

On page 4, "siezed" was replaced with "seized".

On page 6, a comma was added after "Oregonian", a comma was added after
"Ida V. Turney", and series of three asterisks were replaced with
ellipses.

On page 7, a comma was added after "the big blue ox" and an extra period
at the end of the page was removed.

On page 11, a comma was added after "concrete mixers" and a period was
added after "Volcano in America".

On page 17, "regularwork" was replaced with "regular work".

On page 18, "for-and-aft" was replaced with "fore-and-aft".

On page 22, a comma was added after "Paul Bunyan's cow".

On page 23, a comma was added after "camp", a missing period was added
to "Mrs", and "siezing" was replaced with "seizing".

On page 24, "everything" was replaced with "everything".

On page 29, "cook's" was replaced with "cooks".

On page 30, a comma was added after "reversible dog".

On page 32, an open quotation mark was added before "of all".

On page 35, "Unoin Oil" was replaced with "Union Oil", "Los Angles" was
replaced with "Los Angeles", and the table at the bottom was reformatted
to fix the set page width



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARVELOUS EXPLOITS OF PAUL
BUNYAN***


******* This file should be named 32994.txt or 32994.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/2/9/9/32994



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

