Project Gutenberg's Premo Cameras, 1914., by Canadian Kodak Company

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Premo Cameras, 1914.

Author: Canadian Kodak Company

Release Date: June 30, 2010 [EBook #33034]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PREMO CAMERAS, 1914. ***




Produced by V. L. Simpson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)









  PREMO
  CAMERAS

  _1914_


  CANADIAN KODAK CO., Limited
  TORONTO, CANADA




FOR TOURISTS


Premo Cameras and Premo Film Packs may be obtained of practically every
photographic dealer in this country. They may be had also in any part of
the world in most photographic establishments, and always at the following
agencies:

LONDON--Kodak, Limited, Kingsway. W. C.; 60 Cheapside. E. C.; 115 Oxford
Street, W.; 171-173 Regent Street, W.; 59 Brompton Road, S. W.; 40 Strand,
W. C.; 1 and 2 Gracechurch St., E. C.

LIVERPOOL--Kodak, Limited, 96 Bold Street.

BIRMINGHAM--Kodak, Limited, 45 Corporation Street.

NEWCASTLE--Kodak, Limited, 34 Grainger Street.

DUBLIN--Kodak, Limited, 89 Grafton Street.

GLASGOW--Kodak, Limited, 72-74 Buchanan Street.

PARIS--Kodak, Societe Anonyme Francaise, Avenue de l'Opera 5; Place
Vendome 4; Boulevard des Italiens 9.

LYONS--Kodak, Societe Anonyme Francaise, Rue de la Republique 26.

LAUSANNE--Kodak, Societe Anonyme, Avenue du Tribunal Federal 13.

MADRID--Kodak Sociedad Anonima. 4 Puerta del Sol.

NICE--Kodak, Societe Anonyme Francaise, Avenue de la Gare 34.

BERLIN--Kodak Gesellschaft, m. b. H., Leipzigerstrasse 115-116; Unter den
Linden 26; Tauentzienstrasse 14.

BRUSSELS--Kodak, Limited, Rue de l'Ecuyer 36.

COPENHAGEN--Kodak Aktieselskab, Ostergade 1.

VIENNA--Kodak Gesellschaft, m. b. H., 1 Kaerntnerstrasse 16.

ST. PETERSBURG--Kodak, Limited. Bolschaia Konnuschenaia 19.

MOSCOW--Kodak Limited, Petrovka, 15. 16.

MILAN--Kodak Societa Anonima. Corso Vittorio Emanule 34.

ROME--Kodak Societa Anonima. Corso Umberto I. 399.

NAPLES--Kodak Societa Anonima, Via Roma 288.

VENICE--Kodak Societa Anonima, Piazza S. Marco 52.

BUDAPEST--Kodak tarsasag K. F. 4, Vaci-utca 9.

ALEXANDRIA--Kodak (Egypt) Societe Anonyme Rue Cherif Pacha 30.

CAIRO--Kodak (Egypt) S. A. Opera Square.

CAPETOWN--Kodak (S. Africa) Limited, 92-96 St. Georges St.

MELBOURNE--Kodak (Australasia) Ltd., 284 Collins Street.

SYDNEY--Kodak (Australasia) Ltd., 379 George Street.

BRISBANE--Kodak (Australasia) Ltd., 78 Queen Street.

ADELAIDE--Kodak (Australasia) Ltd., 97 Rundle Street.

WELLINGTON--Kodak (Australasia) Ltd., 9 Mercer Street.

BOMBAY--Kodak, Limited, Cook's Building, Hornby Road.




ALL YOU COULD WISH FOR


Ease of operation and convenience in carrying, lens and shutter equipment,
quality of results and price--these, together with unquestioned
reliability, are the factors which logically should determine the
selection of a camera in every case.

Anyone who contemplates the purchase of a camera, and who will make his
selection upon this basis will find in the Premo line all that he could
wish for.

The perfection of the daylight loading Premo Film Pack system has made the
Premo the simplest of all cameras to load and operate. (See description,
page 4). And the film pack takes up so little room that it is possible to
make the Premo Film cameras remarkably light and compact. There are some
that will go into even a boy's pocket or a lady's hand-bag.

Every Premo is fitted with a shutter of the most efficient type in its
particular grade, and all lenses, from the meniscus to the anastigmat, are
carefully tested by the highest standard and promptly rejected if they
fail to come to that standard.

With these selected optical equipments and the fact that Premo Film Pack
Film is taken from the same stock as the Eastman N. C. there can be no
question of the quality of results.

Premos are so simple in construction and so compact in form that they can
be furnished at very moderate prices, considering the quality which is
built into every Premo camera. For those who wish to invest very little in
a photographic outfit, there are thoroughly practical Premos at as small a
price as $1.50. On the other hand, for those who want the very best to the
last detail, there are Premos up to $150.00.

As for reliability, Premos are backed, not only by over thirty years of
manufacturing experience, but also by the Kodak policy of allowing nothing
to be placed on the market which will not do all that is claimed for it.

Step into the dealer's, examine these cameras for yourself and you will
find it very easy to make a selection of a Premo that will be all that you
could wish for in a camera.

  CANADIAN KODAK CO., Limited
  TORONTO, CANADA




THE PREMO FILM PACK


In our advertising, we often refer to Premos as being the smallest and
lightest, the easiest to load and operate of all cameras. This is true,
because the Premo Film Pack, with which most of our cameras are loaded,
requires very little space when in use and itself is constructed upon such
a simple, convenient principle.

[Illustration]

Packed flat, the Premo Film Pack can be loaded in Premo Film cameras by
two operations. Just open back of camera and drop in pack--then close back
and it's done. This is the easiest and quickest method of loading any
camera.

To prepare for the first exposure, simply pull out from the pack the paper
tab marked "Safety Cover." Then to change films for successive exposures,
merely pull out successive tabs. Upon pulling out the twelfth tab the pack
is rendered light-tight, so that it may be safely removed in any light.

With these advantages of easy loading and operating, the Premo Film Pack
has another most important one--the removal of one or more films for
development at any time.

[Illustration: Easy to Load.]

This feature is found in no other film system, and obviates the necessity
of exposing all the films before any can be developed.

And development has been made very simple. As we have said, anyone who
follows directions in our instruction books can make good exposures, and
if the exposures are right, development, heretofore, a bugbear to many
amateurs, is certain with the Premo Film Pack Tank.

All one has to do is to dissolve the developing powders in the tank, bring
the solution to the proper temperature and put in the films. See pages
34-35.




THE PREMO ADAPTER


With the introduction of the Premo Film Pack it was found that a simple
film pack holder or adapter, modeled upon the ordinary plate holder, would
make it a simple matter to load any Premo plate camera with film packs.

[Illustration: Premo Film Pack Adapter.]

The Premo Film Pack Adapter has the general size and appearance of a plate
holder. But it has a hinged back which can be easily opened, the film pack
dropped in place, back closed, and the adapter then loaded into the plate
camera just as an ordinary plate holder is.

To make exposures, the slide is withdrawn, the "safety cover" pulled out
and the film pack operated for successive exposures just as in film
cameras.

Then at any time the slide may be reinserted, the adapter removed and the
subject sharply focused on the ground glass by precisely the same method
you would follow in using glass plates.

Thus a Premo plate camera will take films or plates with equal facility;
it offers the daylight loading and other features of the Premo Film Pack,
as well as every advantage of the ordinary focusing camera; and many of
these Premos are as compact as purely film cameras.

With the Premo Film Pack Adapter, also, it is an easy matter to make
multiple pictures (two or more exposures) on one film.

[Illustration: The Adapter is loaded just like a Plate Holder.]

This is done by manipulating the slide in connection with the film pack
tab, and the procedure is fully explained in the Premo manuals.

For prices on Premo Film Packs and Adapters, see page 44.




KODAK BALL BEARING SHUTTERS


This shutter works automatically and operates with remarkable smoothness
and precision. The leaves are made in five segments, mounted entirely on
ball bearings, and open and close in the form of a star, admitting a much
greater amount of light in the same space of time than any other type of
shutter. All except the No. 0 have variable indicated speeds of 1/25, 1/50
and 1/100 second, operate for bulb or time exposures, and are fitted with
indicator for registering each exposure as made. The No. 0 is graduated
for speeds of 1/25 and 1/50, has no registering device and operates with
finger release only.

[Illustration]

The Kodak Ball Bearing Shutter is supplied with the Premoette Jr. No. 1A,
Film Premo No. 1, Pocket Premo C and Premo No. 8; the No. 0 size with
Premoette Jr. No. 1.


COMPOUND SHUTTER

The Compound Shutter is an automatic and setting shutter combined.
Automatically, either time or bulb exposures may be made, while it may be
set for speeds of from 1 to 1/150, 1/200 and 1/250 second, according to
size of shutter. The shutter leaves are formed of segments opening in star
shape, giving even illumination over the entire plate the instant the
exposure is started, and it has an iris diaphragm. Case is made of
aluminum, and accurate adjustments can be made with shutter in any
position. It may be operated by either bulb or finger release.

[Illustration]

The Compound Shutter is regularly supplied on the Premoette Jr. Specials
Nos. 1 and 1A, Filmplate Premo Special and Six-Three Premo Cameras.




KODAK AUTOMATIC SHUTTER AND KODAK AUTOTIME SCALE

The Kodak Automatic Shutter is carefully adjusted for time, bulb and
instantaneous exposures. It is also graduated for fractional parts of a
second, and is unusually accurate.

This shutter is regularly fitted with the Kodak Autotime Scale and is
supplied on the Filmplate and Premos Nos. 9 and 10. The Kodak Autotime
Scale greatly reduces the liability of error in exposure, as it
automatically indicates the proper time and stop opening for subjects
under any condition of outdoor photography. It is exceedingly simple to
use. The speed indicator is merely set at the point on the scale
indicating the kind of light prevailing and the diaphragm indicator at the
point indicating the character of the subject.

[Illustration]

These scales are also supplied for the following shutters when fitted with
double lenses only. They can be readily attached by any amateur. In
ordering always designate by Style letter as below.

Style A. For use with Kodak Ball Bearing shutter. 2-1/2 x 4-1/4 and 3-1/4
x 4-1/4.

Style AA. For use with Kodak Ball Bearing shutter, 3 x 5-1/4, 3-1/4 x
5-1/2 and 4 x 5.

Style B. For use with F. P. K. Automatic, 2-1/2 x 4-1/4 and 3-1/4 x 4-1/4,
No. 1 S. V. Automatic, or No. 1 B. & L. S. V. Automatic shutters.

Style BB. For use with F. P. K. Automatic, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 and 4 x 5, No. 2
S. V. Automatic, or No. 2 B. & L. S. V. Automatic shutters.

Style C. For use with Kodak Automatic shutter, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4.

Style CC. For use with Kodak Automatic shutter, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 and 4 x 5.

Style D. For use with B. & L. Automatic and Century Automatic shutters,
3-1/4 x 4-1/4.

Style DD. For use with B. & L. Automatic and Century Automatic shutters,
3-1/4 x 5-1/2 and 4 x 5.

Style DDD. For use with B. & L. Automatic shutter, 4-1/4 x 6-1/2.

Style H. For use with No. 0 Compound shutter, 2-1/2 x 4-1/4 and 3-1/4 x
4-1/4.

Style HH. For use with No. 1 Compound shutter, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 and 4 x 5.

Style HHH. For use with No. 2 Compound shutter, 4-1/4 x 6-1/2 and 5 x 7.


_PRICES._

  Any style up to H      $1.00
  Styles H, HH and HHH    1.50




PREMO JUNIOR CAMERAS


[Illustration]

The very simplest camera for making pictures is a camera of the fixed
focus type. Such cameras require no focusing or estimating of distances,
and as they do not have to be opened, are always ready for immediate
action.

The Premo Juniors are cameras of this kind and they are even easier in
operation than the usual camera of this type, possessing, as they do, the
remarkable simplicity of loading and operating provided by the Premo Film
Pack.

To make a picture with one of these cameras is a matter of seconds only.
The first step is to load the camera, and this is effected in any light by
opening the back, dropping in Premo Film Pack and then closing the back.

Second, set the shutter for time or instantaneous exposure as required by
the subject. This is accomplished by merely moving a lever up or down.

Then glance at the finder, which reflects the image on a reduced scale,
just as it will appear in the finished picture, press a lever and the
exposure is made. To change films for successive exposures, pull out
successive film pack tabs as explained on page 4.

The Premo Juniors are particularly well adapted for the use of boys and
girls, by reason of their low cost, substantial construction and simple
operation. This does not mean that the camera is not suitable for older
people, for there are many grown up amateurs who prefer cameras of this
simple type, and are using Premo Juniors with marked success.

For all ordinary work, such as portraiture, snap shots in good light and
average landscapes, they are capable of producing very good results. These
cameras are all fitted with tested lenses, automatic shutters and
horizontal and vertical finders. They are substantially made to withstand
hard knocks, covered with imitation leather and attractive in appearance.

The negatives made with these cameras are of such quality as to yield very
good enlargements and any amateur can make his own enlargements by use of
the Brownie Enlarging Camera described on Page 37.

The Nos. 1, 1A, 3 and 4 are precisely alike, as shown in illustration, in
practically all details excepting size. The No. 0 is somewhat different in
construction, but works upon the same principle and makes equally good
pictures in its size.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Capacity, 12 exposures without reloading. Size of Camera. No. 0. 2-1/4 x
3-5/8 x 5-1/4 in.; No. 1. 3-1/8 x 4-1/2 x 5-3/4 in.; No. 1A, 3-1/2 x 5-1/2
x 5-7/8 in.; No. 3, 4 x 5-1/2 x 5-3/4 in.; No. 4, 4-3/4 x 6-1/4 x 6-1/2
in. Weight, No. 0, 7 ounces; No. 1, 11 ounces; No. 1A, 14 ounces; No. 3,
20 ounces; No. 4, 25 ounces. Shutters, Rotary Automatic, all excepting No.
0, with diaphragm stops. Lens No. 0 and No. 1 Meniscus; No. 1A, 3 and 4,
Meniscus Achromatic. Finders, two. Tripod Sockets, No. 0. none; Nos. 1,
1A, 3 and 4, two.

[Illustration: Premo Jr. No. 0.]


_PRICES._

                              No. 0     No. 1     No. 1A    No. 3    No. 4
                             1-3/4 x   2-1/4 x   2-1/2 x   3-1/4 x   4 x 5
                               2-3/8     3-1/4     4-1/4     4-1/4
  Premo Junior, Meniscus
  Lens, Automatic Shutter      $1.50     $2.00

  Ditto with Meniscus
  Achromatic Lens                                 $3.00     $4.00    $5.00

  Carrying Case                 .60       .75       .85      1.10     1.25

  Premo Film Pack,
 (12 exposures)                 .25       .40       .50       .70      .90

  Kodak Portrait Attachment               .50       .50       .50      .50




PREMOETTE JUNIOR


[Illustration]

To see this little camera is to be instantly attracted by it. Made largely
of aluminum it is just a trifle larger than the picture it makes. It is
extremely light in weight. It inspires confidence by its appearance and
fulfills it in its results.

It will go into even a boy's pocket or a lady's hand-bag. And while these
cameras are so very small in dimensions, they make good size pictures--two
of the most popular of amateur sizes. The No. 1 is for 2-1/4 x 3-1/4 and
the No. 1A for 2-1/2 x 4-1/4 pictures.

The greatest of care is taken in the selection of lenses for these
cameras. For the single lens fitting only meniscus achromatic lenses which
have stood rigid tests are used, and the same is true of the double lens
equipment where our standard Planatograph lenses are fitted in each case.
Thus these cameras will produce sharp, clearly defined pictures under
ordinarily favorable conditions. And the negatives are of such quality
that good enlargements up to almost any desirable size can be easily
obtained from them.

For this reason many amateurs who already have larger cameras are adding
these inexpensive little cameras to their photographic outfits. They can
be easily carried where oftentimes the larger cameras might be
inconvenient, and where larger pictures are wanted it is an easy matter to
secure them by the simple process of enlargement. Any amateur can enlarge
his own negatives by use of the inexpensive enlarging camera described on
page 37 or his finisher will gladly do it for him.

The Premoette Jr. is fitted with the smoothly working, precise Kodak Ball
Bearing Shutter, the camera is covered with genuine grain leather and is
handsomely finished in every detail. And with its compact, substantial
construction and capabilities for high grade work is combined that
simplicity of loading and operating possible only in a Premo Film Pack
camera. See page 4. In addition to these advantages any Premoette Jr. will
make an excellent outfit for home portrait work when fitted with the
inexpensive Kodak Portrait Attachment.

For one who desires to make a present at the holidays, or on any occasion,
the Premoette Jr. makes an ideal gift. It is suitable alike for a boy or
girl, a man or woman of any age.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

_Premoette Jr. No. 1._ Capacity 12 film pack exposures without reloading.
Dimensions, 1-1/2 x 3 x 4-3/4 in. Weight, 12 ozs. Lens, Meniscus
Achromatic. Shutter, Kodak Ball Bearing No. 0 (See page 6). Finder,
collapsible, reversible, brilliant. Tripod Socket, one.

_Premoette Jr. No. 1A._ Capacity 12 film pack exposures without reloading.
Dimensions, 1-3/4 x 3-1/4 x 5-3/4 in. Weight, 18 ozs. Lens, Meniscus
Achromatic. Shutter, Kodak Ball Bearing (see page 6), but has no bulb,
operating with finger release only. Finder brilliant, reversible,
collapsible. Tripod Sockets, two.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                              No. 1              No. 1A
                                          2-1/4 x 3-1/4      2-1/2 x 4-1/4
  Premoette Jr. with Meniscus Achromatic
  Lens and Kodak Ball Bearing Shutter         $5.00             $ 8.00

  Ditto, with Planatograph Lens                7.00              10.00

  Carrying Case                                1.00               1.25

  Premo Film Pack (12 exposures)                .40                .50

  Kodak Portrait Attachment,                    .50                .50




PREMOETTE JR. _SPECIAL_


[Illustration]

So compact, so generally desirable is the Premoette Jr. that there are
many amateurs among the more serious, particular workers, who have wished
for a camera of the same type with the very maximum of photographic
efficiency.

For the average amateur the regular Premoette Junior will be found
eminently satisfactory, but for those who insist upon the best to be had,
who demand a camera capable of making good pictures under all conditions
where pictures could possibly be made, the Premoette Jr. Special is a
revelation.

Here is a camera with the light weight and compactness, the ease of
loading and operating of the original Premoette Jr., but with an equipment
which places it on a par in capabilities, with the largest, most expensive
amateur cameras made.

It is fitted with the Compound shutter with cable release, attaining a
maximum speed of 1/300 of a second in the No. 1 and 1/250 in the No. 1A
size and the Zeiss Kodak Anastigmat lens f.6.3. This lens was made
expressly for hand camera work and combines depth, definition and speed to
a remarkable degree. This equipment enables one to work under adverse
conditions that the ordinarily equipped camera could not meet as, for
instance snap shot work in dull lights, fast indoor portraiture, and the
like. And the remarkable sharpness and depth of the negatives make them
suitable for enlarging up to any size desired.

Either size can be carried in any pocket or in a lady's hand-bag. Thus,
however cramped for room, one may be certain he can take along a Premoette
Jr., and make as good pictures of anything he cares about, as can be made
with any camera.

Aside from the difference in size, the two models are practically
identical. Focusing is provided for by a series of three focusing slots in
which the standard is inserted as occasion requires. The focusing block on
the No. 1 folds over to permit closing the camera; in the No. 1A this is
not necessary.

In keeping with its high grade equipment, we have finished this camera in
the best possible manner. It is covered with genuine Persian Morocco, and
the bellows is of the finest quality black leather, giving it a rich,
attractive appearance.

In a word, this is the finest, most capable, handsomest small camera you
ever saw--a marvel of compactness and efficiency.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

_Premoette Jr. No. 1 Special._ Capacity 12 2-1/4 x 3-1/4 film pack
exposures without reloading. Dimensions, 1-1/2 x 3 x 4-3/4 in. Weight, 13
ozs. Lens, Zeiss Kodak Anastigmat f.6.3. Shutter, compound with cable
release, highest speed 1/300 second. Finder, brilliant, reversible,
collapsible. Tripod Socket, one.

_Premoette Jr. No. 1A Special._ Capacity 12 2-1/2 x 4-1/4 Premo Film
Pack exposures without reloading. Dimensions, 1-3/4 x 3-1/4 x 5-3/4 in.
Weight, 19 ozs. Lens, Zeiss Kodak Anastigmat f.6.3. Shutter, compound with
cable release, highest speed 1/250 second. Finder, reversible, brilliant,
collapsible. Tripod Sockets, two.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                        No. 1            No. 1A
                                     2-1/4 x 3-1/4    2-1/2 x 4-1/4
  Premoette Jr. Special with Zeiss
  Kodak Anastigmat Lens f.6.3 and
  Compound Shutter                      $36.00           $41.00

  Grain Leather Carrying Case             1.50             1.75

  Premo Film Pack (12 exposures)           .40              .50

  Kodak Portrait Attachment                .50              .50




FILM PREMO No. 1


[Illustration]

The Film Premos are designed for those who want reliable, simply operated
cameras for all-around amateur photographic work.

They are designed to be as convenient and easy of manipulation as
possible, and without reference to the requirements of the specialists,
are fitted only with the simple adjustments sufficient to enable the
average photographer, whether experienced or not, to secure good pictures
under all ordinary conditions.

Working with this idea in mind, we are able to offer these cameras not
only at moderate prices, but for compactness and light weight, for ease of
loading and unloading, the Film Premos have a considerable margin over any
other type of cameras. This fact may be easily verified by comparative
weights and dimensions and investigation of the Premo Film Pack system
used in this camera. (See page 4).

As convenient and low priced as these cameras are however, the very first
consideration in their construction has been the quality of results which
must be produced. And the lens and shutter equipment and the film used in
this camera offer the assurance that the Film Premos will produce as good
pictures as any camera that can be purchased, aside from those fitted with
anastigmat lenses.

The shutter of the Film Premo No. 1 is the Kodak Ball Bearing with bulb
release--the finest type of the single valve shutter, and the regular lens
is our celebrated Planatograph, each one thoroughly tested. This equipment
is the best to be had outside of the anastigmats and is amply efficient
for the general run of amateur photography. The film used in the Premo
Film Pack is from the same stock as the Eastman N. C.--the best in the
world.

In addition to the double lens fittings these cameras are also offered
with single meniscus achromatic lenses for those who prefer compact
folding cameras requiring but little adjustment of focus for objects at
different distances.

Film Premos No. 1 are very attractive in appearance; they are made of
seasoned wood, with bed and back panel of aluminum, covered with seal
grain leather, and metal parts are beautifully nickeled.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Capacity, 12 film exposures. Box, seasoned wood. Bed, aluminum.
Dimensions, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 2-1/4 x 4 x 5-1/2 in.; 3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2),
2-3/8 x 4-5/8 x 7-1/8 in. Weight, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 19 ounces; 3A (3-1/4 x
5-1/2), 29 ounces. Lens, Planatograph. Shutter, Kodak Ball Bearing with
bulb release (see page 6). Tripod Sockets, two. Finder, reversible,
brilliant, collapsible. Automatic Standard Clamp.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                                                  3A
                                             3-1/4 x 4-1/4   3-1/4 x 5-1/2
  Film Premo No. 1, with Planatograph Lens
  and Kodak Ball Bearing Shutter                $10.00          $12.50

  Ditto with Meniscus Achromatic Lens and
  Kodak Ball Bearing Shutter,                     8.00           10.50

  Sole Leather Carrying Case                      1.50            2.00

  Kodak Autotime Scale                            1.00            1.00

  Premo Film Pack (12 exposures)                   .70             .80

  Kodak Portrait Attachment                        .50             .50




POCKET PREMO C


[Illustration]

In choosing his photographic outfit the amateur is often undecided as to
whether he should select a film or a plate camera. He knows that the film
camera is more convenient, that it will load and unload in daylight, and
as the films are much lighter and occupy less space than dry plates, he
knows that the film camera is especially desirable for use at vacation
time, when traveling, and on other occasions where light weight and the
greatest convenience are necessary. On the other hand, he knows that the
plate camera offers the advantage of ground glass focusing between each
exposure--a very desirable feature to many as it insures absolutely sharp
focus and does away with the estimating of distances.

The Pocket Premo C will settle such a question for anyone. This camera
will take plates or daylight loading films just as the user chooses. One
can be used just as easily as the other--plates by means of an ordinary
double plate holder, and films in the Premo Film Pack Adapter. (See page
5).

Thus in this camera are offered the daylight loading feature and all the
other conveniences of films, together with the ground glass focusing
feature of the plate camera. And the ground glass may be used for focusing
before each exposure just as well _when using films_ as when using plates.

The camera is equipped with an accurate focusing scale, so that it may be
focused by scale if desired. You do not have to use the ground glass. But
when you want it, it is always there. A rack and pinion attachment is
supplied for ease in focusing.

These advantages are offered in a camera which is even lighter and more
compact than the average purely film camera and which is so easy to
operate that anyone can make good pictures with a Pocket Premo C from the
start, without any previous experience. The Pocket Premo C is fitted with
our Planatograph, the best rapid rectilinear lens that can be obtained,
and the new Kodak Ball Bearing shutter with bulb release. With this lens
working at f.8 and shutter with star-shaped leaves, the camera is very
effective for general "snap-shot" work.

For the popular post card size, the 3A Pocket Premo C makes an outfit of
unusual scope and capabilities at a moderate price. The camera is
handsomely finished, covering is genuine leather, bellows is of red
leather and metal parts are nickeled.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Capacity, 12 film or 2 plate exposures. Box, mahogany. Bed, mahogany with
rack and pinion for focusing. Finder, reversible, collapsible, brilliant.
Tripod Sockets, two. Lens, Planatograph. Shutter, Kodak Ball Bearing with
bulb release (see page 6). Dimensions, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 2-1/16 x 4-1/4 x
5-1/2 in.; 3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2), 2-1/4 x 5 x 7-1/8 in. Weight, 3-1/4 x
4-1/4, 21 ozs.; 3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2), 32 ozs. Automatic Standard Clamp.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                                            3A
                                     3-1/4 x 4-1/4     3-1/4 x 5-1/2
  Pocket Premo C with Planatograph
  Lens, Kodak Ball Bearing Shutter
  and Plate Holder                      $12.00            $15.00

  Double Plate Holder                     1.00              1.00

  Sole Leather Carrying Case              1.75              2.00

  Kodak Autotime Scale                    1.00              1.00

  Premo Film Pack Adapter                 1.00              1.50

  Premo Film Pack (12 exposures)           .70               .80

  Kodak Portrait Attachment                .50               .50




FILMPLATE PREMO


[Illustration]

All that we have just said of the Pocket Premo C is equally true of the
Filmplate Premo, but this model has even greater capabilities. Like the
Pocket Premo C it takes films or plates with equal facility, but it is
fully equipped for more serious and more particular work.

It has a rack and pinion for focusing, rising and sliding front and swing
bed. These latter features are of great importance in making pictures of
high buildings, mountains, and the like, for they enable the user to
decrease his foreground without tipping the camera proper, which causes an
untrue convergence of lines toward the top of the picture.

The shutter is the Kodak Automatic, which works with bulb or finger
release for time, bulb, instantaneous and retarded speeds of from 1 second
to 1/100 second. It is also supplied with Kodak Autotime Scale. Under
every possible outdoor light condition this scale shows at a glance just
where to set diaphragm and speed lever to get properly timed exposures.
The lens is the Planatograph, the best obtainable aside from the
anastigmats, and each lens is carefully tested before and after being
fitted to the camera.

With accurate focusing scale and brilliant finder, the Filmplate Premo is
a splendid snap shot instrument. Whereas, for particular work, the ground
glass is instantly available for composition or focusing, whether films or
plates are being used.

With all these advantages there is nothing bulky or cumbersome or
complicated about the Filmplate Premo. It is as compact and as easily
carried as the average camera for films alone. It is so simple to
understand and operate that anyone who can read the instructions which
come with the camera can at once start in to make good pictures, without
any trouble at all.

The 3A size is especially suitable for post card work, for bust and full
length portraiture and for artistic landscape compositions.

The Filmplate Premo is made in the most careful manner of the best of
materials. The box is made of thoroughly seasoned wood, front bed of
aluminum, all covered with selected leather of beautiful seal grain. All
metal parts are highly nickeled, the bellows is of black leather, and the
general appearance of the cameras is most striking. These cameras are
especially suitable for home portraiture with Kodak Portrait Attachment on
account of the ground glass focusing feature.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Capacity, 12 film or 2 plate exposures. Box, cherry. Bed, aluminum. Rack
and pinion for fine focusing. Front, rising and sliding. Finder,
reversible, brilliant, collapsible. Tripod Sockets, two. Lens,
Planatograph. Shutter, Kodak Automatic with Autotime Scale (see page 7).
Dimensions. 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 2-1/4 x 4-1/8 x 5-3/8 in.; 3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2).
2-3/16 x 4-3/4 x 7-1/8 in.; 4 x 5, 2-1/4 x 4-7/8 x 6-1/8 in.; 5 x 7, 2-5/8
x 6 x 8-3/8 in. Weight, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4. 30 ozs.; 3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2), 37
ozs.: 4 x 5, 33 ozs.; 5 x 7. 56 ozs. Automatic Standard Clamp.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                               3A
                           3-1/4 x 4-1/4  3-1/4 x 5-1/2   4 x 5    5 x 7
  Filmplate Premo with
  Planatograph Lens, Kodak
  Auto. Shutter, Autotime
  Scale, Plate Holder
  and Film Pack Adapter       $22.50         $25.00       $25.00   $30.00

  Carrying Case                 1.75           2.25         2.25     3.00

  Premo Film Pack                .70            .80          .90     1.60

  Kodak Portrait Attachment      .50            .50          .50      .50




FILMPLATE PREMO _SPECIAL_


[Illustration]

For those who want the highest possible efficiency in a hand camera,
combined with compactness and convenience, the Filmplate Premo Special is
truly the ideal camera.

It is thoroughly equipped to make good pictures under all conditions of
amateur photography where good pictures could possibly be made, aside from
ultra rapid focal plane photography.

It is fitted with every desirable mechanical convenience. It has a fast,
fully corrected lens,--the Zeiss Kodak Anastigmat, _f_.6.3, specially
designed for hand camera work, and a high speed shutter, the Compound,
that works with great precision. This shutter attains a speed of 1/250
second in the 3-1/4 x 4-1/4 size, 1/200 in the 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 and 4 x 5
sizes and 1/150 second in the 5 x 7 size.

This equipment cannot be surpassed. It not only provides a very high speed
for rapidly moving objects, but it enables the operator to make pictures
on dark days, indoors, and under generally unfavorable light conditions,
where absolute failure would result from the use of the ordinarily
equipped camera.

These advantages are offered in a camera that takes films or plates with
equal facility, and is as compact and easy to carry, as convenient to
operate, as the average hand camera for films only. In addition this
camera is provided with a ground glass which may be used for sharp
focusing and accurate composing between each exposure, and this can be
done with equal ease whether films or plates are used. This is an
advantage which will appeal strongly to many, as it enables one to utilize
to the fullest extent the microscopic definition of his anastigmat lens.

In keeping with the high grade of work for which this camera is designed,
we have constructed and finished it in the best possible manner. The
covering is a rich black morocco, the bellows black leather, and metal
parts are handsomely nickeled, producing a most attractive combination.

Particular attention is called to the 3A size for its all-around
popularity, and to the 5 x 7 for its unusual compactness for a 5 x 7
camera of its great capabilities.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Capacity, 12 film or 2 plate exposures. Box, seasoned wood. Bed. aluminum.
Rack and pinion for fine focusing. Front, rising and sliding. Finder,
brilliant, reversible, collapsible. Tripod Sockets, two. Lens. Zeiss Kodak
Anastigmat _f_.6.3. Shutter, compound. Dimensions, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 2-1/4 x
4-1/8 x 5-3/8 in.; 3-1/4 x 5-1/2. 2-1/8 x 4-11/16 x 7-1/8 in.; 4 x 5,
2-1/4 x 4-7/8 x 6-1/8 in.; 5 x 7. 2-5/8 x 6 x 8-3/8 in. Weight, 3-1/4 x
4-1/4. 26 ozs.; 3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 36 ozs.; 4 x 5, 28-1/2 ozs.; 5 x 7, 48 ozs.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                                 3A
                             3-1/4 x 4-1/4  3-1/4 x 5-1/2   4 x 5   5 x 7
  Filmplate Premo Special
  with Zeiss Kodak
  Anastigmat, _f_.6.3
  and Compound Shutter,
  Film Pack Adapter and
  Plate Holder                  $50.00         $60.00       $60.00  $80.00

  Ditto, Cooke Ser. III A.
  _f_.6.5 Lens                   60.50          66.50        66.50   90.00

  Ditto, B. & L. Zeiss Tessar
  Ser. II B. _f_.6.3 Lens        60.00          71.00        71.00   90.00

  Case, Velvet Lined              2.75           3.00         3.00    4.00

  Kodak Autotime Scale            1.50           1.50         1.50    1.50

  Premo Film Pack                  .70            .80          .90    1.60




PREMO NUMBER 8


[Illustration]

In the plate camera field Premos have always been pre-eminent in quality
and dependability from the very beginning of amateur photography. They
have been manufactured for over thirty years, upon the idea of giving the
customer the very best possible values for money expended.

The Premo No. 8 is an excellent illustration of the application of this
idea. Designed for the amateur who wants a convenient, dependable plate
camera at a moderate price, it is so carefully made and so simple to
operate that it will produce remarkably good results for so inexpensive a
camera.

It is equipped with our regular Planatograph lens, each one carefully
tested, and the shutter is of the Kodak Ball Bearing type but supplied
with bulb and tube instead of cable release. This shutter is graduated for
speeds of 1/25, 1/50 and 1/100 seconds, and works also, of course, for
bulb and time exposures. The leaves operate on ball bearings and open in
the shape of a star, admitting the greatest possible amount of light for
any given exposure.

With this equipment the camera is suitable for general amateur work of all
kinds--snap shots, landscapes and portraiture, especially in connection
with the Kodak Portrait Attachment.

It is made of seasoned wood, with front bed of aluminum and metal runways,
making an instrument of unusual compactness for a plate camera.

The bed and box of the Premo No. 8 are covered with black leather, the
bellows is black and the metal parts being finished in nickel, give the
camera a neat, attractive appearance.

The standard is made of metal and is very rigid, a rising and falling
front is supplied and the finder is of the new Premo collapsible type.

This model, of course, is provided with a ground glass for sharp focusing,
and while it is intended primarily for plates, it can be loaded with films
just as easily. By the use of a Premo Film Pack Adapter it can be
converted into a compact, daylight loading film camera, perfectly suitable
for the vacationist or for any occasion where the light weight and greater
convenience of films would be desirable. It is really one camera which
offers the advantage of two.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Capacity, 12 Film or 2 plate exposures. Box, kiln-dried wood, covered with
leather. Standard, made of metal, with rising and falling front. Carrying
Case, imitation leather, with compartments for holders. Finder, reversible
brilliant, collapsible. Tripod Sockets, two. Lens, Planatograph. Shutter,
Kodak Ball Bearing with bulb and tube (see page 6). Dimensions, 3-1/4 x
5-1/2, 2 x 5 x 7-1/4 in.; 4 x 5, 2 x 5-1/4 x 6-1/2 in.; 5 x 7. 2-1/4 x
6-1/2 x 8-1/2 in. Weight, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 34 ozs.; 4 x 5, 30 ozs.; 5 x 7,
42 ozs.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                                  3A
                                    4 x 5    3-1/4 x 5-1/2   5 x 7
  Premo No. 8, with Planatograph
  Lens, Kodak Ball Bearing
  Shutter. Carrying Case and
  Plate Holder                      $12.00      $14.00       $18.00

  Kodak Autotime Scale                1.00        1.00         1.00

  Premo Film Pack Adapter             1.50        1.50         2.50

  Premo Film Pack (12 exposures)       .90         .80         1.60

  Kodak Portrait Attachment            .50         .50          .50




PREMO NUMBER 9


[Illustration]

This efficient camera is designed for the amateur who wishes an instrument
of very wide scope. With its complete equipment and accurate, convenient
mechanical adjustments, it is a camera never before approached at the
price.

The Premo No. 9 is fitted with the new Premo reversible back. This is the
simplest back to reverse ever offered, for with its patented spring lug
construction, it may be instantly removed and reversed without any
tendency to stick or bind.

The bellows is of black leather and has sufficient draw to permit the use
of the single lens combination or a telephoto attachment of several
magnifications. The extension plate is actuated by rack and pinion working
with exceptional smoothness and provided with a simple locking device.

The standard is constructed of metal, it is very rigid, and incorporates a
rising and falling front of great latitude. This in connection with the
swing bed construction makes it an easy matter to take pictures of tall
buildings, and the like, without tipping the camera, with its attendant
distortion. The lens board is removable and the finder is the new Premo
collapsible brilliant.

The instrument is of the most substantial construction, it is covered with
selected leather of beautiful grain and is finished in the most careful
manner. The covering is of black leather, specially selected for its
beautiful grain, the bed is finished in black and the metal parts are
heavily nickeled.

The regular lens and shutter equipment comprises the Kodak Automatic
shutter and Autotime scale and the Planatograph lens--a perfectly
satisfactory equipment for everyday amateur photography. The single
combination of the lens will produce sharp, clear pictures of objects at a
distance double the size made with the complete lens.

Like the Premo No. 8, this model is primarily intended for plates, but it
can be easily converted into a daylight loading film camera by use of the
Premo Film Pack Adapter. It offers the advantage of ground glass focusing
with either medium, but is fitted with a focusing scale for snap shot work
or for any occasion when one does not care to use the ground glass.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Capacity. 12 film or 2 plate exposures. Box. kiln-dried wood, covered with
fine grain leather. Bed, hand polished wood, finished in black, and
supplied with rack and pinion for fine focusing, and swing arrangement.
Back, spring catch, reversible. Standard, made of metal, with rising and
falling front. Finder, brilliant reversible, collapsible. Tripod Socket,
one. Lens, Planatograph. Shutter, Kodak Automatic (see page 7). Carrying
Case, sole leather, with compartments for holders. Bellows, black leather;
draw 3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 13 in.; 4 x 5, 13 in.: 5 x 7, 15-1/4 in. Dimensions,
3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 3 x 7 x 7 in.; 4 x 5, 3 x 7 x 7 in.; 5 x 7, 2-7/8 x 8-1/4 x
8-1/4 in. Weight, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 63 ozs.; 4 x 5, 63 ozs.; 5 x 7, 76 ozs.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                                  3A
                                    4 x 5    3-1/4 x 5-1/2   5 x 7
  Premo No. 9, with Planatograph
  Lens. Kodak Automatic Shutter
  with Kodak Autotime Scale,
  Case and Holder                   $28.00      $28.00       $33.00

  Ditto, with Zeiss Kodak
  Anastigmat Lens _f_.6.3
  and Compound Shutter               62.50       62.50        81.50

  Premo Film Pack Adapter             1.50        1.50         2.50

  Premo Film Pack (12 exposures)       .90         .80         1.60

  Kodak Portrait Attachment,           .50         .50          .50




PREMO NUMBER 10


[Illustration]

Designed to meet the requirements of the most advanced photographer and of
the specialist in photographic work, the Premo No. 10 is equipped with
every known adjustment desirable in a hand camera for making pictures
under all conditions.

The bellows is of such length as to readily accommodate the single
combinations of any lens system, and also to meet the capacity
requirements of telephoto lenses of the highest magnifications. This
feature is also a valuable one in the processes of enlarging, copying and
portraiture.

Provision is made for the use of lenses of the widest angle. For this
purpose, it is necessary only to unclasp the two supplementary side arms,
which drop the beds down on a hinge, removing it from the path of the
shortest focus lens. Then a short supplementary bed, carried conveniently
at the top of the camera when not in use, is substituted for the regular
bed, affording easy focusing facilities.

The movable extensions are constructed entirely of metal, are actuated by
a single pinion and attached to the wooden bed by metal angle pieces,
making the operation impervious to changing atmospheric conditions. The
swing back is actuated by rack and pinion, with locking device, as is also
the rising and falling front. The standard clamp is automatic.

The camera is regularly fitted with the Planatograph lens--the best
obtainable aside from the anastigmats, but it is constructed with the
view of accommodating anastigmat lenses of any kind when desired. The
regular shutter is the reliable Kodak Automatic fitted with Kodak Autotime
Scale. This scale automatically indicates the proper time and stop opening
for all outdoor exposures. (See page 7).

The finish and general workmanship of the instrument must be seen to be
appreciated. The shutter and all metal parts are highly nickeled and the
covering is of the best leather, especially selected for its beautiful
grain. The wood is mahogany with hand polished black finish. The carrying
case is of sole leather, lined with purple velvet.

With all these advantages the Premo No. 10 can be successfully used even
by the beginner. Its special features do not have to be reckoned with
excepting when needed, and the Premo adapter will convert it at any time
into a daylight loading film camera. The camera is made in the 5 x 7 size
only.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Capacity, 12 film or 2 plate exposures. Box, mahogany, leather covered.
Bed, mahogany, with highly polished black finish and with triple extension
runway. Back, spring catch, reversible. Swing, vertical; rack and pinion
actuated, with locking device. Front, rising and falling; rack and pinion
actuated, with locking device. Lens Board, removable; size 3-1/2 x 3-1/2
in. Finder, Brilliant, reversible. Tripod Sockets, two. Lens,
Planatograph. Shutter, Kodak Automatic with Autotime Scale (see page 7).
Carrying Case, sole leather, plush lined, with compartment for holders.
Bellows, black leather; draw, 19 in. Dimensions. 4 x 8-1/2 x 8-1/2 in.
Weight, 5 x 7, 5-1/2 lbs. Automatic Standard Clamp.

[Illustration]


_PRICES._

                                                                   5 x 7
  Premo No. 10, with Planatograph Lens and Kodak Auto. Shutter
  with Autotime Scale, Carrying Case and Plate Holder             $60.00

  With Zeiss Kodak Anastigmat Lens f.6.3 and Compound Shutter     109.00

  With B. & L. Zeiss Protar Vila Lens and Compound Shutter        141.00

  Premo Film Pack Adapter                                           2.50

  Premo Film Pack                                                   1.60

  Kodak Autotime Scale for Compound Shutter                         1.50




SIX-THREE PREMOS


[Illustration]

The Six-Three Premos are designed to supply absolutely reliable cameras
with every anastigmat advantage, at the very minimum of expense.

Taking as a basis the regular Premo models suitable for this purpose, we
have simply replaced the R. R. lens and automatic shutter with the
Compound shutter and a new anastigmat lens, called the Cooke Kodak
Anastigmat. This lens has been specially designed for this particular use
by the makers of the well-known Cooke Anastigmat lenses. It is an
anastigmat of the very first quality, fully corrected for definition and
flatness of field, and working at a speed of _f_.6.3. The shutter is the
regular Compound, but operated with cable release instead of bulb and
tube. For details merely refer to detailed specifications of the regular
models. The illustration shows the Six-Three Filmplate Premo.


_PRICES._

  Six-Three Premoette Jr. No. 1A. Cooke Kodak Anastigmat Lens
  _f_.6.3, and Compound Shutter                                   $34.00

  Six-Three Filmplate Premo, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, equipped as above      41.00

  Ditto, 3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2) or 4 x 5                               48.00

  Six-Three Premo No. 9, 3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2) or 4 x 5, equipped
  as above                                                         51.00

For prices on carrying cases, films, etc., see price list of corresponding
regular models.




THE R. O. C. VIEW


[Illustration]

An inexpensive, reliable view camera for those who do not require extra
long bellows capacity. It is especially adapted for interior work as it
focuses from the rear only, and the back may be moved as close to the
front as desired so that extreme wide angle lenses may be used.

The front board is so wide that stereoscopic lenses may be used, and the
standard is strong and rigid, affording a safe support for the heaviest
lenses.

The back is supplied with horizontal and vertical cut out boards, so that
four pictures may be made on one plate if desired. Vertical and horizontal
swings, rising and falling front and reversible back are provided. The
camera is strongly built for service and will last indefinitely.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Bellows Draw, 5 x 7, 14 in.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 15-1/2 in.; 8 x 10, 17 in.
Weight, 5 x 7, 4-3/4 lbs.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 6 lbs.; 8 x 10, 6-3/4 lbs. Size
of Lens Board, 5 x 7, 3-3/4 x 6-3/8 in.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 4-1/2 x 6-1/2 in.;
8 x 10, 5 x 6 in. Carrying Case, square style canvas.


_PRICES._

                                        5 x 7   6-1/2 x 8-1/2   8 x 10

  R. O. C. View with Case and Holder    $12.00     $13.00       $14.00
  Extra Carrying Case, Regular            1.75       2.00         2.25




EASTMAN VIEW No. 1

IMPROVED MODEL OF EMPIRE STATE


[Illustration]

For years there has been no radical change in View Cameras. The Empire
State camera had seemed to meet all requirements, and it certainly gave
good value and satisfaction.

However we started an investigation of the View Camera situation some time
ago, and it was found that improvements could be made, and by the
perfection of our factory organization and the running through of large
lots, a camera fully equal to the old Empire State, from the standpoint of
service and efficiency, could be supplied to advantage.

As a result we now offer the Eastman View No. 1, an Improved Model of
Empire State, and anyone who is in the market for a substantial, reliable
view camera at low cost, will find this of exceptional value for the
money.

The appearance of this camera is quite novel. It is finished in mission
style with metal parts oxidized, and black bellows.

It has no complications, but is built for practical service, and its
various adjustments are such as to work conveniently and easily.

It has double extensions and both front and back are actuated by rack and
pinion, so that the camera may be focused from either end, and the back
can be racked up as close to the front as desired. This provides for the
use of lenses of the widest angle. The camera has rising and falling
front, actuated by rack and pinion, and this can be locked solidly at any
point by merely pushing in the pinion. The front board is removable and is
large enough to accomodate any lens.

Both horizontal and vertical swings are provided, and the back is
reversible and furnished with a vertical cut-off board, so that two
negatives may be made on one plate, if desired.

A strap handle and plumb level are supplied and an automatic bellows
support which prevents sagging of the bellows at any time.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Bellows Draw, 5 x 7, 22-1/2 in.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2 in., 26 in.; 8 x 10, 29 in.
Weight, 5 x 7, 6 lbs.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 8 lbs.; 8 x 10, 9-1/2 lbs. Size of
Lens Board, 5 x 7, 4-1/4 x 4-1/4 in.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 4-3/4 x 4-3/4 in.; 8
x 10, 4-3/4 x 4-3/4 in. Carrying Case, long style canvas, combination
style, with compartment for camera, holders and tripod.


_PRICES._

                                         5 x 7   6-1/2 x 8-1/2   8 x 10

  Eastman View No. 1 (improved model of
  Empire State) with Case and Holder     $20.00     $22.00       $25.00

  Extra Carrying Case                      3.50       3.75         4.00

  Extra Lens Boards                         .30         .40         .50




EASTMAN VIEW No. 2

IMPROVED MODEL OF EMPIRE STATE


[Illustration]

All our experience in view camera making, all the information that we have
been able to collect, of the needs of the view camera worker, have been
put into the proposition of providing in this new model a view camera as
near to perfection as human ingenuity can devise.

It has all the good points of the famous old Empire State, with important
additional features which leave nothing to be desired in view camera work,
however exacting it may be.

The camera is constructed with the idea of providing the greatest possible
solidity and strength throughout. The extensions are extra thick, the
standard is very large and will furnish an absolutely rigid support for
the heaviest lenses. Corners are dovetailed and reinforced by brass angle
pieces, and the metal parts are all made of the best quality of brass,
fully lacquered.

The front board is removable and very large. The rising and falling front
is actuated by rack and pinion, as are both the horizontal and vertical
swings. The camera can be focused from both front and rear by rack and
pinion, so that the back can be racked up as close to the front as
desired. Thus lenses of the widest angle can be used. A sliding tripod
block is provided so that the camera can always be supported directly
above the tripod or the weight distributed, as the operator may wish.

The back is reversible, a plumb level and strap handle are supplied and
both horizontal and vertical cut-off boards are furnished so that four
different negatives can be made on one plate if desired. The bellows of
this camera is made of genuine leather and a spring arrangement working
automatically prevents it from sagging at any time.

[Illustration]

The method of locking extensions is very convenient, not by means of the
old-fashioned, long threaded screw, but by a specially constructed device
which locks firmly by merely being pushed in and given a quarter turn. The
back extension, which is detachable, in addition to this device is further
strengthened by two clamp catches which hold it absolutely rigid.

The camera is made of hand-polished mahogany, with exception of the
extensions, which are of cherry on account of its greater strength.


_SPECIFICATIONS._

Bellows Draw, 5 x 7, 23 in.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 26-1/2 in.; 8 x 10, 29-1/2 in.
Weight, 5 x 7, 7 lbs.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 10-1/2 lbs.; 8 x 10, 11-1/4 lbs.
Size of Lens Board, 5 x 7, 4-1/2 x 4-1/2 in.; 6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 6 x 6 in.; 8
x 10, 6 x 6 in. Carrying Case, canvas, combination style, with
compartments for camera, holders and tripod. All operating nuts on the
right side, binding nuts on the left hand side.


_PRICES._

                                        5 x 7   6-1/2 x 8-1/2   8 x 10
  Eastman View No. 2 (improved model
  of Empire State) with Case and
  Holder                                $27.00     $30.00       $33.00

  Extra Carrying Case                     4.00       4.50         5.00

  Extra Lens Boards                        .60        .75          .75




PREMO FILM PACK TANK


[Illustration]

Those who use the Premo Film Pack need never give a thought to
development, for if they will use the Premo Film Pack Tank, they can
absolutely know that every pack they expose is certain to be perfectly
developed, provided they follow the simple directions for use of the tank.
This means that the merest beginner, without any need of skill or help,
can get as good results in development as the most expert photographer.

For the tank is simplicity itself. It requires no experience, no lengthy
manipulation in a close dark-room. And we recommend the tank system to the
most careful workers as being infinitely simpler than the older method and
producing results superior to those which can be obtained by the most
painstaking tray development.

The Premo Film Pack Tank consists of two pieces--a metal receiver or cage
for the films, and a tank with cover for the developing fluid. The entire
outfit is self-contained and can be easily carried in a corner of a
suitcase.

The cage is divided into twelve compartments--in the 5 x 7 size, six--each
accommodating one film. As the film is taken from the pack it is held
between the thumb and fingers, slightly bent from top to bottom, and
slipped into its respective compartment. When all the compartments are
filled, the cage is placed in tank, which has been previously filled with
developer, the top replaced and the films left to develop for a certain
specified time. No further attention is necessary except to turn the tank
end for end, several times during the progress of development.

At the expiration of the full time, open the tank, take out the cage,
remove films, place them in a tray of water for a moment, then transfer to
the fixing bath. Development is completed. Rinse out cage and tank and set
them aside.

The operation of removing films from the pack and loading the cage is
done, of course, in a darkened room by the light of a ruby lamp. During
the day any darkened closet will suffice, at night any dark room in which
the shades are drawn will answer. To load the films in cage will take only
two or three minutes, and as soon as the top is placed on tank it may be
brought out into any light and left until development is completed. And
night is really an ideal time to develop films, as they can be fixed and
washed in a short time and will dry over night, being all ready to print
from in the morning.

If it is desired to develop less than a dozen films, one merely removes
from his pack as many films as have been exposed, places them in the cage,
and proceeds in the same manner as described above.

The cage of the No. 1 Tank is slightly different from that shown in the
illustration, but the method of loading is the same and, of course, the
results are just as dependable.


_PRICES._

  Premo Film Pack Tank No. 1, for 12 1-3/4 x 2-3/8
  or 2-1/4 x 3-1/4 films                                    $1.25

  Do., No. 2, for 12 2-1/2 x 4-1/4, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4,
   3 x 5-1/4, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 or 4 x 5 films                   3.50

  Do., No. 3, for 6 5 x 7 films                              4.00

  Premo Tank Developing Powders, in packages of 6, No. 1      .20

  Premo Tank Developing Powders, in packages of 6, No. 2      .25

  Premo Tank Developing Powders, in packages of 6, No. 3      .35

  Kodak Acid Fixing Powder, per 1 pound package               .25

  Do., per 1/2 pound package                                  .15

  Do., per 1/4 pound package                                  .10




EASTMAN PLATE TANK


In the Eastman Plate Tank, plates may be developed in the same manner and
with the same assurance of excellent results as may films developed in the
Premo Film Pack Tank. The theory of construction is precisely the same,
with of course such differences as are necessary because of the physical
differences between films and plates.

[Illustration]

It consists of a metal solution cup, a cage for holding twelve (or less)
plates and a loading fixture for loading plates into the cage. In the
3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 and 4 x 5 sizes, the cage of plates may be
developed in a Premo Film Pack Tank, so that one using a Premo that takes
films or plates and having a Premo Film Pack Tank needs only to purchase
the cage and loading fixture of the plate tank for the development of his
plates, an advantage in economy. It is thus apparent that the owner of a
Premo plate camera can not only use films or plates in his camera with
equal facility, but he can also avail himself of the advantages of tank
development with either medium.


_PRICES._

  Eastman Plate Tank for 4 x 5, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 or smaller
  plates, includes Solution Cup, Plate Cage, Loading
  Fixture and Adjustable Kit                                $ 3.50

  Ditto, 5 x 7, without Kit                                   4.50

  Ditto, 8 x 10, with Adjustable Kit                         10.00

  Adjustable Kit for 4 x 5 or 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 Tank to take
  smaller plates                                               .50

  Kits for 5 x 7 Tank, to take 3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 4-1/4 x 6-1/2
  or 4-3/4 x 6-1/2 plates, each                                .75

  Extra Adjustable Kit for 8 x 10 Plate Tank                  1.00

  Plate Cage and Loading Fixture for 4 x 5 and 3-1/4 x 5-1/2
  plates (can be used in a 4 x 5 Premo Film Pack Tank)        1.75

  Eastman Plate Tank Powders, for 4 x 5 Tank, per pk'e
  1/2 doz.                                                     .20

  Ditto for 5 x 7 Tank, per package, 1/2 dozen                 .35

  Ditto for 8 x 10 Tank, per package, 1/2 dozen                .50

  Kodak Acid Fixing Powder, per 1-pound package                .25




BROWNIE ENLARGING CAMERA


[Illustration]

Those who use Premo Cameras up to and including the 4 x 5 size will find
that with one of these cameras it's just as easy to make first-class
enlargements as it is to print on Velox paper. In fact, the two processes
are very much the same excepting that, in ordinary printing, the negative
and paper are in contact, while in enlarging, the paper is at some
distance from the negative, with a lens in between. The Improved Brownie
Enlarging Camera consists of a light-tight cone with attachments to hold a
negative at the small end, and a sheet of Bromide or Velox paper at the
other. They are collapsible and made in two sections the lens support
holding them firmly together when in use.

  No. 2 Brownie Enlarging Camera, for 5 x 7 enlargements
  from 2-1/4 x 3-1/4 negatives                              $2.00

  No. 3 Ditto, for 6-1/2 x 8-1/2 enlargements from
  3-1/4 x 4-1/4 negatives                                    3.00

  No. 4 Ditto, for 8 x 10 enlargements from 4 x 5
  negatives (will also take 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 negatives)         4.00




BROWNIE ILLUMINATOR


A very convenient device, providing a strong, even light by which to print
with the Brownie Enlarging Camera. It is collapsible, but when set up, has
the form of a half-round, light-proof box with socket through which is
inserted an electric light bulb.

[Illustration]

The inner walls of this box are white and act as a reflector when the
light is turned on. At the end is a ground glass, which diffuses the
light, so that by placing negative end of the enlarging camera in contact
with this glass and turning on the electricity, an excellent steady
printing light is obtained.

  Brownie Enlarging Camera Illuminator    $3.50




PREMO LENSES


For those who wish lenses in barrel for view cameras or other use, we list
below several desirable types. Prices on any others will be supplied on
demand.


ZEISS KODAK ANASTIGMAT LENS _f_.6.3

        Size of Plate Covered
  No.   with Full Aperture.     Equivalent Focus.   Price.

  1     2-1/2 x 4-1/4           4-1/2 inches        $18.50
  2     3-1/4 x 4-1/4           5     inches         19.00
  3     4 x 5                   6-1/8 inches         23.25
  4     4 x 5                   6-7/8 inches         26.25
  5     5 x 7                   8-1/4 inches         34.50
  6     6-1/2 x 8-1/2           10    inches         46.50


B. & L.-ZEISS PROTAR LENS--SERIES VII A

       Size of Plate   Focus of     Focus of     Combined
  No.  Covered with    Front Lens.  Back Lens.   Focus.     Speed.  Price.
       Full Aperture.

  2    3-1/4 x 4-1/4   8-1/4 in.    7-3/16 in.   4-1/2 in.  _f_:7   $45.50
  3    4 x 5           11-3/16 in.  7-3/16 in.   5 in.      _f_:7-7  50.00
  5    4-1/4 x 6-1/2   11-3/16 in.  8-3/4 in.    5-5/8 in.  _f_:7    53.00
  8    5 x 7           13-3/4 in.   11-3/16 in.  7 in.      _f_:7    63.50
  9    5 x 8           16-1/8 in.   11-3/16 in.  7-1/2 in.  _f_:7-7  74.00
  11   6-1/2 x 8-1/2   16-1/8 in.   13-3/4 in.   8-1/2 in.  _f_:7    80.00
  12   6-1/2 x 8-1/2   18-7/8 in.   13-3/4 in.   9-1/8 in.  _f_:7-7  98.50
  17   8 x 10          23-1/8 in.   18-7/8 in.   11-7/8 in. _f_:7   145.50


B. & L.-ZEISS PROTAR LENS--SERIES V, _f_:18

The B. & L.-Zeiss Protar. Series V, is designed for extreme wide-angle
work. This lens embraces a field of 110 degrees.

  No.  Size.           Equivalent Focus.   Price.

  1    4-1/4 x 6-1/2   3-3/8 inches        $20.00
  2    5 x 7           4-7/16 inches        20.00
  3    6-1/2 x 8-1/2   5-9/16 inches        25.00
  4    8 x 10          7-3/16 inches        31.00


SYMMETRICAL WIDE-ANGLE LENS

This is an excellent wide-angle lens at a moderate price, having an angle
of about 80 degrees. It is furnished in cells to interchange with the
various lenses supplied on Premo Cameras.

                                           Price in
  No.  Size.           Equivalent Focus.   Cells Only.

  1    4 x 5           3-1/2 inches        $ 5.00
  2    5 x 7           5 inches              7.50
  3    6-1/2 x 8-1/2   6-1/2 inches         12.00
  4    8 x 10          8 inches             15.00




PREMO ACCESSORIES


THE KODAK PORTRAIT ATTACHMENT

This attachment simply fits on in front of the regular lens and in no way
affects the operation of the camera, excepting to so change the focus as
to permit working close to the subject, thereby giving good sized head and
shoulder portraits. Not supplied for cameras larger than 5 x 7. Please
order by number.

  No. 0. For Premo Jrs. No. 1 and No. 1A                             $ .50

  No. 3. For 3-1/4 x 4-1/4 Film Premo No. 1; 3-1/4 x 4-1/4 Pocket
  Premo C; Premoette Jr. No. 1A, both single and double lens;
  Premo Jrs. Nos. 3 and 4                                              .50

  No. 5. For all 4 x 5, 3A and 5 x 7 Premos Nos. 8, 9 and 10; all
  sizes of Filmplate Premos; 3A Pocket Premo C; 3A and 4 x 5
  Film Premo No. 1                                                     .50

  No. 6. For Premoette Jr. No. 1A Special                              .50

  No. 7. For 3A Filmplate Premo Special                                .50

  No. 8. For Premoette Jr. No. 1, with both single and double lens     .50


[Illustration: Made with Filmplate Premo and Kodak Portrait Attachment
(Reduced)]

[Illustration]


KODAK COLOR SCREENS

These are mounted in the same manner as the Kodak Portrait Attachment.
Please order by number.

  No. 0. For Premo Jrs. Nos. 1 and 1A                                $ .50

  No. 3. For 3-1/4 x 4-1/4 Film Premo No. 1; 3-1/4 x 4-1/4 Pocket
  Premo C; Premoette Jr. No. 1A, both single and double lens;
  Premo Jrs. Nos. 3 and 4                                              .75

  No. 5. For all 4 x 5, 3A and 5 x 7 Premos Nos. 8, 9 and 10; all
  sizes of Filmplate Premos; 3A Pocket C; 3A and 4 x 5 Film
  Premo No. 1                                                         1.00

  No. 6. For Premoette Jr. No. 1A Special                              .75

  No. 7. For 3A Filmplate Premo Special                               1.00

  No. 8. For Premoette Jr. No. 1, with both single and double lens     .50




PREMO TRIPODS


CROWN TRIPOD

[Illustration]

Made in four sections. Very rigid.

  Style.   Folded.         Extended.    Weight.   Price.

  No. 1    16-1/4 inches   4-1/3 feet   36 ozs.   $5.50
  No. 2    17-1/4 inches   4-2/3 feet   65 ozs.    6.00
  No. 3    20 inches       5-1/2 feet   70 ozs.    7.50


COMBINATION TRIPOD

[Illustration]

This tripod is made on the sliding and folding principle. The wood parts
are of ash and the finish is of the very best.

  Style.      Size of Camera.             Weight.   Price.

  No. 2-1/2   6-1/2 x 8-1/2 and smaller   3 lbs.    $3.00
  No. 3       8 x 10 and 10 x 12          4 lbs.     3.50
  No. 4       11 x 14 and 14 x 17         5 lbs.     4.50
  No. 5       17 x 20 and 20 x 24         8 lbs.     6.00


SLIDING TRIPOD

[Illustration]

A perfectly rigid tripod for the heaviest cameras.

  Style.  Size of Camera.           Weight.        Price.

  No. 1   5 x 7 and smaller         2 lbs.         $2.00
  No. 2   5 x 8 and 6-1/2 x 8-1/2   2 lbs. 8 ozs.   2.50
  No. 3   8 x 10 and 10 x 12        4 lbs. 8 ozs.   3.00
  No. 4   11 x 14 and 14 x 17       6 lbs. 8 ozs.   4.00


R. O. C. TRIPOD

[Illustration]

The R. O. C. Tripod is of the combination type and is for use with any
camera up to and including the 5 x 7 size.

  Weight, 32 ounces.    Length, 22 to 57 inches    Price, $1.70


FLEXO TRIPOD

[Illustration]

For cameras up to and including the 5 x 7 size this is a very satisfactory
tripod at small expense.

  Weight, 16 ounces    Length, 29 to 54 inches    Price, $1.00


METAL TRIPODS

These tripods have the qualities that make for service as well as good
appearance.

Light and very compact, they are yet rigid when extended because of their
special construction. The principle is that of a telescope, each section
sliding into the one above it, till the whole length is reduced to a
single section and the sections are securely fastened to one another.

Nos. 380, 390, 400 and 410 fold up flat, the first three being supplied in
neat cases. Nos. 400 and 410 have the additional advantage of being fitted
with a patent top, which provides a broad firm table for supporting the
camera, but folds to the side when tripod is not in use. Upper or outer
sections are all black enameled, lower sections brass.

  No. 320. 5 sections, length closed 14-1/2 inches  $3.00
  No. 330. 7 sections, length closed 11-3/4 inches   3.75
  No. 340. 4 sections, length closed 15-1/2 inches   2.50
  No. 380. 7 sections, length closed 11-3/4 inches   6.25
  No. 390. 7 sections, length closed 11-1/2 inches   5.00
  No. 400. 7 sections, length closed 12 inches       6.50
  No. 410. 4 sections, length closed 16 inches       3.25

Adjustable Heads (extra) fitted with ball and socket joint, suitable for
any of above Tripods.

  No. 300   $1.00
  No. 305    1.50
  No. 310    1.75




PREMO ACCESSORIES


EASTMAN TRIPOD BRACE

[Illustration]

Out of doors, or indoors when the R. O. C. Tripod Truck is not used, this
is an excellent attachment for holding tripod legs in position. Made
entirely of metal, it can be instantly attached, and even when tripod is
lifted the legs cannot collapse or change their position.

  Eastman Tripod Brace    $1.00


R. O. C. TRIPOD TRUCK

[Illustration]

For flash-light work, home portraiture, in fact any branch of indoor
photography, this truck is a very great convenience. It holds the tripod
legs firmly in place and there is no danger of slipping nor of tripod
spikes marring floors or rugs. Can be easily moved on its castors to any
part of room, and folds up compactly when not in use.

  No. 1, for average Tripods $1.00; No. 2 for very heavy Tripods, $1.25


THE UNIVERSAL CLAMP

[Illustration]

The Universal Clamp is a small, convenient article which takes the place
of a tripod, and which may be attached to any camera. It can be carried
readily in the pocket, is very light, and may be attached to a chair,
fence, the front board of an automobile, or other object which may be at
hand. The clamp jaws are padded with felt.

  Price    $ .75


PREMO PLATE HOLDER

Premo holders are made absolutely light-tight by a fully patented
light-lock. This device is shown in cut and is constructed of finely
tempered, non-corrosive metal with independently operating spring fingers
overlaid with a closely woven, specially prepared fabric. A slide can be
inserted cornerwise without admitting light to the plate. Fitted with
lacquered press-board slides that will not electrify, collect dust, crack
or split.

[Illustration]

  3-1/4 x 4-1/4   $1.00
  3-1/4 x 5-1/2    1.00
  4 x 5            1.00
  5 x 7            1.25
  6-1/2 x 8-1/2    1.75


EASTMAN VIEW HOLDER

These holders are made with bottom flap, avoiding all danger of plates
falling out. They are strongly constructed, have patented spring finger
light-lock, and made to fit both models of the Eastman View. Slides are of
lacquered press-board.

  5 x 7           $1.00
  6-1/2 x 8-1/2    1.10
  8 x 10           1.25


UNIVERSAL PLATE HOLDER

Constructed in the same manner as the Eastman View Holder but made to fit
Empire State and Premo View Cameras.

  5 x 7           $1.00
  6-1/2 x 8-1/2    1.10
  8 x 10           1.25
  11 x 14          4.00
  14 x 17          5.00


R. O. C. PLATE HOLDER

This holder is of good construction and is adapted for use in the R. O. C.
View Camera only. It has pressboard slides.

  5 x 7           $1.00
  6-1/2 x 8-1/2    1.10
  8 x 10           1.25


PLATE HOLDER AND ADAPTER SLIDES

LACQUERED PRESSBOARD

  3-1/4 x 4-1/4  $ .20
  3-1/4 x 5-1/2    .20
  4 x 5            .20
  5 x 7            .25
  6-1/2 x 8-1/2    .30
  8 x 10           .40
  11 x 14          .60

HARD RUBBER.

  5 x 7          $ .35
  6-1/2 x 8-1/2    .50
  8 x 10           .65


PLATE HOLDER KITS

  Size Outside.   Size of Opening for Plate.                Price.

  4 x 5           3-1/4 x 4, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4                  $ .20

  5 x 7           3-1/4 x 4, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2,
                  4 x 5, 4-1/4 x 6-1/2                        .25

  6-1/2 x 8-1/2   3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 4 x 5, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2,
                  4-1/4 x 6-1/2, 4-3/4 x 6-1/2, 5 x 7         .30

  8 x 10          4-1/4 x 6-1/2, 4-3/4 x 6-1/2, 5 x 7,
                  6-1/2 x 8-1/2                               .40

  11 x 14         6-1/2 x 8-1/2, 8 x 10, 10 x 12              .50

  14 x 17         10 x 12, 11 x 14                            .80


PREMO FILM PACK ADAPTERS

Adapters are regularly carried in stock for all Premo and Poco cameras up
to and including the 5 x 7 size.

  Size.                Price.

  3-1/4 x 4-1/4        $1.00
  3 x 5-1/4             1.50
  3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2)    1.50
  4 x 5                 1.50
  5 x 7                 2.50


PREMO FILM PACKS

Twelve exposures in each pack.

  Size.               Price.

  1-3/4 x 2-3/8       $ .25
  2-1/4 x 3-1/4         .40
  2-1/2 x 4-1/4         .50
  3-1/4 x 4-1/4         .70
  3 x 5-1/4             .75
  3A (3-1/4 x 5-1/2)    .80
  4 x 5                 .90
  5 x 7                1.60


GLASS DRY PLATES.

Seed, Royal or Stanley.

  Size.            Price per Dozen.

  3-1/4 x 4-1/4    $ .45
  3-1/4 x 5-1/2      .65
  4 x 5              .65
  4-1/4 x 6-1/2      .90
  5 x 7             1.10
  5 x 8             1.25
  6-1/2 x 8-1/2     1.65
  8 x 10            2.40


VELOX PAPER

The very best developing paper for amateur use.

                        SINGLE WEIGHT.                DOUBLE WEIGHT.

  Size.           Doz.    1/2 Gross.  Gross.    Doz.    1/2 Gross.  Gross.

  2-1/4 x 3-1/4   $ .15   $ .60       $1.00     $ .20   $ .75       $1.25
  2-1/2 x 4-1/4     .15     .70        1.25       .20     .90        1.55
  3-1/4 x 4-1/4     .15     .80        1.50       .20    1.00        1.90
  3-1/4 x 5-1/2     .15     .80        1.50       .20    1.40        2.50
  4 x 5             .25    1.10        2.00       .30    1.40        2.50
  5 x 7             .35    2.00        3.50       .45    2.50        4.40
  Velox Post Cards                                .20    1.10        2.00


KODAK CANDLE LAMP

This lamp is well made, collapsible, of special tested ruby fabric, bound
in metal frames.

[Illustration]

  Kodak Candle Lamp                  $ .25
  Extra Candles for same, per dozen    .30


KODAK DARK ROOM LAMP

The Kodak-Dark Room Lamp is oil burning and is fitted with both orange and
ruby glass.

  No. 2 Kodak Dark Room Lamp   $1.00


DEVELOPING TRAYS

  Bulls-Eye, 4 x 5 or 4 x 6    $ .15
  Bulls-Eye, 5 x 7               .30
  Enameled, 4 x 5                .20
  Enameled, 4 x 6                .25
  Enameled, 5-1/4 x 7-3/8        .35


DEVELOPING AND PRINTING OUTFITS

Eastman 3A Outfit includes every requisite for developing by the dark room
method, printing and finishing twenty-four 3-1/4 x 5-1/2 or smaller
pictures.

1 Kodak Candle Lamp, 25c; Printing Frame, 25c; 1 Glass for Frame, 5c; 1
4-ounce Graduate, 10c; 1 Stirring Rod, 5c; 4 Developing Trays, 40c; 5
Tubes Eastman's Special Developer, 25c; 1/2 pound Kodak Acid Fixing
Powder, 15c; 1 package Bromide Potassium, 5c; 2 dozen Velox Paper. 30c; 3
Kodak M. Q. Powders for developing Velox, 15c; Instruction Book, 10c;
These articles if purchased separately would cost $2.10. Price, complete,
neatly packed, $1.50.

A B C Outfit, similar to above, but for 4 x 5 negatives, $1.50.


DEVELOPING AND PRINTING

  Size.                   Developing and       Developing  Printing only,
                          Printing Per Pack.   only, Per   Each Exposure.
                          Mounted. Unmounted.  Pack.       Mounted.  Unmounted.

  1-3/4 x 2-3/8, 12 exp.  $ .95    $ .89       $ .40       $ .06     $ .05-1/2
  2-1/4 x 3-1/4, 12  "     1.40     1.28         .50         .08       .07
  2-1/2 x 4-1/4, 12  "     1.50     1.38         .70         .08       .07
  3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 12  "     1.50     1.38         .70         .08       .07
  3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 12  "     1.80     1.68        1.00         .10       .09
  4 x 5,         12  "     1.80     1.68        1.00         .10       .09
  5 x 7,         12  "     2.40     2.10        1.20         .12-1/2   .10

Unmounted Velox prints are furnished unless otherwise specified.

"Double Weight" prints will be billed at mounted rates.

No orders executed for less than 25 cents.


THE KODAK FLASH SHEET HOLDER

The safest and most convenient method of flashlight photography is in the
use of Eastman Flash Sheets with the Kodak Flash Sheet Holder.

[Illustration]

The sheet is held in place by a saw tooth in the center, and the holder
may be held always between the sheet and the operator, either with hand or
on a tripod, a tripod socket being provided for this purpose. When all is
ready the flash is set off by touching a match from the back to the sheet
through the small aperture in the center.

  Kodak Flash Sheet Holder                                       $1.00
  Eastman Flash Sheets, No. 1, per pkg. 1/2 doz. sheets, 3 x 4     .25
  Eastman Flash Sheets. No. 2, per pkg. 1/2 doz. sheets. 4 x 5     .40
  Eastman Flash Sheets, No. 3, per pkg. 1/2 doz. sheets, 5 x 7     .60


PREMO NEGATIVE RACK

This rack accommodates negatives of all sizes. It folds flat when not in
use.

[Illustration]

  No. 1, for 12 negatives   $ .20
  No. 2, for 24 negatives     .25


KODAK TRIMMING BOARD

A thoroughly reliable trimming board at a moderate price, constructed of
hard wood with natural finish. The blade is of the best steel and a rule
is fitted to the board.

[Illustration]

  No. 1, 5 x 5 in.                                $ .40
  No. 2, 7 x 7 in.                                  .60
  Transparent Trimming Gauge for either (extra)     .20


THE KODAK ALBUM

Made on a new principle, which does away with mounting prints by paste or
otherwise. They are merely slipped into pocket strips at top and bottom,
and will not come out unless removed by hand. Has handsome grain leather
cover and black leaves with linen finish.

  A, 2-1/4 x 3-1/4, 25 leaves, 3 on    $2.75
  B, 2-1/2 x 4-1/4, 25 leaves, 3 on     3.00
  C, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, 25 leaves, 3 on     3.00
  D, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 25 leaves, 3 on     3.25
  E, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2, 50 leaves, 3 on     4.25
  F, 4 x 5,         25 leaves, 2 on     3.00
  G, 4-1/4 x 6-1/2, 25 leaves, 2 on     3.25
  H, 5 x 7,         25 leaves, 2 on     3.50


THE FORUM ALBUM

Flexible, black leather embossed cloth cover.

  A, 25 black leaves, or N, 25 Sepia leaves, 5-1/2 x 7     $ .45
  B, 25 black leaves, or O, 25 Sepia leaves,     7 x 10      .60
  C, 25 black leaves, or P, 25 Sepia leaves,    10 x 7       .60
  D, 25 black leaves, or R, 25 Sepia leaves,    11 x 14     1.60
  E, 50 black leaves,                        5-1/2 x 7       .60
  F, 50 black leaves,                            7 x 10      .95
  G, 50 black leaves,                           10 x 7       .95
  H, 50 black leaves,                           11 x 14     1.90


CARD MOUNTS

  VIEW

  Carbon Black and Scotch Gray

  For Prints      Size Outside   Per 50   Per 100
  2-1/4 x 3-1/4       4 x 5      $ .35    $ .70
  2-1/2 x 4-1/4   4-1/4 x 6        .45      .90
  3-1/4 x 4-1/4       5 x 6        .55     1.10
  3-1/4 x 5-1/2   4-3/4 x 7        .65     1.25
  4 x 5           5-1/2 x 6-1/2    .60     1.15
  5 x 7               7 x 9        .95     1.90


  RIVERVIEW

  London Brown and Ash Gray

  For Prints      Size Outside   Per 50   Per 100
  2-1/4 x 3-1/4       4 x 5      $ .75    $ 1.50
  2-1/2 x 4-1/4   4-1/8 x 5-7/8    .85      1.65
  3-1/2 x 3-1/2       5 x 5        .90      1.75
  3-1/4 x 4-1/4       5 x 6        .95      1.85
  3-1/4 x 5-1/2       5 x 7       1.00      2.00
  4 x 5           5-3/4 x 6-3/4   1.05      2.05

No orders accepted for less than fifty of one kind and size.


EASTMAN FILM NEGATIVE ALBUMS

[Illustration]

  For 100 negatives, 2-1/2 x 4-1/4, or smaller    $ .75
  For 100 negatives, 3-1/4 x 4-1/4, or 4 x 5       1.00
  For 100 negatives, 3-1/4 x 5-1/2, or smaller     1.00
  For 100 negatives, 5 x 7          or smaller     1.50


MISCELLANEOUS

  Cable Release                                                      $ .25

  Bulbs and Tubes, No. 2                                               .25

  Bulbs and Tubes, No. 3                                               .35

  Focus Cloth, Rubber                                                  .50

  Kodak Print roller 2 x 6 inch rubber roller, nickled frame           .50

  Flexo Print Roller, 4 inch rubber roller, black enameled frame       .15

  Photo Paste, 3 oz. tube                                              .15

  Photo Paste, 5 oz. tube                                              .25

  Thermometer Stirring Rod                                             .60

  Graduates, moulded, 4 ozs.                                           .10

  Ditto, 8 ounces                                                      .15

  Ditto, 16 ounces                                                     .20

  Ground Glass:
    4 x 5                                                              .15
    5 x 7                                                              .20
    6-1/2 x 8-1/2                                                      .25
    8 x 10                                                             .30

  Eastman Printing Frames:
    3-1/4 x 4-1/4, opens two-thirds                                    .25
    3-1/2 x 5-1/2, for films, opens two-thirds                         .25
    3-1/4 x 5-1/2, for plates, opens two-thirds                        .25
    4 x 5, opens two-thirds                                            .25
    5 x 7, opens two-thirds                                            .35

  Reversible Backs:
    For View Cameras, 5 x 7                                           7.50
    For View Cameras, 6-1/2 x 8-1/2                                   9.00
    For View Cameras, 8 x 10                                         11.00

  Premo View Finder                                                   1.50

  Screws for Tripod Head:
    Nos. 1, 2 and 3                                                    .25
    Nos. 4 and 5                                                       .40

  Screws for Tripod Leg:
    Nos. 1, 2 and 3                                                    .15
    Nos. 4 and 5                                                       .25

  Milled Head Screws for Cameras:
    1/2 inch and smaller                                               .15
    Larger than 1/2 inch                                               .25

  Shoulder Straps, Black:
    1/2 x 52 inch with Snaps and Buckles                               .40
    5/8 x 52 inch with Snaps and Buckles                               .50
    1/2 x 66 inch, with Buckle                                         .40
    5/8 x 74 inch, with Buckle                                         .50

  Tan Straps for View Cases with Buckle. Specify style and size
  of camera when ordering:

    34, 40 and 44 inches                                               .40
    52, 60 and 60 inches                                               .50

  Tubing per foot                                                      .07


TERMS

Prices included in this catalogue are net, excepting to dealers.

When ordering, give shipping directions, whether by freight, express or
otherwise. If not stated, we use our discretion.

Mail orders must be accompanied with remittance for full amount of
purchase, including postage, or we will ship by express.

All goods are carefully packed and we cannot be held responsible for any
damage during transit.

Orders for special parts or for goods not listed in this catalogue will be
filled on customers responsibility only. Under no circumstances can we
permit the return of such goods for credit.

All prices are F. O. B. at Toronto, Ont.

  CANADIAN KODAK CO., Limited
  TORONTO, CANADA




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

Punctuation has been corrected without note.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "hav-" corrected to "having" (page 38)
  "light tight" standardized to "light-tight" (page 43)

Other than the corrections listed above, printer's inconsistencies in
spelling and hyphenation usage have been retained.






End of Project Gutenberg's Premo Cameras, 1914., by Canadian Kodak Company

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PREMO CAMERAS, 1914. ***

***** This file should be named 33034.txt or 33034.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/0/3/33034/

Produced by V. L. Simpson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
