The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Five Giants, by Daniel P. Kidder

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Five Giants

Author: Daniel P. Kidder

Release Date: July 31, 2010 [EBook #33299]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIVE GIANTS ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









    THE

    FIVE GIANTS.

    [Illustration]

    New-York:
    LANE & TIPPETT,
    FOR THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION OF THE
    METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH,
    200 Mulberry-street.




[Illustration]




    THE

    FIVE GIANTS.

    [Illustration]

    REVISED BY D. P. KIDDER.

    New-York:

    PUBLISHED BY LANE & TIPPETT,

    FOR THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION OF THE METHODIST
    EPISCOPAL CHURCH, 200 MULBERRY-ST.

    Joseph Longking, Printer.
    1847.




THE FIVE GIANTS.


When I was a boy, few things pleased me better than to hear a tale about
a giant. Silly and untrue as were the stories that I heard, they vastly
delighted me; but were you now to ask what information they gave me, or
what good I gathered from them, sadly should I be at fault for a reply.

But if a tale about giants, that was not true, and that added nothing
to my knowledge, amused me, why should not a story about giants, which
is true, and which gives good information, be equally entertaining to
you? I see no reason why it should not be so, and therefore it is my
determination to tell you the tale of the Five Giants.

Three of the five giants are old, so very old that you would hardly
believe me were I to tell you their ages; and the other two are much
older than many people imagine; but, notwithstanding the great age of
these giants, their strength is not in the least impaired. They can
travel as fast and do quite as much work as they ever did in their
youthful days.

By and by you shall know the real names of these five giants; but it
will answer my purpose better, and give you, perhaps, quite as much
entertainment, if, at first, I name them according to my fancy. The
three old giants, Flare, Roar, and Blow, are known in every part of the
world; but the two younger, Bounce and Rush, have not, as yet, traveled
quite as far as their brothers. For the most part, all five of them are
useful characters; but if once they are in a passion, and this is too
often the case, the sooner you are out of their way the better.

Giant Flare is somewhat yellow in complexion, with red hair, and has
many good and companionable qualities; indeed, in the winter, when
people like to gather round the friendly hearth, he is one of the most
agreeable creatures in the world. No wonder, then, that he should be so
much sought after. He is invited by the prince and the peasant, and
accepts the invitation of both freely, so that on the same day he is to
be seen in the poorest cot and the proudest palace.

But besides his companionable qualities, Giant Flare is a capital cook,
so much so, that he has been employed by all the crowned heads in all
the quarters of the world. He is very useful in mining operations, and
in smelting ore; and then, as a manufacturer, he is quite at home, being
equally skilled in making a copper saucepan, a brass warming-pan, a
silver snuff-box, and a golden sovereign.

You will begin to think well of Giant Flare; but truth is truth, and, as
I told you, all the five giants are sad fellows when in a passion. Giant
Flare has many a time burst out into a perfect frenzy, and done
mischief that could never be repaired. If he is not used well, he thinks
nothing of burning a person's house down. He has been the means of
destroying many fine forests, and, on one occasion, when in London, to
his disgrace be it spoken, with the assistance of one of his brothers,
Giant Blow, he set almost a hundred churches and as many as thirteen
thousand houses all in a blaze.

When Bonaparte set out to conquer Russia, Giant Flare resisted him, and
would not let him go further than Moscow; and when the Spanish Armada
invaded England, he boldly attacked the Spanish ships, and was one of
the principal means of scattering and putting them to flight. But now
let me tell you of Giant Roar.

This giant is about the same age as his brother of whom I have said so
much, and, like him, has done both kind and ill-natured deeds in his
time. He is fond of constructing baths, and fishing ponds, and canals,
and of rendering assistance in cultivating gardens. He is largely
connected with ships and sailors. Many think he has more power by sea
than by land; but some of his mad pranks will surprise you.

A long time after the Thames Tunnel was begun, under the river at
London, and when thousands and tens of thousands of pounds had been
spent, in an angry mood he set his foot against the bottom of the
river, and crushed the in tunnel. Since then he has behaved better, and
allowed them to finish the work; but, for a time, this prank of his
occasioned great confusion.

I have seen him myself, in his tantrums, play terrible tricks; I once
met him at the Falls of Niagara, where he roared like a Bedlamite,
foamed at the mouth worse than a mad dog, and at last flung himself
headlong from so high a precipice that he was dashed into a thousand
pieces. Whether the Americans and Canadians had used him ill, or not, I
will not say, but certain it was, that his rage appeared unbounded.

You will think that what I have already said of Giant Roar is bad
enough; but on one occasion he was even yet more ungovernable, for
rushing abroad in his fury, he destroyed more lives than ever had been
destroyed at one time since the world had been made. Many of his
victims struggled hard with him to the utmost; but he came upon them by
surprise, and they were neither swift enough to escape, nor strong
enough to resist him.

Giant Blow is kind, whimsical, mischievous, and dangerous, by fits. One
day, as I went by the common, he was good-naturedly helping a group of
school boys to fly their kites. I hardly think they could have managed
without his assistance; but, in ten minutes after, he tore two of their
kites all to shivers. The same day he snatched widow Woodward's shawl
from her back, and went off with it, broke half a dozen clothes lines,
tossed about the clothes, and then, all at once, violently pushed down a
large stack of chimneys. You see by these actions how little he is to be
relied on.

Giant Blow is a great traveler, for he sailed round the world with
Captain Cook, and helped Columbus to discover America. Indeed Columbus
could not have gone without him. Were he and Giant Roar to withdraw the
assistance they give to seamen, it would at once put an end to all
merchandise, and not a single ship would be able to sail upon the seas.

But though Giant Blow is one of the best friends in the world to
sailors, he often treats them very harshly, knocking their vessels to
pieces, and flinging them into the raging deep. Hundreds of gallant
ships, and thousands of hardy tars, has he destroyed in his time.

Giant Blow grinds a great deal of corn, and has a method of his own for
cooling the earth in hot weather. Common report says that, on some
occasions, he has removed the plague; and no physician on the earth has
effected such extraordinary cures as he has done. If every one that he
has kept in health were to give him a fee, of all doctors in the world
he would be the richest.

Giant Blow is well known in the West Indies, where he has, at different
times, made great confusion. When once his loud voice is heard, a
general terror and consternation are spread around; for it is well known
that, in his passions, he spares neither friend nor foe. With his great
strength he lays about him in all directions, stripping the trees of
their foliage, and furiously tearing them up by the roots, flinging the
roofs of the houses in the air, and battering down the walls on the
heads of those who dwell in them. On he goes, till loud cries of
distress are heard, and heaps of rubbish and rafters, and the dead
bodies of men, women, and children, lie mingled together in confusion on
the ground.

You have not, from what I have told you, I dare say, formed the highest
opinion of Flare, Roar, and Blow; and I fear that the characters of
Giants Bounce and Rush will be very far from perfect in your estimation.
You shall have, however, the best account of them that I can give you,
and then you will be able to judge more correctly.

Giant Bounce, of all the family of the giants, is certainly the most
peppery in his temper. His brothers usually give some notice of their
outbreaks, and rise in their position by degrees; not so Giant Bounce:
at one moment he is quiet as a lamb, and at the next much fiercer than
a lion.

In complexion, he is much darker than the others; indeed he has an ugly,
grim, and very forbidding appearance, which well suits his disposition.
He is the friend of duelists and highwaymen, and this of itself would be
bad enough, if I had nothing else to bring against him. He has done some
good, certainly, in his day; but take him for all in all, it might have
been well if his friend the monk, who first introduced him into
society, had been otherwise employed.

You would hardly think, from the kind way in which he amuses children,
by making them squibs and crackers, and other fireworks, that he was
half so mischievous as he is; but as I have told you the truth about his
brothers, so will I tell you the truth about him. I cannot say that he
does not make himself useful at times, for, in deep mines, he often does
more work, in one hour, than the miners could do without him in a whole
day; yet still he is a dark, designing, cruel character.

It is true that, some years ago, he went against a terrible pirate and
robber, who lived on the coast of Barbary, destroying his ships,
knocking his fortifications about his ears, compelling him to give up
all the Christian slaves he had in his dungeons, and making him promise
to behave better in future. It is true also that he helped Nelson,
Napoleon, Wellington, and Washington, to win their victories; but it was
not because he had any special love for either of them that he did these
things. No! whatever other people say of him, I say that he is a hasty,
cruel, treacherous, blood-thirsty monster. It was he who first persuaded
people to make guns, pistols, and cannon mortars, bombshells, and
congreve rockets, so that widows and orphans have been multiplied by
him, and millions of men, by his means, have been destroyed.

I have now come to the last of the giants, and his character shall be
summed up in few words. If you remember, I told you that, in winter
nights, Giant Flare was a very agreeable companion, and the same thing
may be said of Giant Rush. When the tea-urn simmers, and friends gather
round the winter tea-table, Giants Flare and Rush ought always to be
there. They are good company even when you have them one at a time; but
still better when they are together.

Giant Rush is thought to be younger than his brother Bounce; but of
this I have some doubt. Of the two, however, he is by far the most
industrious. He draws up water out of mines; he blows the bellows of the
blast-furnaces; saws timber; grinds and polishes metals, makes carriages
run without horses, and forces ships through the waters of the great
deep against both wind and tide. Besides these things, he has latterly
begun to print newspapers and books, and in this department he will make
himself more known than ever. These are his good deeds; but his bad ones
are a sad reproach to him.

Would you believe it that, some time back, he undertook to do more
destruction, and to destroy more lives in one hour, than Giant Bounce
could in a day? Few people thought better than I did of Giant Rush
before this; and, to speak the truth, I hardly thought the report was
true. But when I saw him, with my own eyes, fire sixty or eighty bullets
out of an iron tube, in less time than Giant Bounce could fire with the
same instrument, I thought to myself, "O! if he can do this, he can do
anything."

The giant then went into a large field, and, pointing a cannon into a
high sand-bank, fired off a complete stream of cannon balls, enough, I
should think, to bring down a house, if not a church, to the very
ground. In short, I was quite frightened at his invention; and all that
I hope now is, that no one will give him the least encouragement in his
horrid undertaking.

Having now related what may appear to you rather a wonderful story, I
must proceed to tell you the real names of the five giants, though it is
by no means unlikely that you have already guessed them. The five
giants, Flare, Roar, Blow, Bounce, and Rush, are, then, neither more
nor less than the five gigantic powers, Fire, Water, Wind, Gunpowder,
and Steam; and, though I may have related their adventures and
achievements somewhat fancifully, if you will examine them you will find
that they are strictly true. The influence of these giant powers in the
world has been very great; and as your attention is now drawn to the
subject, you will, perhaps, be disposed to think upon it more than you
have hitherto done, connected so closely as it is with the comfort, the
luxury, the knowledge, and indeed, also, with the happiness and misery
of mankind. Had I been disposed, I might have made my relation much more
wonderful; but I trust you have received from it, as it is, some
amusement, and that it has not been altogether without instruction. It
may be long before you again hear a true story of five giants; you will
therefore do well to try to turn this one to advantage, and to inquire
what it is, in each case, that gives force to the power. For you ought
to understand that, in and with all the powers of nature, although man
is allowed to make much use of them, and often to set them in operation;
yet there is a greater Hand than his, though all unseen, which alone can
control them. Whenever, then, we see either the water or the fire, or
hear the wind, let us remember that these are so many elements which
God has intrusted to the use of man, and that for an abuse of their
capacities we shall be held accountable.

[Illustration]




    METH. EPIS. S. S. UNION.
    ELEGANT BOOKS.

    AUNT CLARA'S
    STORIES.
    18mo. Price 16 cents.

    ANNIE WALTON.
    18mo. Price 16 cents.

    TALKS WITH LITTLE
    ELLA.
    2 vols. 48mo. 13 cts. each.

    WAY TO JESUS.
    2 vols. 48mo. 10 cts. each.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Five Giants, by Daniel P. Kidder

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIVE GIANTS ***

***** This file should be named 33299.txt or 33299.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/2/9/33299/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
