Project Gutenberg's Instruction book on ring spinning, by Francis L. Lincoln

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Instruction book on ring spinning

Author: Francis L. Lincoln

Release Date: August 13, 2010 [EBook #33424]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INSTRUCTION BOOK ON RING SPINNING ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









/$
INSTRUCTION BOOK

ON

RING SPINNING

BY

FRANCIS L. LINCOLN.




WARREN, MASS.
HERALD PRINTING COMPANY.
1885.
$/




/$
Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1885,
By FRANCIS L. LINCOLN,
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.
$/




PREFACE.


The object of this little book is to give help and instruction to
those who are engaged in this department of mill work. It imparts that
knowledge which only years of thorough study and observation can give.
It has been carefully prepared by an experienced Spinner, who has
given years of study to it, in order to benefit and help those who are
interested in the Spinning department.

/$
                                      FRANCIS L. LINCOLN, Author.
$/




CONTENTS.


/$
   1. The First Thing to do when going into a strange room to take
      charge.

   2. To see that your Draughts, Twists and Travelers are right,
      etc.

   3. How to pack Yarn closely on the Bobbin.

   4. To see that your Thread Guides are

   5. About Spindles, Rings, and Steel Rolls.

   6. How Top Rolls should be kept in order to make good yarn weight
      on top rolls, etc.

   7. Bands; how they should be run, etc.

   8. What to do when you have long staple Cotton.

   9. What Twists should be in the hank roving, and why.

  10. How Roving should be when run double, and how to get it
      single.

  11. How to run colored Roving double on spinning frames.

  12. How Waste should be run through the lappers, etc.

  13. How to prove that uneven work is not made on Spinning Frames.

  14. How bunches can be made on Spinning Frames and Spoolers.

  15. How coarse threads are made.

  16. Caution to be observed in changing from one number of yarn to
      another.

  17. What to do when Cotton is poor.

  18. Why it is cheaper for the Company to wind the yarn hard on the
      bobbins and spools.

  19. If yarn is knitted, where the trouble is.

  20. How snarled yarn is made, etc.

  21. How to avoid making lap waste in spinning room.

  22. How to avoid making roving waste in spinning room.

  23. When wastes should be picked up.

  24. What the draught change gear should be, when you run colored
      work.

  25. System in doffing the frames and gauge to go by.

  26. How to get speed of cylinder and spindles.

  27. To know what pulley will drive your cylinder faster or slower.

  28. How to take up a belt or let it out, when you change pulleys.

  29. Rule for finding what number of twists to the inch for any
      number of yarn.

  30. Square Root of numbers, from 18 to 30, with twist.

  31. The rule for finding the draught for any number of yarn.

  32. The gear required to run another number on the same hank
      roving.

  33. The hank roving required to run another number of yarn with
      same draught.

  34. Rule to find the draught change gear required, when changing
      from one number to another on a frame or mule, when the
      draught and roving both have to be altered.

  35. How to find the twist gear by square root of the number.

  36. How to get twist pulley for another number of yarn.

  37. How to get the exact twist in yarn.

  38. How to get the weight on top rolls.

  39. Square Root table for the twist of yarn.
$/




INSTRUCTION BOOK.


THE FIRST THING.

1. The first thing to do when going into a strange room to take
charge, is to learn the names and dispositions of your help, and their
ability. By doing this it will save you some trouble. Do not turn off
help the first day you go into a room to take charge. Get the good
will of your help and keep them; and when they learn your ways and
know you mean just what you say, every thing will be pleasant for them
and you also.


DRAUGHTS, TWISTS AND TRAVELERS.

2. To see that your Draughts, Twists and Travelers are right for the
numbers of yarns you are spinning. Travelers govern the twist. When
the bobbins are full there is more twist in than when it first starts.
Have them heavy enough to keep the ends straight. If Travelers are
poor the work will run bad. Change them on fine work once in three or
four months, clean them every doff, and touch the ring with a little
oily waste. If Draught gears bind, spinners cannot keep their ends
up.


PACKING YARN ON BOBBINS.

3. To see that the yarn is packed closely on the bobbin. The way to
tell is to put an empty bobbin on, and run one layer of yarn upon it;
if the threads do not lay close together, run your motion slower. In
this way you get more length of yarn to the bobbin.


THREAD GUIDES.

4. To see that your thread guides are central with the bobbin below.
If a crease has been made by the thread running through it, take it
out and put in a new one.


SPINDLES.

5. To see that the spindles are in the center of the rings, and that
your rings are in good condition. A poor ring will make two-thirds
more waste than a good one, and the frame requires three times the
cleaning that it does with a good ring. Slip your finger round inside
of the ring; if it feels notchy the ring is poor. Take it out. Rings
should be looked over every time you scour. That should be every six
months. Steel rolls should be rubbed with one-twenty emery cloth once
a year, with a little oil.


TOP ROLLS.

6. See that your top rolls are kept in good condition. Look them all
over once a month if that will do, if not look them over oftener. New
rolls should always be put in the front, poorest ones in the back. New
rolls should always be calipered at each end; if they do not caliper
the same at each end of the roll, the roll should not be used, as it
would spoil the yarn, and spinners could not keep up their ends. New
rolls should be oiled when they are put in to run. Neck of front rolls
should be oiled morning and noon. All of the rolls should be oiled
once a week. The weight should be the same on all top rolls. In order
to do this your saddles must be all alike, and must not hug the neck
of the roll. Stirrups should be all of the same length and style. The
levers should be all of the same length and style; and weights should
be all of the same heft. Stirrups must clear the rolls, and use double
saddles. Shell rolls should be cleaned and oiled once a month, with
lard oil. Use vinegar with one-third water to clean top rolls. Roller
hooks should not be used on steel rolls.


CARRYING.

7. A small band carrying one spindle is better than a large band
carrying a number of spindles. It makes better yarn, and not one-third
the waste. Bands should be put on tight; and the spinner should call
the band boy soon as one comes off, to put on a new one. Bands should
all be looked over once a week, and all slack ones cut off and new
ones put on. A slack band makes soft yarn. If your frame does not run
up to speed, you will get soft yarn. A dry spindle will also make soft
yarn. Keep your spindles properly oiled.


LONG STAPLE COTTON.

8. For long staple cotton you must spread the bottom and top rolls a
little to avoid cockley yarn. Long staple cotton does not require so
much twist on spinning as short.


ROVING.

9. Too much twist in roving makes bad yarn, and spoils the top rolls
on spinning frames. The square root of the number is about the twist
for roving. It gives the Carder a chance to keep up with the spinning,
and gives the Spinner a chance to make a better quality of yarn. If
there is too much twist in the roving, you cannot draw it on spinning
frames without spreading the rolls; but then it will spoil the top
rolls. Keep your numbers even if you can. Size from every fine speeder
and average it every day, and examine the yarn every time you size, to
see if it is good. By doing so it may save you considerable trouble.


TWO-ROVING.

10. In running two-roving together, always have them of the same
hank, because if one is of one hank, and the other of another, there
will be more twist in one than in the other, and will not make as good
yarn, and will not draw as even as they would if they were of the same
twist or hank. To know what the two hanks would be single; you must
add the two hanks together, and divide that by four to get it single.


DOUBLE WORK.

11. The way to run double work on spinning frames. Have the white put
in the top, if you have double creels; and colored work in the bottom.
Piece the back roving in the top with the back roving in the bottom.
Front in with front makes the yarn more even.


WASTE.

12. Waste must be run through the lapper all by itself, not mix it
with the good cotton; and if one section of cards will run one lap a
day and keep the waste up, you may run one; if it makes two laps put
on two sections, (one lap on each section,) and the work or yarn will
be more even.


UNEVEN WORK.

13. How to prove that uneven work is not made on spinning frames. See
that your draught gears do not bind; if they do, you will have uneven
yarn. Put in new rolls in front, middle and back. See that your frame
runs up to right speed and roller belt is tight. See that the rings
and travelers are good. See that stirrups and saddles are in place.
Then if your yarn is uneven the trouble is in the carding room. Roving
bobbins should be marked for each speeder; and the spinner run each
separate on his frames. Then if you had bad work you could tell very
quick which speeder it belonged to.


BUNCHES.

14. How bunches can be made on spinning frames. By piecing on roving
and leaving the end to run through double. By piecing up ends and not
twisting on smoothly. By wiping out the roving rack and the waste
catching on the roving and running through the rolls. By wiping off
thread-boards, waste catching on to the ends and spinning. By rolls
not being kept clean and oiled. By spinners not being careful enough
when they clean their rolls. By spinners brushing and cleaning their
frames. By brushing down over head. By spinners not keeping their
clearers clean. The carder should be just as particular about making
his roving as the spinner is about making his yarn; then there will be
good work all through. A dry front roll will make bunches on spinning
frames, and will do the same on speeders. Sweepers should not blow
their waste under the frames. Bunches can be made on spoolers by
thread guides not being wide enough for the threads to pass through.
A bunch will collect and stop the spool. Spooler tenders lift it over
on to the spool.


COARSE THREADS.

15. How coarse threads are made. First, by coarse roving; second by
spinners letting two roving run through the guide; third, by one end
catching on to another and running on to the bobbin; fourth, sometimes
where there is two ends on one boss, one end will break and catch onto
the other and spin. If the trouble is in the spinning, you untwist the
thread and you will find two threads instead of one. If not two
threads, the trouble is in the carding room.


CHANGING NUMBERS.

16. When you change from one number to another see that the motion
runs right to pack the yarn closely on the bobbin; then have your
travelers just heavy enough to keep the ends straight. By running a
heavy traveler you pack the yarn harder on the bobbin. I do not
believe in running a traveler heavy enough to pull down the ends, but
heavy enough to keep the ends straight.


POOR COTTON.

17. When cotton is poor you may need a little more twist in the yarn;
sometimes when cotton is poor, the warp spinning will run bad. In this
case you may run your warp one number heavier and mule filling one
number lighter. Waste work requires more twist than good cotton.


ECONOMY OF HEAVY TRAVELERS.

18. It is cheaper for the company to run heavy travelers, and wind the
yarn hard on the bobbins and spools. You get more length of yarn and a
better quality. Will not cost so much for spooling.


KNITTED YARN.

19. If the yarn is knitted the trouble is in the carding room, as you
cannot make knitted yarn on spinning frames.


SNARLED YARN.

20. How snarled yarn is made. By spinners not finding the end and
breaking a thread on the bobbin to piece up by. By having the taper
shorter on top of the bobbin than on the bottom, so when the doffers
take the full bobbins off, the thread pulls over the top and snarls.
To avoid the above, lower the arm where it is attached to the frame,
(the arm that the heart rider is attached to). About one-quarter of an
inch will be enough. You want the taper longer at the top than at the
bottom.


LAP WASTE.

21. How to avoid making lap waste in spinning room. By keeping
spinners where their work is, and by not giving spinners any more work
than they can keep up. By having good doffers and good starters. If
doffers and starters are not good they will make more waste than their
wages will come to. Doffers should wind the thread four times around
the bobbin. Starters should not wind on to bobbins when there is yarn
on to piece up by.


ROVING WASTE.

22. How to avoid making roving waste in spinning room. By letting it
all run through the rolls into yarn. All bad roving should be sent
back into the carding room, where it belongs, every day.


PICKING UP WASTES.

23. All wastes should be picked up, looked over, weighed and carried
off where it belongs, every day. You will find it much better than the
old way. Not so apt to accumulate.


COLORED WORK.

24. Colored work always runs heavy. You want one tooth less draught
change gear than your hank roving figures for. But put in the same
twist.


DOFFING.

25. System in doffing the frames. To save making waste and trouble in
the room, doff every other row right through, then go back and doff
the remaining rows through. In doffing this way the spinners can tend
more sides and not make so much waste, as any spinner knows, or ought
to know. Frames run better when half full than on an empty bobbin. One
frame stopped at a time to doff, is all that ought to be permitted.
From three to four minutes is long enough time to doff any frame with
four doffers. The first frame should be filled to a gauge astride the
bobbin. Do not go by the clock, as the yarn is sometimes heavy. This
gauge is the best guide I ever had in doffing.


SPEED OF CYLINDER.

26. How to get speed of cylinder. See what main line runs; then get
diameter of counter pulley that carries the cylinder below. The pulley
above is called a driver. Then multiply the speed of main line by
diameter of counter pulley that carries the cylinder, and divide that
by the diameter of the pulley that is on the cylinder, which is called
the driven. Then to get speed of spindles, get diameter of cylinder,
and multiply the speed of cylinder by diameter of cylinder, and
divide that by the diameter of the whorl.


SPEEDING PULLEYS.

27. To know what pulley will drive your cylinder faster or slower.
Multiply the speed you would like to have it run, by diameter of
pulley overhead, that carries the cylinder, and divide that by the
speed you are now running. Will give you pulley required.


TAKING UP BELTS.

28. To know how to take up a belt, when you change pulleys. If your
belt is tight enough with the pulley you now have on, for every inch
that your pulley is smaller than you now have on, take out one inch
and three-quarters of belting. If larger, right the reverse.


TWISTS.

29. To know what number of twists to the inch, for any number of yarn.
On warp, multiply the square root of the number by 5. Frame filling by
4, and mule filling by 3-1/4. For every ten numbers below thirty take
away two twist to the inch. For every ten numbers above thirty, add
two.


SQUARE ROOT.

30. Square Root of numbers from 18 to 30.--These twists are within a
fraction.

/$
  +---------+---------+---------------+----------------+
  | NUMBERS | SQ ROOT | Warp Twist    | Filling Twist  |
  +---------+---------+---------------+----------------+
  |    13   |  3.605  | 15   per inch | 11-1/2 per inch. |
  |    14   |  3.741  | 15-1/2  "   "   | 12    "   "    |
  |    18   |  4.242  | 19    "   "   | 15    "   "    |
  |    19   |  4.359  | 19-1/2  "   "   | 15    "   "    |
  |    20   |  4.472  | 20-1/2  "   "   | 15-1/2  "   "    |
  |    21   |  4.582  | 21    "   "   | 16    "   "    |
  |    22   |  4.690  | 21-1/2  "   "   | 16-1/2  "   "    |
  |    23   |  4.796  | 22    "   "   | 17    "   "    |
  |    24   |  4.899  | 22-1/2  "   "   |                |
  |    25   |  5.000  | 24    "   "   | 19    "   "    |
  |    26   |  5.099  | 24-1/2  "   "   |                |
  |    27   |  5.196  | 25    "   "   | 19-3/4  "   "    |
  |    28   |  5.291  | 25-1/2  "   "   | 21    "   "    |
  |    29   |  5.385  | 26    "   "   |                |
  |    30   |  5.477  | 27-1/2  "   "   | 22    "   "    |
  +---------+---------+---------------+----------------+
$/


DRAUGHT FOR YARN.

31. To know the draught for any number of yarn. Write the number you
are spinning or want to spin, add two ciphers to it; divide that by
the hank roving that you are spinning from, to get draught. Example;
hank roving 225, No. yarn 18. Add two ciphers, (1800); divided by 225
gives 8 draught.


GEAR REQUIRED.

32. This is the way I was taught to figure draughts of different
numbers of yarn. If you want to run another number with the same hank
roving, multiply the smallest draught change gear by the number you
are spinning, and divide that by the number you want to spin, and that
will give you the gear required.


ROVING REQUIRED.

33. If you want to spin another number with same draught, write your
number that you want to spin (as above) and divide that by the
draught. That will give you hank roving required.


TO FIND DRAUGHT CHANGE GEAR.

34. Rule to find the draught change gear required. When you change
from one number to another on a frame or mule, when the draught and
roving both have to be changed, multiply the number of the yarn being
spun by the hank roving desired, and that product by the number of
teeth in the draught change gear; using that for a dividend. Then
multiply the number of the yarn desired by the hank roving, using that
for a divisor; that product divided will tell the draught change gear
that is required.


TWIST GEAR.

35. The way I was taught to find the twist gear by square root of the
number of yarn. Multiply the twist gear in use by the square root of
the number being spun, and divide that product by the square root of
the number you want to spin. That will give you the twist gear
required.


TWIST PULLEY.

36. To get the twist pulley for another number of yarn. See what twist
the pulley gives that you have on, and multiply the twist that you
have in, by the pulley that is on, and divide that product by the
twist you would like to put in to get the pulley required.


TWIST OF YARN.

37. To know how to get the exact twist in yarn. Have your roll belt
tight, and band also. Count the revolutions of the spindle to the
rollers once. Divide that by the circumference of the roll, which is
3-14/100 inches. Example. Say 86 turns to the rolls once. (3-14/100)
86.00 turns, (27-38/100) twists to the inch.


WEIGHT ON TOP ROLLS.

38. To know the weight on top rolls. You must measure the distance
from where the stirrup is attached to the lever to where the wire is
attached that holds the weight; then multiply the distance by whatever
the weight weighs, and divide that product by the exact distance from
where the lever is attached to the set screw, to where the stirrup is
attached.


SQUARE ROOT TABLE FOR THE TWIST OF YARNS.

39

/$
  +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
  | No. of | Square | No. of | Square | No. of | Square |
  | Yarn   | Root   | Yarn   | Root   | Yarn   | Root   |
  +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
  |   1    | 1.000  |  31    | 5.567  |  61    | 7.810  |
  |   2    | 1.414  |  32    | 5.656  |  62    | 7.874  |
  |   3    | 1.732  |  33    | 5.744  |  63    | 7.937  |
  |   4    | 2.000  |  34    | 5.830  |  64    | 8.000  |
  |   5    | 2.236  |  35    | 5.916  |  65    | 8.062  |
  |   6    | 2.449  |  36    | 6.000  |  66    | 8.124  |
  |   7    | 2.645  |  37    | 6.082  |  67    | 8.185  |
  |   8    | 2.828  |  38    | 6.164  |  68    | 8.246  |
  |   9    | 3.000  |  39    | 6.244  |  69    | 8.306  |
  |  10    | 3.162  |  40    | 6.324  |  70    | 8.366  |
  |  11    | 3.316  |  41    | 6.403  |  71    | 8.426  |
  |  12    | 3.464  |  42    | 6.480  |  72    | 8.485  |
  |  13    | 3.605  |  43    | 6.557  |  73    | 8.544  |
  |  14    | 3.741  |  44    | 6.633  |  74    | 8.602  |
  |  15    | 3.872  |  45    | 6.708  |  75    | 8.660  |
  |  16    | 4.000  |  46    | 6.782  |  76    | 8.717  |
  |  17    | 4.123  |  47    | 6.855  |  77    | 8.774  |
  |  18    | 4.242  |  48    | 6.928  |  78    | 8.831  |
  |  19    | 4.358  |  49    | 7.000  |  79    | 8.888  |
  |  20    | 4.472  |  50    | 7.071  |  80    | 8.944  |
  |  21    | 4.582  |  51    | 7.141  |  81    | 9.000  |
  |  22    | 4.690  |  52    | 7.211  |  82    | 9.055  |
  |  23    | 4.795  |  53    | 7.280  |  83    | 9.110  |
  |  24    | 4.898  |  54    | 7.348  |  84    | 9.165  |
  |  25    | 5.000  |  55    | 7.416  |  85    | 9.219  |
  |  26    | 5.099  |  56    | 7.483  |  86    | 9.273  |
  |  27    | 5.196  |  57    | 7.549  |  87    | 9.327  |
  |  28    | 5.291  |  58    | 7.615  |  88    | 9.380  |
  |  29    | 5.385  |  59    | 7.681  |  89    | 9.433  |
  |  30    | 5.477  |  60    | 7.745  |  90    | 9.486  |
  +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
$/


==> If any Spinner purchasing this book has trouble with his work, he
will receive aid from me (if in my power) by stating all particulars.

All orders for this book should be addressed to Francis L. Lincoln,
P.O. Box 35, Warren, Mass.

PRICE ONE DOLLAR.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Instruction book on ring spinning, by
Francis L. Lincoln

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INSTRUCTION BOOK ON RING SPINNING ***

***** This file should be named 33424.txt or 33424.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/4/2/33424/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
