The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cruise of the Revenue-Steamer Corwin in
Alaska and the N.W. Arctic Ocean in 1881: Botatical Notes, by John Muir

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cruise of the Revenue-Steamer Corwin in Alaska and the N.W. Arctic Ocean in 1881: Botatical Notes
       Notes and Memoranda: Medical and Anthropological; Botanical;
       Ornithological.

Author: John Muir

Release Date: August 15, 2010 [EBook #33443]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRUISE OF THE ***




Produced by Colin Bell, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






THE EXECUTIVE DOCUMENTS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

FOR THE SECOND SESSION OF THE FORTY-SEVENTH CONGRESS.

1882-'83.

IN TWENTY-FIVE VOLUMES.

VOLUME 23.

WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
_1883._




47TH CONGRESS, }   HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.  { Ex. Doc.
_2d Session_.  }                              { No. 105.


CRUISE OF THE REVENUE-STEAMER CORWIN IN ALASKA
AND THE N. W. ARCTIC OCEAN IN 1881.


NOTES AND MEMORANDA: MEDICAL AND ANTHROPOLOGICAL;
BOTANICAL; ORNITHOLOGICAL.


WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
1883.




    LETTER FROM THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, IN RESPONSE TO

    _A resolution of the House of Representatives transmitting the
    observations and notes made during the cruise of the revenue-cutter
    Corwin in 1881._


    MARCH 3, 1883.--Referred to the Committee on Commerce and
    ordered to be printed.


TREASURY DEPARTMENT, _March_ 3, 1883.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of resolution of the
House, dated March 3, 1883, requesting that the Secretary of the
Treasury furnish, as soon as convenient, to the Speaker of the House
copies of documents in the possession of the Treasury Department
containing observations on glaciation, birds, natural history, and the
medical notes made upon cruises of revenue-cutters in the year 1881.

In reply, I transmit herewith the observations on glaciation in the
Arctic Ocean and the Alaska region, made by Mr. John Muir; notes upon
the birds and natural history of Bering Sea and the northwestern
region, by Mr. E. W. Nelson; and medical notes and anthropological
notes relating to the natives of Alaska and the northwestern Arctic
region, made by Dr. Irving C. Rosse.

All these notes were made upon the cruise of the revenue-cutter Corwin
in 1881.

Very respectfully,

    H. F. FRENCH,
          _Acting Secretary_.

    Hon. J. W. KEIFER,
          _Speaker of the House of Representatives_.




BOTANICAL NOTES ON ALASKA.


BY JOHN MUIR.




BOTANICAL NOTES.

By John Muir.


INTRODUCTORY.

The plants named in the following notes were collected at many
localities on the coasts of Alaska and Siberia, and on Saint Lawrence,
Wrangel, and Herald Islands, between about latitude 54 deg. and 71 deg.,
longitude 161 deg. and 178 deg., in the course of short excursions, some of
them less than an hour in length.

Inasmuch as the flora of the arctic and subarctic regions is nearly the
same everywhere, the discovery of many species new to science was not
to be expected. The collection, however, will no doubt be valuable for
comparison with the plants of other regions.

In general the physiognomy of the vegetation of the polar regions
resembles that of the alpine valleys of the temperate zones; so much so
that the botanist on the coast of Arctic Siberia or America might
readily fancy himself on the Sierra Nevada at a height of 10,000 to
12,000 feet above the sea.

There is no line of perpetual snow on any portion of the arctic regions
known to explorers. The snow disappears every summer not only from the
low sandy shores and boggy tundras but also from the tops of the
mountains and all the upper slopes and valleys with the exception of
small patches of drifts and avalanche-heaps hardly noticeable in
general views. But though nowhere excessively deep or permanent, the
snow-mantle is universal during winter, and the plants are solidly
frozen and buried for nearly three-fourths of the year. In this
condition they enjoy a sleep and rest about as profound as death, from
which they awake in the months of June and July in vigorous health, and
speedily reach a far higher development of leaf and flower and fruit
than is generally supposed. On the drier banks and hills about Kotzebue
Sound, Cape Thompson, and Cape Lisbourne many species show but little
climatic repression, and during the long summer days grow tall enough
to wave in the wind, and unfold flowers in as rich profusion and as
highly colored as may be found in regions lying a thousand miles
farther south.


_OUNALASKA._

To the botanist approaching any portion of the Aleutian chain of
islands from the southward during the winter or spring months, the view
is severely desolate and forbidding. The snow comes down to the water's
edge in solid white, interrupted only by dark outstanding bluffs with
faces too steep for snow to lie on, and by the backs of rounded rocks
and long rugged reefs beaten and overswept by heavy breakers rolling in
from the Pacific, while throughout nearly every month of the year the
higher mountains are wrapped in gloomy dripping storm-clouds.

Nevertheless vegetation here is remarkably close and luxuriant, and
crowded with showy bloom, covering almost every foot of the ground up
to a height of about a thousand feet above the sea--the harsh trachytic
rocks, and even the cindery bases of the craters, as well as the
moraines and rough soil beds outspread on the low portions of the short
narrow valleys.

On the 20th of May we found the showy _Geum glaciale_ already in
flower, also an arctostaphylos and draba, on a slope facing the south,
near the harbor of Ounalaska. The willows, too, were then beginning to
put forth their catkins, while a multitude of green points were
springing up in sheltered spots wherever the snow had vanished. At a
height of 400 and 500 feet, however, winter was still unbroken, with
scarce a memory of the rich bloom of summer.

During a few short excursions along the shores of Ounalaska Harbor and
on two of the adjacent mountains, towards the end of May and beginning
of October we saw about fifty species of flowering plants--empetrum,
vaccinium, bryanthus, pyrola, arctostaphylos, ledum, cassiope, lupinus,
zeranium, epilobium, silene, draba, and saxifraga being the most
telling and characteristic of the genera represented. _Empetrum
nigrum_, a bryanthus, and three species of vaccinium make a grand
display when in flower and show their massed colors at a considerable
distance.

Almost the entire surface of the valleys and hills and lower slopes of
the mountains is covered with a dense spongy plush of lichens and
mosses similar to that which cover the tundras of the Arctic regions,
making a rich green mantle on which the showy flowering plants are
strikingly relieved, though these grow far more luxuriantly on the
banks of the streams where the drainage is less interrupted. Here also
the ferns, of which I saw three species, are taller and more abundant,
some of them arching their broad delicate fronds over one's shoulders,
while in similar situations the tallest of the five grasses that were
seen reaches a height of nearly six feet, and forms a growth close
enough for the farmer's scythe.

Not a single tree has yet been seen on any of the islands of the chain
west of Kodiak, excepting a few spruces brought from Sitka and planted
at Ounalaska by the Russians about fifty years ago. They are still
alive in a dwarfed condition, having made scarce any appreciable growth
since they were planted. These facts are the more remarkable, since in
Southeastern Alaska lying both to the north and south of here, and on
the many islands of the Alexander Archipelago, as well as on the
mainland, forests of beautiful conifers flourish exuberantly and attain
noble dimensions, while the climatic conditions generally do not appear
to differ greatly from those that obtain on these treeless islands.

Wherever cattle have been introduced they have prospered and grown fat
on the abundance of rich nutritious pasturage to be found almost
everywhere in the deep withdrawing valleys and on the green slopes of
the hills and mountains, but the wetness of the summer months will
always prevent the making of hay in any considerable quantities.

The agricultural possibilities of these islands seem also to be very
limited. The hardier of the cereals--rye, barley, and oats--make a good
vigorous growth, and head out, but seldom or never mature, on account
of insufficient sunshine and overabundance of moisture in the form of
long-continued drizzling fogs and rains. Green crops, however, as
potatoes, turnips, cabbages, beets, and most other common garden
vegetables, thrive wherever the ground is thoroughly drained and has a
southerly exposure.


_SAINT LAWRENCE ISLAND._

Saint Lawrence Island, as far as our observations extended, is mostly a
dreary mass of granite and lava of various forms and colors, roughened
with volcanic cones, covered with snow, and rigidly bound in ocean ice
for half the year.

Inasmuch as it lies broadsidewise to the direction pursued by the great
ice-sheet that recently filled Bering Sea, and its rocks offered
unequal resistance to the denuding action of the ice, the island is
traversed by numerous ridges and low gap-like valleys all trending in
the same general direction, some of the lowest of these transverse
valleys having been degraded nearly to the level of the sea, showing
that had the glaciation to which the island has been subjected been
slightly greater we should have found several islands here instead of
one.

At the time of our first visit, May 28, winter still had full
possession, but eleven days later we found the dwarf willows, drabas,
crizerons, saxifrages pushing up their buds and leaves, on spots bare
of snow, with wonderful rapidity. This was the beginning of spring at
the northwest end of the island. On July 4 the flora seemed to have
reached its highest development. The bottoms of the glacial valleys
were in many places covered with tall grasses and carices evenly
planted and forming meadows of considerable size, while the drier
portions and the sloping grounds about them were enlivened with
gay highly-colored flowers from an inch to nearly two feet in
height--_Aconitum Napellus_, L. var. _delphinifolium_ ser. _Polemonium
coeruleum_, L. _Papaver nudicaule_, _Draba alpina_, and _Silene
acaulis_ in large closely flowered tufts, Andromeda, Ledum Linnaea,
Cassiope, and several species of Vaccinium and Saxifraga.


_SAINT MICHAEL'S._

The region about Saint Michael's is a magnificent tundra, crowded with
Arctic lichens and mosses, which here develop under most favorable
conditions. In the spongy plush formed by the lower plants, in which
one sinks almost knee-deep at every step, there is a sparse growth of
grasses, carices, and rushes, tall enough to wave in the wind, while
empetrum, the dwarf birch, and the various heathworts flourish here in
all their beauty of bright leaves and flowers. The moss mantle for the
most part rests on a stratum of ice that never melts to any great
extent, and the ice on a bed rock of black vesicular lava. Ridges of
the lava rise here and there above the general level in rough masses,
affording ground for plants that like a drier soil. Numerous hollows
and watercourses also occur on the general tundra, whose well-drained
banks are decked with gay flowers in lavish abundance, and meadow
patches of grasses shoulder high, suggestive of regions much farther
south.

The following plants and a few doubtful species not yet determined were
collected here:

    Linnaea borealis, Gronov.

    Cassiope tetragone, Desv.

    Andromeda polifolia, L.

    Loiseleuria procumbeus, Desv.

    Vaccinium Vitis Idaea, L.

    Arctostaphylos alpina, Spring.

    Ledum palustre, L.

    Nardosmia frigida, Hook.

    Saussurea alpina, Dl.

    Senecio frigidus, Less.
            palustris, Hook.

    Arnica angustifolia, Vahl.

    Artemisia arctica, Bess.

    Matricaria inodora, L.

    Rubus chamoe morus, L.
          arcticus, L.

    Potentilla nivea, L.

    Dryas octopetala, L.

    Draba alpina, L.
          incana, L.

    Entrema arenicola, Hook?

    Pedicularis sudetica, Willd.
                euphrasioides, Steph.

    Langsdorffii, Fisch, var. lanata, Gray.

    Diapensia Lapponica, L.

    Polemoium coeruleum, L.

    Primula borealis, Daly.

    Oxytropis podocarpa, Gray.

    Astragalus alpinus, L.
               frigidus, Gray, var. littoralis.

    Lathyrus maritimus, Bigelow.

    Arenaria lateriflora, L.

    Stellaria longipes, Goldie.

    Silene acaulis, L.

    Saxifraga nivalis, L.
              hieracifolia, W. and K.

    Anemone narcissiflora, L.
            parviflora, Michx.

    Caltha palustris, L., var. asarifolia, Rothr.

    Valeriana capitata, Willd.

    Lloydia serotina, Reichmb.

    Tofieldia coccinea, Richards.

    Armeria vulgaris, Willd.

    Corydalis pauciflora.

    Pinguicula Villosa, L.

    Mertensia paniculata, Desv.

    Polygonum alpinum, All.

    Epilobium latifolium, L.

    Betula nana, L.

    Alnus viridis, Dl.

    Eriophorum capitatum.

    Carex vulgaris, Willd, var. alpina.

    Aspidium fragrans, Swartz.

    Woodsia Iloensis, Bv.


_GOLOVIN BAY._

The tundra flora on the west side of Golovin Bay is remarkably close
and luxuriant, covering almost every foot of the ground, the hills as
well as the valleys, while the sandy beach and a bank of coarsely
stratified moraine material a few yards back from the beach were
blooming like a garden with _Lathyrus maritimus_, _Iris sibirica_,
_Polemonium coeruleum_, &c., diversified with clumps and patches of
_Elymus arenarius_, _Alnus viridis_, and _Abies alba_.

This is one of the few points on the east side of Bering Sea where
trees closely approach the shore. The white spruce occurs here in small
groves or thickets of well developed erect trees 15 or 20 feet high,
near the level of the sea, at a distance of about 6 or 8 miles from the
mouth of the bay, and gradually become irregular and dwarfed as they
approach the shore. Here a number of dead and dying specimens were
observed, indicating that conditions of soil, climate, and relations to
other plants were becoming more unfavorable, and causing the tree-line
to recede from the coast.

The following collection was made here July 10:

    Pinguicula villosa, L.

    Vaccinium vitis Idaea, L.

    Spiraea betulaefolia, Pallas.

    Rubus arcticus, L.

    Epilobium latifolium, L.

    Polemonium coevuleum, L.

    Trientalis europaea, L. var. arctica, Ledeb.

    Entrema arenicola, Hook.

    Iris sibirica, L.

    Lloydia serotina, Reichemb.

    Chrysanthemum arcticum, L.

    Artemisia Tilesii, Ledeb.

    Arenaria peploides, L.

    Gentiana glanca, Pallas.

    Elymus arenarius, L.

    Poa trivialis, L.

    Carex vesicaria, L. var. alpigma, Fries.

    Aspidium spinulosum, Sw.


_KOTZEBUE SOUND._

The flora of the region about the head of Kotzebue Sound is hardly less
luxuriant and rich in species than that of other points visited by the
Corwin lying several degrees farther south. Fine nutritious grasses
suitable for the fattening of cattle and from 2 to 6 feet high are not
of rare occurrence on meadows of considerable extent and along
streambanks wherever the stagnant waters of the tundra have been
drained off, while in similar localities the most showy of the Arctic
plants bloom in all their freshness and beauty, manifesting no sign of
frost, or unfavorable conditions of any kind whatever.

A striking result of the airing and draining of the boggy tundra soil
is shown on the ice-bluffs around Escholtze Bay, where it has been
undermined by the melting of the ice on which it rests. In falling down
the face of the ice-wall it is well shaken and rolled before it again
comes to rest on terraced or gently sloping portions of the wall. The
original vegetation of the tundra is thus destroyed, and tall grasses
spring up on the fresh mellow ground as it accumulates from time to
time, growing lush and rank, though in many places that we noted these
new soil-beds are not more than a foot in depth, and lie on the solid
ice.

At the time of our last visit to this interesting region, about the
middle of September, the weather was still fine, suggesting the Indian
Summer of the Western States. The tundra glowed in the mellow sunshine
with the colors of the ripe foliage of vaccinium, empetrum,
arctostaphylos, and dwarf birch; red, purple, and yellow, in pure
bright tones, while the berries, hardly less beautiful, were scattered
everywhere as if they had been sown broadcast with a lavish hand, the
whole blending harmoniously with the neutral tints of the furred bed of
lichens and mosses on which the bright leaves and berries were painted.

On several points about the sound the white spruce occurs in small
compact groves within a few miles of the shore; and pyrola, which
belongs to wooded regions, is abundant where no trees are now in sight,
tending to show that areas of considerable extent, now treeless, were
once forested.

The plants collected are:

    Pyrola rotundifolia, L. var. pumila, Hook.

    Arctostaphylos alpina, Spring.

    Cassiope tetragone, Desr.

    Ledum palustre.

    Vaccinium Vitis Idaea, L.

    Uliginosum, L. var. mucronata, Hender.

    Empetrum nigrum.

    Potentilla, anserina, L. var.
                biflora, Willd.
                fruticosa.

    Stellaria longipes, Goldie.

    Cerastium alpinum, L. var. Behringianum. Regel.

    Mertensia maritima, Derr.

    Papaver nudicale, L.

    Saxifraga tricuspidata, Retg.

    Trientalis europaea, L. var. arctica, Ledeb.

    Lupinus arcticus, Watson.

    Hedysarum boreale, Nutt.

    Galium boreale, L.

    Armeria vulgaris, Willd, var. Arctica, Cham.

    Allium schaenoprasum, L.

    Polygonum Viviparum, L.

    Castilleia pallida, Kunth.

    Pedicularis sudetica, Willd.
                verticillata, L.

    Senecio palustris, Hook.

    Salix polaris, Wahl.

    Luzula hyperborea, R. Br.


_CAPE THOMPSON._

The Cape Thompson flora is richer in species and individuals than that
of any other point on the Arctic shores we have seen, owing no doubt
mainly to the better drainage of the ground through the fissured
frost-cracked limestone, which hereabouts is the principal rock.

Where the hill-slopes are steepest the rock frequently occurs in loose
angular masses and is entirely bare of soil. But between these barren
slopes there are valleys where the showiest of the Arctic plants bloom
in rich-profusion and variety, forming brilliant masses of color--purple,
yellow, and blue--where certain species form beds of considerable size,
almost to the exclusion of others.

The following list was obtained here July 19:

    Phlox Sibirica, L.

    Polemonium humile. Willd.
               coeruleum, L.

    Myosotis sylvatica, var. alpestris.

    Eritrichium nanum, var. arctioides, Hedu.

    Dodecatheon media, var. frigidum, Gray.

    Androsace chamoejasme, Willd.

    Anemone narcissiflora, L.
            multifida, Poir.
            parviflora, Michx.
            parviflora, Michx. var.

    Ranunculus affinis, R. Br.

    Caltha aserifolia, Dl.

    Geum glaciale, Fisch.

    Dryas octopetala, L.

    Polygonum Bistorta, L.

    Rumex Crispus, L.

    Boykinia Richardsonii, Gray.

    Saxifraga tricuspidata, Retg.
              cernua, L.
              flagellaris, Willd.
              davarica, Willd.
              punctata, L.
              nivalis, L.

    Nardosmia carymbosa, Hook?

    Erigeron Muirii, Gray, n. sp.

    Taraxacum palustre, Dl.

    Senicio frigidus, Less.

    Artemisia glomerata, Ledt.

    Potentilla biflora, Willd.
               nivea, L.

    Draba stellata, Jacq. var. nivalis, Regel.
          incana, L.

    Cardamine pratensis, L.?

    Cheiranthus pygmaeus, Adans.

    Parrya nudicaulis, Regel. var. aspera, Regel.

    Hedysarum borealis, Nutt.

    Oxytropis podocarpa, Gray.

    Cerastium alpinum, L. var. Behringianum, Regel.

    Silene acaulis, L.

    Arenaria verna, L. var. rubella, Hook, f.
             arctica, Ster.

    Stellaria longipes, Goldie.

    Artemisia tomentosa.

    Pedicularis capitata, Adans.

    Papaver nudicaule, L.

    Epilobium latifolium, L.

    Cassiope tetragone, Desr.

    Vaccinium uliginosum, L. var. Mucronata, Hender.
              vitis idaea, L.

    Salix polaris, Wahl, and two other species undetermined.

    Festuca Sativa?

    Glyceria, ----

    Trisetum subspicatum, Beaur, var. Molle, Gray.

    Carex variflora, Wahl.
          vulgaris, Fries, var. Alpina, (C. rigida, Good).

    Cystoperis fragilis, Bernt.


_CAPE PRINCE OF WALES._

At Cape Prince of Wales we obtained:

    Loiseleuria procumbens, Desr.

    Andromeda polifolia, L. forma arctica.

    Vaccinium Vitis Idaea, L.

    Androsace chamoejasme, Willd.

    Tofieldia coccinaea, Richards.

    Armeria arctica, Ster.

    Taraxacum palustre, Dl.


_TWENTY MILES EAST OF CAPE LISBOURNE._

    Lychnis apetala, L.

    Androsace chamoejasme, Willd.

    Geum glaciate, Fisch.

    Potentilla nivea, L.
               biflora, Willd.

    Phlox Sibirica, L.

    Primula borealis, Daly.

    Anemone narcissiflora, L. var.

    Oxytropis campestris, Dl.

    Erigeron uniflorus, L.

    Artemisia glomerata, Ledb.

    Saxifraga escholtzii, Sternb.
              flagellaris, Willd.

    Chrysosplenium alternifolium, L.

    Draba hirta, L.


_CAPE WANKEREM, SIBERIA._

Near Cape Wankerem, August 7 and 8, we collected:

    Claytonia Virginica, L.?

    Ranunculus pygmaeus, Wahl.

    Pedicularis Langsdorffii, Fisch.

    Chrysosplenium alternifolium, L.

    Saxifraga cernua, L.
              stellaris, L. var. cornosa.
              rivularis, L. var. hyperborea, Hook.

    Polemonium coeruleum, L.

    Lychnis apetala, L.

    Nardosmia frigida, Hook.

    Chrysanthemum arcticum, L.

    Senecio frigidus, Less.

    Artemisia vulgaris, var. Telesii, Ledeb.

    Elymus arenarius, L.

    Alopocurus alpinus, Smith.

    Poa arctica, R. Br.

    Calamagrostis deschampsioides, Trin.?

    Luzula hyperborea, R. Br.
           spicato Desv.


_PLOVER BAY, SIBERIA._

The mountains bounding the glacial fiord called Plover Bay, though
beautiful in their combinations of curves and peaks as they are seen
touching each other delicately and rising in bold, picturesque groups,
are nevertheless severely desolate looking from the absence of trees
and large shrubs, and indeed of vegetation of any kind dense enough to
give color in telling quantities, or to soften the harsh rockiness of
the steepest portions of the walls. Even the valleys opening back from
the water here and there on either side are mostly bare as seen at a
distance of a mile or two, and show only a faint tinge of green,
derived from dwarf willows, heathworts, and sedges chiefly.

The most interesting of the plants found here are _Rhododendron
Kamtschaticum_, Pall., and the handsome blue-flowered _Saxifraga
oppositifolia_, L., both of which are abundant.

The following were collected July 12 and August 26:

    Gentiana glauca, Pall.

    Geum glaciale, Fisch.

    Dryas octopetala, L.

    Aconitum Napellus, L. var. delphinifolium, Ser.

    Saxifraga oppositifolia, L.
              punctata, L.
              coespitosa, L.

    Diapensia Lapponica, L.

    Rhododendron Kamtschaticum, Pall.

    Cassiope tetragona, Desv.

    Anemone narcissiflora, L.

    Arenaria macrocarpa, Pursh.

    Draba alpina, L.

    Parrya Ermanni, Ledb.

    Oxytropis, podocarpa, Gray.


_HERALD ISLAND._

On Herald Island the common polar cryptogamous vegetation is well
represented and developed. So also are the flowering plants, almost the
entire surface of the island, with the exception of the sheer crumbling
bluffs along the shores, being quite tellingly dotted and tufted with
characteristic species. The following list was obtained:

    Saxifraga punctata, L.?
              serpyllifolia, Pursh.
              sileniflora, Sternb.
              bronchialis, L.
              stellaris, L. var. comosa, Poir.
              rivularis, L. var. hyperborea, Hook.
              hieracifolia, Waldst & Kit.

    Papaver nuedicaule, L.

    Draba alpina, L.

    Gymnandra Stelleri, Cham. & Schlecht.

    Stellaria longipes, Goldie, var. Edwardsii T. & G.

    Senecio frigidus, Less.

    Potentilla frigida, Vill.?

    Salax polaris, Wahl.

    Alopecurus alpinus, Smith.

    Luzula hyperborea, R. Br.


_WRANGEL ISLAND._

Our stay on the one point of Wrangel Island that we touched was far too
short to admit of making anything like as full a collection of the
plants of so interesting a region as was desirable. We found the rock
formation where we landed and for some distance along the coast to the
eastward and westward to be a close-grained clay slate, cleaving freely
into thin flakes, with here and there a few compact metamorphic masses
that rise above the general surface. Where it is exposed along the
shore bluffs and kept bare of vegetation and soil by the action of the
ocean, ice, and heavy snow-drifts the rock presents a surface about as
black as coal, without even a moss or lichen to enliven its sombre
gloom. But when this dreary barrier is passed the surface features of
the country in general are found to be finely molded and collocated,
smooth valleys, wide as compared with their depth, trending back from
the shore to a range of mountains that appear blue in the distance, and
round-topped hills, with their side curves finely drawn, touching and
blending in beautiful groups, while scarce a single rock-pile is seen
or sheer-walled bluff to break the general smoothness.

The soil has evidently been derived mostly from the underlying slates,
though a few fragmentary wasting moraines were observed containing
traveled boulders of quartz and granite which doubtless were brought
from the mountains of the interior by glaciers that have recently
vanished--so recently that the outlines and sculptured hollows and
grooves of the mountains have not as yet suffered sufficient post
glacial denudation to mar appreciably their glacial characters.

The banks of the river at the mouth of which we landed presented a
striking contrast as to vegetation to that of any other stream we had
seen in the Arctic regions. The tundra vegetation was not wholly
absent, but the mosses and lichens of which it is elsewhere composed
are about as feebly developed as possible, and instead of forming a
continuous covering they occur in small separate tufts, leaving the
ground between them raw and bare as that of a newly-ploughed field. The
phanerogamous plants, both on the lowest grounds and the slopes and
hilltops as far as seen, were in the same severely repressed condition
and as sparsely planted in tufts an inch or two in diameter, with about
from one to three feet of naked soil between them. Some portions of the
coast, however, farther south presented a greenish hue as seen from the
ship at a distance of eight or ten miles, owing no doubt to vegetation
growing under less unfavorable conditions.

From an area of about half a square mile the following plants were
collected:

    Saxifraga flegellaris, Willd.
              stellaris, L. var. cornosa, Poir.
              sileneflora, Sternb.
              hieracifolia, Waldst. & Kit.
              rivularis, L. var. hyperborea, Hook.
              bronchialis, L.
              serpyllifolia, Pursh.

    Anemone parviflora, Michx.

    Papaver nudicaule, L.

    Draba alpina, L.

    Cochleria officinalis, L.

    Artemisia borealis, Willd.

    Nardosmia frigida, Hook.

    Saussurea monticola, Richards.

    Senecio frigidus, Less.

    Potentilla nivea, L.
               frigida, Vill.?

    Armeria macrocarpa, Pursh.
            vulgaris, Willd.

    Stellaria longipes, Goldie, var. Edwardsii T. & G.

    Cerastium alpinum, L.

    Gymnandra Stelleri, Chain & Schlecht.

    Salix polaris, Wahl.

    Luzulu hyperborea, R. Br.

    Poa arctica, R. Br.

    Aira caespitosa, L. var. Arctica.

    Alopecurus alpinus, Smith.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cruise of the Revenue-Steamer Corwin
in Alaska and the N.W. Arctic Ocean in 1881: Botatical Notes, by John Muir

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRUISE OF THE ***

***** This file should be named 33443.txt or 33443.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/4/4/33443/

Produced by Colin Bell, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
