The Project Gutenberg EBook of Geological Report on Asbestos and its
Indications, in the Province of Quebec, Canada, by Lucius J. Boyd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Geological Report on Asbestos and its Indications, in the Province of Quebec, Canada

Author: Lucius J. Boyd

Release Date: September 4, 2010 [EBook #33630]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEOL. REPORT ON ASBESTOS IN QUEBEC ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Canadian Institute for
Historical Microreproductions (www.canadiana.org))









    GEOLOGICAL REPORT
    ON
    ASBESTOS,
    AND ITS INDICATIONS, IN
    THE PROVINCE OF QUEBEC,
    CANADA.

    LONDON:
    E. FORSTER GROOM, 15, CHARING CROSS, S.W.
    1889.

    [_All rights reserved._]




GEOLOGICAL REPORT ON ASBESTOS, AND ITS INDICATIONS IN THE PROVINCE OF
QUEBEC, CANADA.


Having been called upon to make a close and careful examination of the
geological formations in the eastern townships of Garthby, Wolf'stown,
and Coleraine, situated in the province of Quebec, Canada, I gave
special attention to the distribution of the Asbestos-bearing rocks
(serpentine), which have been, in my opinion, heretofore only partially
traced. Perhaps this was owing to the difficulties which had to be
encountered from the thick undergrowth which in many places rendered it
almost impossible to penetrate sufficiently in order to make a _true_
report as regards the "existence," "location," and "association" of
these rocks.

Admirable reports have been written by R. E. Ellis, LL.D., Dr. Hunt, and
others, on the origin and distribution of the serpentines, and have been
fully discussed and ventilated. Still, though various opinions have been
expressed upon the subject, they appear to differ in many respects. I
mention these facts as possibly one inexperienced or unacquainted with
the country might consider it strange that a thorough examination of the
Asbestos properties had not been followed. Yet the causes I have
mentioned above, as well as the difficulties I had to contend with
during the months of heavy snowfall, lead me to believe that my
_confreres_ (geologists) were disinclined to follow up a correct and
actual prospectus of these valuable serpentinous localities.

Before locating, or going into details of these classes of rock as a
mineral repository, I intend to treat on the subject as regards their
mode of existence and origin.

Serpentine is diffused under the head of "metamorphic rocks," while, in
the widest sense, according to Studor and others, mineral metamorphism
means every change of aggregation, structure, or chemical condition,
which rocks have undergone subsequently to their deposition and
stratification, or the effects which have been produced by forces other
than gravity and cohesion.

There fall under this definition the discolouration of the surface of,
for instance, black limestone, by the loss of its carbon, the formation
of brownish red crusts in rocks of limestone, sandstone, many
slatestones, shales, granite, &c., by the decomposition of compounds of
iron, finely disseminated in the mass of the rock, the change in rocks
consequent in the absorption of water, and the crumbling of many
granites and porphyries into gravel, occasioned by the decomposition of
the mica and felspar.

In its more limited sense the term "metamorphic" is confined to those
changes of rock which are produced directly or indirectly by agencies
seated in the interior of the earth. In many cases the mode of change
may be explained by our physical or chemical theories, and may be viewed
as the effects of temperature or of electro-chemical actions adjoining
rocks or connecting communications with the interior of the earth, also
distinctly point out the seat from which this change proceeds. In many
other cases the metamorphic process itself remains a mystery, and from
the nature of the products alone do we conclude that such a metamorphic
action has taken place.

Serpentine is generally believed to have been originally deposited as a
sediment, and to have acquired its present compact crystalline character
through the subsequent action of various chemical, or mechanical,
agencies. It is known to be a _hydrated silicate of magnesia_ with about
equal parts of silica and magnesia, and contains 12 per cent. of water
with varying proportions of iron, chromium manganese, alumina and lime,
has a specific gravity of 2.7, and weighs about 169 lbs. to the cubic
foot. It is found both in a soft and very compact state, of a waxy
lustre, with many different shades of beautiful green which give it a
mottled appearance like a serpent, hence the origin of its name
"serpentine," or ophite. It is called "ranocchia" by the Italians, from
the appearance it bears to the "frog," and, on account of its
susceptibility to a high polish, is greatly valued as a marble for
interior ornamental purposes, more than exterior, as it weathers
rapidly. In Galway, Ireland, it is found in large quantities, and called
"serpentinous marble," or "ophi-calcite." It is also to be found in
other parts of the world, as in the Pyrenees, Alps of Dauphing, Mount
St. Gothard, Italy, Sweden, Ural Mountains, Silesia, New South Wales,
Savoy, Corsica, Cornwall, Scotland, and other places too numerous to
mention; but in Canada the finest and most crystalline serpentine is to
be found forming great belts of over 100 miles long and several thousand
feet in breadth. There it associates with the dioretic, or volcanic,
rocks, and is, according to Dr. Ells, without any doubt, "An alteration
product of a dioretic rock rich in olivine." It is sometimes very
difficult to distinguish the mineral constituents in many of the
metamorphic rocks, but diorite is always considered to be composed
chiefly of felspar and hornblende, which composition enters largely into
the serpentines. Actinolite, tremolite, &c., and many other minerals,
are sometimes found associating with it.

There are many valuable properties attributed to serpentine, and I am of
opinion that the time is not far distant when it will be commercially
considered an invaluable substance, and this on account of its
refractory properties. I may also mention that it can be extensively
used in the manufacture of crucibles, &c. Its soft and unctuous
qualities (especially where it is found associated with "steatite," or
"soapstone," which is often to be seen in large quantities) renders it
easy to be worked, and, if reduced to a powder, could be moulded in
bricks which the most intense heat will not affect. One of the chief
properties it contains, and one which the serpentine of Lower Canada is
so famous for, is the Asbestos, crysotile, or fibrous serpentine. This
valuable and important mineral product is found in paying quantities
only at certain points in the extensive serpentine reefs, and was first
mined as an article of commerce in Canada in 1878, and has now become a
regular and rapidly-developing industry.

On account of its incombustible and indestructible qualities, is
extensively used in steam, hydraulic, and electrical machinery. It has
been adopted by the Admiralty for engine packing, in Her Majesty's
war-ships. It is spun into six-fold yarn, with a tensile strength of 40
lbs. and upwards, is manufactured into cloth, as clothing for firemen,
and covering hose-pipes, in fire brigades, and also engine purposes, as
well as drop-curtains, and general stage scenery, and is employed by the
principal railway and steamship companies, collieries, ironworks and all
classes of factories, and, in the manufacture of the new Asbestos grates
and stoves, is finding for itself a large market. Messrs. Bell &
Company of London, who are the largest Asbestos users in the world,
have adopted it in the manufacture of over 50 special purposes in
connection with steam engines and general machinery, and, as a
lubricant, Asbestoline ranks in the first degree.

There have been many mines started in Canada by people of the farming
class, as well as by companies, and "cotton," as Asbestos is locally
termed, has been found in large quantities within a few feet from the
surface, in veins from 1/4 to 6 inches and more in length of fibre. In
Italy, Asbestos is found, measuring up to 6 feet, in fibre, and
chemically speaking, there is no difference between it and Canadian,
except that the latter, though shorter in fibre, is much more compact
and crystalline, and purer in every sense of the word than can be
obtained in Italy, so much so, as I understand, that users of Italian
material have virtually abandoned it for Canadian. Although I have no
doubt but that Italian Asbestos has its own special purposes.

The greatest depth reached in Canada is 130 feet in open workings. No
timbering or extensive machinery is used in the manipulation of the
mines, as the "cuts"--being usually in the mountain side--afford a
natural drainage, and dumpage.

Having blasted the rock, the first process of extraction is termed
"cobbing," which means breaking off the adhering serpentine from the
Asbestos vein, this being manual work done by boys. The fibre is packed
in sacks, each weighing 100 lbs., and in some cases 200 lbs. are shipped
by the local railroad company to Montreal or New York at something about
10 cents and 20 cents per sack.

Asbestos is sorted into three qualities, and priced thus:--

    1st quality, selling at mine $80 to $200, per ton of 2,000 lbs.
    2nd    "        "       "     60  "   70,      "        "   "
    3rd    "        "       "     25  "   50,      "        "   "

Some inferior quality, at a very low price, is used by the Asbestos
Mining and Manufacturing Company of Quebec.

The workmen are principally French Canadians belonging to the
neighbouring villages, and the wages paid them are--

    Miners (without board), $0.90 (3/9) to $1.25 (5/2), per day.
    Pickers and cobbers,    $0.40 (1/8)  " $0.70 (2/11),   "

The cost of extraction is taken from $20 to $25 per ton; this includes
local administrations and all other expenses connected with the mine,
and with the adoption of machinery and the use of air-compressed drills
the cost of actual mining will be reduced to at least 30 per cent.; so
taking an average price of about $70 per ton, a net profit of from 8
pound to 9 pound, or 45 pound, is obtainable per ton of raw material.

In 1886 the total amount of Asbestos, taken from all the mines, may be
estimated at 1,500 tons, and of the amount returned last year (1888),
all but 400 tons were from the Quebec province mines, and of these
Thetford turned out 2,560 tons, and Black Lake 950, or together
three-fourths of the whole out-put. The 400 tons were from Bridgewater,
in the province of Ontario, a somewhat different class of mineral,
which is generally used in the manufacture of fire-proof roofing.

As regards the indications of Asbestos, it is a general recognised fact,
and one that may be depended on, that not alone in Canada, but indeed
all other places where Asbestos-bearing serpentine is found, the
existence of Asbestos, or "Amianthus," is noticed when the serpentine is
exposed, and presents a rusted, sometimes greyish and broken appearance,
due to decomposition or weathering, or covered with a thin layer of
soil. Small veins of Asbestos are to be seen forming a network on the
surface of the rock. If closely examined there may be noticed the
indications of a fault which, in the eastern townships of Quebec, has
generally a direction of N. 40 degrees E., this fault appearing in all
openings where a good show of mineral is to be seen, presenting a wall
either in a vertical position or at an angle, which is preferred to be
not greater than 30 degrees. From this wall, at a varying distance of
from 5 to 20 feet, will be found another, sometimes parallel to, or at
an opposite angle; in this latter case, if these walls be worked down,
they will be found to either meet, forming a trough-like appearance, or
to change their course in a downward direction, leaving only a few feet
from each other at the narrowest point, and then diverge to an unlimited
depth. In this case their faces will have a slicken appearance, smeared
over with thin layers of imperfect Asbestos, or crysotile, now and then
compact, fibrous hornblende, up to 24 inches in length, of various
colours, and rich deposits of olivine, in rare cases small quantities of
"ground ivory" with many other admixtures.

The condition of the serpentine within these walls is greatly distorted,
containing many small veins of Asbestos varying from mere threads to 2
and 3 inches in thickness, and sometimes deposits of grains of magnetic
iron or magnetite with traces of chromic iron, which in some localities
break the continuity of the fibre, veins of rich white crystalline
matter (perhaps calcareous) with large deposits of "soapstone," or
steatite, associated with "serpentite." Such contorted out-crops are
indications of rich veins of Asbestos, which will be found to both
increase in quantity and quality the deeper they are worked. And in the
case where the walls are parallel and the filling matter in the same
contorted condition, it is inevitable, in order to obtain a good fibre,
considerable depth should be reached.

The serpentine, which constitute these walls, will also be found to
proportionally become more compact, and less associated with impurities,
and contain the finest quality and lustre of fibre.

A very interesting phenomenon may be noticed at some of the mines in
connection with this contorted matter. It is the transposition of the
serpentine into Asbestos fibre, by the action of the atmosphere. This is
to be seen on the dumps where the filling matter and cobbed rock is
exposed. In one or two cases I have seen large quantities of broken rock
changed into fibre after a few years, by atmospherical chemical
agencies.

In so many cases I find people are prejudiced from going deeper than a
few feet from the surface, as not finding a copious supply of Asbestos
there, when _good_ indications are shown they become disheartened.

Therefore, from these practical facts it will be seen that in order to
get the best results it is necessary to work at the lowest possible
level when a favourable out-crop is shown, as, possibly, working at a
high elevation on the out-crop may be a mistake, where a lower point is
available.

There are good indications of Asbestos where the serpentine is crossed
by quartzose, gneiss, or "traverse dykes," and some valuable finds have
been made at the junction with the dioretic rocks.

When the serpentine is found dark in colour, to have a granular
appearance, containing many dark grains of, perhaps, felspathic
crystals, the Asbestos will be of a dark, dull, translucent lustre, very
compact, and easily fluffed to a fine silken fibre. The admixtures of
hard and soft serpentine, where not effected by a fault, may sometimes
be regarded as a doubtful indication of an immediate find, but if its
hardness increases on descending, and colour becomes more uniform, from
a light emerald green with a whitish admixture, to a dark olive, and
containing numerous small veins of fibre, the conclusions may be
considered as favourable to rich deposits of Asbestos.

In conclusion I may add that the foregoing remarks, as regards the
indications of this valuable mineral, are based on my personal
geological experience, and the reliable information of the managers of
the various Asbestos mines in Canada, whose opinions have greatly aided
me in my recent prospection, and I trust that this pamphlet will not
alone be a benefit to them, but to the Asbestos industry, which I feel
assured will be one of the most prominent in the province of Quebec.

    LUCIUS J. BOYD,
            C.E., F.R.G.S.I.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Geological Report on Asbestos and its
Indications, in the Province of Quebec, Canada, by Lucius J. Boyd

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEOL. REPORT ON ASBESTOS IN QUEBEC ***

***** This file should be named 33630.txt or 33630.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/6/3/33630/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Canadian Institute for
Historical Microreproductions (www.canadiana.org))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
