The Project Gutenberg EBook of Parturition without Pain or Loss of
Consciousness, by James Townley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Parturition without Pain or Loss of Consciousness

Author: James Townley

Release Date: October 4, 2010 [EBook #34029]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARTURITION WITHOUT PAIN ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)







PARTURITION WITHOUT PAIN

OR

Loss of Consciousness.

BY

JAMES TOWNLEY,

Member of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, Fellow of the
Royal College of Surgeons of England, Fellow and Councillor of the
Medical Society of London, F.L.S., Etc. Etc.

_SECOND EDITION._

LONDON:
JOHN W. DAVIES, 54, PRINCES STREET,
LEICESTER SQUARE.

EDINBURGH: MACLACHLAN AND STEWART.
DUBLIN: FANNIN AND CO.

MDCCCLXII.

LONDON:
SAVILL AND EDWARDS, PRINTERS, CHANDOS STREET,
COVENT GARDEN.




PREFACE

TO

THE SECOND EDITION.


A second edition of my little work being required at the expiration of
only a few months is gratifying to me, as evidence that my views
regarding the use of an Anodyne in Parturition have attracted
considerable attention. I may take this opportunity of stating, that I
have never had any intention of undervaluing the merits of others who
have laboured in the field of anaesthetics, my only claim to attention
consisting in the novelty of my mode of applying the agent, by which its
effects are so remarkably modified.

When chloroform is administered in the usual way it is given slowly, and
"goes the round of the circulation" before it relieves the pain or
produces anaesthesia. Whereas, in my plan of using the "anodyne," the
rapidly repeated but interrupted impressions made on the nervous system
produce the anodyne without the anaesthetic effect--before, indeed, the
mass of the blood has become affected. In this consists all the
originality to which I lay claim. I have used the word "anodyne,"
instead of "modified chloroform," in consequence of this peculiarity of
its effects. I cannot but regard this as an improvement on the old plan
of using chloroform--which relieved pain, it is true, but it produced
loss of consciousness also, and was not unattended with danger.

_2, Harleyford Place, Kennington, S.,
October, 1862._




ADVERTISEMENT

TO

THE FIRST EDITION.


The following remarks on the administration of an anaesthetic agent
during parturition are reprinted from the _Lancet_. I have appended a
series of Letters, illustrative of the efficacy of the mode of
proceeding I adopt.

_2, Harleyford Place, Kennington, S.,
June, 1862._




PARTURITION WITHOUT PAIN.


For some time past, my attention has been directed to the use of
anaesthetics in parturition. I had often been requested by patients to
administer chloroform to them during labour, but I had seen the ill
effects of this drug in one instance so strongly and almost fatally
developed, that I shrank from its use. After considerable reflection on
the subject, I thought that if a plan could be devised by which the
anaesthetic agent should act only in deadening sensation, and not
interfere with consciousness, it would be a boon to the accoucheur as
well as to the patient. How was this to be effected? Two conditions
appeared necessary for its accomplishment,--namely, a modification of
the Inhaler at present in use; and certain additions to the
chloroform--additions which would reduce its strength, and give it a
certain flavour. These two conditions I had not much difficulty in
fulfilling. But there arose an obstacle of more serious moment: How,
when, and for what time, was the inhalation to be made? I will now give
an account, _seriatim_, of my inhaler, the anodyne fluid which I employ,
and the mode in which I direct the inhalation to be made.

_The Inhaler_[A] is similar to one very commonly used in administering
chloroform. It has, however, in addition, two tubes, an inch and a
quarter long and a quarter of an inch in diameter, running parallel to
the floor of the inhaler. These tubes, being placed above and to the
sides of the inspiring valve, admit two small streams of fresh air,
which to a great extent are inspired unmixed with the vapour of the
anodyne. In the place of the grating there is a curved prong for
retaining the sponge under the right tube and opposite the hole in the
right side connected with the cup which receives the mixture to be
inhaled. The object of this cup is--first, to receive the mixture, and
direct it to the centre of the sponge. It has, in the second place, the
advantage of helping to keep the Inhaler cool by the patient making use
of it to rest her thumb upon when she is inhaling. It will therefore be
gathered from this that the patient herself always holds the inhaler.

[Footnote A: Manufactured by Messrs. Weiss and Son.]

[Illustration: A, cup; B, external opening of tubes; C, internal opening
of tubes; D, sponge.]

_The anodyne mixture_ which I have found to be the most manageable is
composed as follows: Alcohol, two ounces; one drachm of aromatic
tincture; with sufficient chloroform added, short of the production of a
turbid state of the fluid. The object of adding the tincture is to make
it pleasanter to inhale; the spice also appears to prevent the sickness
which would otherwise sometimes arise from long-continued inhalation. By
giving a little colour to the mixture, also, it prevents any accident
that might arise by putting in by mistake pure for the modified
chloroform. I prepare the aromatic tincture as follows: One drachm of
nutmegs; two drachms of cloves; pterocarp chips, a drachm and a half;
water, four ounces; alcohol, five ounces: mix.

_Mode of administering the anodyne vapour._--The great object to be
attained is to so far influence the nerves of sensation as to prevent
pain, and yet not carry the anaesthetic agent to the extent of producing
unconsciousness. This can be effected in the following manner:--The
woman, in the upright or recumbent position, as the case may be, holds
the Inhaler in her right hand. She is directed to take a full
inspiration, and then to apply the Inhaler to the mouth and nose. She is
then to breathe rapidly for six, eight, or more inspirations (the
inspirations and expirations being equal) only with the diaphragm and
abdominal muscles, the chest being kept a fixture all the time. The
Inhaler should then be removed immediately, and one or two full, deep,
quick chest-inspirations taken. This will be found sufficient to
relieve all pain, and there will be no loss of consciousness. During the
entire process it is desirable to have a full light upon the face, to
watch the countenance and feel the pulse occasionally, and observe the
pupils. These, in some cases, are very quickly affected, and then the
inhalation requires to be suspended for a time. During the time the
process is going on, I am in the habit of giving a teaspoonful of brandy
in a cup of weak tea with plenty of milk, and something to eat; or,
instead, a glass of wine and a little cake or bread-and-butter, from
time to time, to keep up the strength and prevent that sudden pallor of
the face which sometimes occurs. I may add, as only a portion of the
alcohol is taken up in vapour, it accumulates in the sponge, so that it
is necessary occasionally to squeeze it out before adding a fresh
quantity.

I can hardly attempt to explain clearly the _modus operandi_ of the
agent. Practically, however, it answers the purpose intended. The great
point is, of course, to arrest its action before it produces
unconsciousness. This is effected by using it as I have described. It is
requisite that the patient be carefully watched, so that the moment for
administering the agent may be seized. From the experience I have now
had of its use, I can estimate pretty accurately the exact time the
inhalation should be resumed or discontinued. After a little practice
this knowledge can be obtained by any competent observer. I have now
given my anodyne mixture in 216 cases, and without in any one instance
seeing a bad result _quoad_ the administration of the mixture. Of these
cases many have come to me in consequence of the severity of their
former labours, their extreme nervousness, and other causes.

I select a few instances from my notebook in which the anodyne was
employed with complete and satisfactory effects:

1. The patient was in her twenty-ninth year, by no means robust, of a
nervous temperament, and looking forward to her first labour with great
apprehension.

2. Was in her thirty-third year, and looked forward to her first labour
with great dread.

3. Her sixth labour; all her previous labours had been very severe.

4. Her tenth labour; her previous labours very severe, and each time
followed by a great deal of after-pain.

5. Her eighth labour; had suffered intensely in every previous labour,
in some of which she had been delivered with instruments; had had a
protracted recovery after each labour.

6. Her seventh labour; inflammation had followed each of her former
labours.

7. Her fifth and sixth labours; her former labours had been very severe.

8. Her third and fourth labours; her former labours having been very
severe.

9. Her first labour; very strong expulsive pains; soft parts at first
being very rigid, then gradually giving way after six hours' use of the
inhaler.

10. Her third labour; child's head very large and firm; much exhaustion;
delivered with the short forceps, very great force requiring to be used
before the head could be extracted.

11. Her first labour; very nervous and timid; with difficulty could I
get her to use the Inhaler rightly, but she became much more composed
towards the end, and inhaled very well. I have rarely seen stronger
expulsive pains than she had towards the last; the arch of the pubes
being rather contracted, and the child full-sized.

12. Her fourth labour; breech presentation; used the Inhaler for three
hours.

13. Her first labour; in her thirty-ninth year; very severe expulsive
pains for nine hours; the last hour, owing to the size of the head and
the contracted outlet, no progress was made; and beginning to get
exhausted, it was decided to apply the forceps, which were accordingly
sent for, but a few minutes before they arrived, nature had overcome the
difficulty; the child was born alive, but with a large caput
succedaneum, showing how firmly it had been retained the last hour.

14. Had always had great suffering in her former labours; used the
Inhaler about three hours; breech presentation; placenta was adherent,
and required great force to peel it off.

I have thus given the results of my experience with an agent calculated,
under proper management, I venture to think, to be of great service in
the practice of midwifery. I believe my experience with it has proved
that--

1st. It is possible for a woman to be delivered with less pain from the
beginning to the end of her labour than a rhubarb draught would
occasion.

2nd. It is possible to afford that relief without interfering with the
regular and natural action of the heart or brain.

3rd. It is possible for the child to be born without the mother
experiencing any pain whatever, while at the same time she retains her
consciousness and power to bear down when told to do so; and her first
knowledge of the birth of her child shall be from hearing it cry.

4th. That when a woman is delivered without suffering pain, although she
shall have had inflammation after each of six previous labours, the
prevention of the suffering will have the effect of preventing the usual
inflammation.

5th. That by preventing the suffering of labour, the woman does not lose
her strength, and always has a speedy recovery.




CASES.

     _Of the following Letters from Patients which I have
     selected for publication, six relate to cases of first
     labour._


It is generally admitted that the suffering of first labours equals, if
not surpasses, that of subsequent ones. In three of these six labours
there was the additional drawback of age, the youngest being more than
twenty-eight years old. In one of these cases also there was a
contracted outlet, which retained the head for one hour. It follows,
therefore, that if in the severer cases of labour, with obstacles to
impede delivery, women can be so fully relieved as not to suffer pain,
the more ordinary and milder cases will also have the same relief. I,
therefore, think it unnecessary to give any larger number of cases.

I will only add, that in all these cases the patient deserved as much
credit as the accoucheur, as it was by her quickly altering and exactly
following his directions in the manner of inhaling that enabled her to
go through the labour without pain. Some patients, with the best
intentions of doing what you wish, find it difficult, and then they have
a little pain at times, but so little that I am within bounds when I say
it is not one-twentieth of what they would otherwise have suffered.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Providence Place.

My dear Sir,

Having always had a great dread of the pains of labour, I was
exceedingly pleased when you told me that you had it in your power
almost entirely to prevent their being felt, though I must confess I was
at the time rather sceptical as to the amount of alleviation you could
effect without producing unconsciousness; but having been so happy as to
be under your care during my confinement, I can truly say that the
result fully realized all you had said. I suffered very much before you
arrived, part of the time lying on the floor in great agony, perfectly
unable to rise; but from the time I took the Inhaler in my hand, and
used it under your directions, I had no more pain, lying quite still on
the bed, and giving orders to the attendants to get all that was
required (as you are aware, I was confined quite unexpectedly). I was
perfectly conscious all the time, and remembered where everything was
that was wanted. I was quite free from pain, excepting when you took the
Inhaler from me to replenish it, when the pains came on rapidly, and I
was delighted to get it back again. When the child was born, there was a
feeling of great forcing, but scarcely any pain; indeed, I did not think
it was born until you said "There, Mamma, you have a nice little girl."

Again thanking you, dear Sir, for your kindness, and the immense relief
I experienced under your most beautiful method,

I remain,
Yours very truly,
* * *

Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Oxford Terrace.

My dear Sir,

Having heard of the great relief many ladies had received from your plan
of treatment in their confinements, and having a great dread and fear of
the pain and suffering, it somewhat relieved my mind to know that you
had the means of very much mitigating them; but it is impossible for me
to express a tithe of the benefit and relief I obtained while using your
Inhaler.

I had been suffering more or less pain for thirty-six hours before
sending to you; but you had not been with me five minutes before I was
perfectly free from all pain, and continued so for the six hours that my
labour lasted, and the first knowledge of baby being born was my hearing
it cry. I held the Inhaler myself the whole time, and was not the least
unconscious for a single moment. I was laughing and talking with my aunt
and nurse the greater part of the time.

No one who has not experienced or seen it can have the least idea of the
marvellous effect of your process. I will only add, that I had no after
pains, and felt well, and quite strong enough to get up the next day, if
I had been allowed.

No words can sufficiently convey my thanks to you for this inestimable
boon in my hour of need.

I remain,
My dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
* * *

Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Roupell Park.

Dear Sir,

It is with great pleasure I testify to the wonderful efficacy of your
method of treatment during the agony and peril of childbirth.

Having had the benefit of your professional services in my former
confinements, you are well aware how greatly I suffered on those
occasions. After a lapse of four years I was anticipating my sixth
confinement with feelings of dread and apprehension, until assured by
you that you had a means of greatly easing suffering women at these
times; but I can truly say, that unless I had myself experienced the
marvellous effects of your beautiful method, I could not have believed
it possible that aught in medical science could have been so perfect in
application and result. At the time of your arrival, I was in great
agony; five minutes after you entered my room I was entirely free from
pain, and unless I had occasionally removed the Inhaler, I should not
have believed I was in labour: the intensity of pain then felt made me
hastily replace it. During the whole time--about an hour and a half--I
was perfectly conscious, able to ask and answer questions.

I did not know when my baby was born. I had not the slightest feeling of
pain or distension; and even when twice assured by yourself, and also by
my sister, who was present, that baby was born, I could not believe,
until I saw the child with my own eyes, that my trial was over. I had no
after-pains or inconvenience of any kind as hitherto, but regained my
strength quickly and comfortably.

I can only say, in conclusion, that it is impossible to speak
sufficiently in praise of your marvellous process, or for me to offer
you thanks at all in proportion to the great blessing you have been the
means of bestowing on suffering women.

I remain,
Dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Clapham.

My dear Sir,

It gives me great pleasure to have this opportunity of stating the very
great relief I received in my late confinement from your most beautiful
plan of treatment.

Having had a large family, and, as you know, always suffering so much
in my previous confinements, I could scarcely believe I was in labour
when using the Inhaler under your direction, as I had not the least
particle of pain, and only when I took it away to have it refilled was I
aware that labour was going on. My husband, mamma, and nurse, who were
in the room at the time, were quite astonished to see me without the
least pain or suffering during the five hours my trouble lasted.

I never lost my consciousness, but knew all that passed, holding the
Inhaler myself the whole time; and, more wonderful still, when baby was
born I did not feel any pain or inconvenience whatever, and only when
told it was over, did I know the child was in the world. I had no
after-pains, from which I generally suffer so much; felt perfectly well
the next day, and continued so the whole time, which was a perfect
contrast to my former confinements, as I have always been many weeks
before I regained my strength.

In conclusion, I must say I cannot sufficiently speak in praise of your
beautiful process, which not only relieves all pain at the time, but
prevents loss of strength afterwards.

Allow me, with my husband, to offer you my most sincere thanks; and
rejoiced are we to think that at any future time I can be relieved from
such agonizing pain by your invaluable method.

I am, my dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Kennington Lane.

Dear Sir,

It was with no ordinary apprehensions that I looked forward to my hour
of peril. My previous labours had been seasons of the most prolonged and
intense suffering, at times rising to intolerable agony. My medical
attendants in the country have been compelled to remain, with slight
intervals of absence, from twelve to twenty-four hours, yet utterly
unable to afford aught but momentary relief.

My anxiety was somewhat abated by the statements I received from ladies
whom you had attended, by hearing the great relief they had received
from your plan of treatment; and I am happy to have it in my power to
corroborate their testimony.

No one but those who have experienced it can conceive or describe the
immense alleviation of suffering it produces, without in the least
taking away the power of consciousness; and when baby was born I did not
feel the least pain or inconvenience, and did not know that it was born
till you assured me it was.

My recovery, too, was marked by the absence of pains and other
inconveniences, which sometimes awakened the greatest apprehensions on
the part of my family.

Very grateful am I to you for your attention; and sincerely do I thank
God, who has enabled you to mitigate to a most wonderful degree the
pains and agony of child-bearing.

I will only add, that after you came I can conscientiously say that I
had no pain at all.

I am, Sir,
Yours most respectfully,
* * *

Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Epsom.

Dear Sir,

With pleasure I write to tell you of my safe return home and continued
good health. My rapid restoration and early return is a subject of
wonder and astonishment to my friends, who have been accustomed to see
me at the end of six and eight weeks in a precarious and suffering
condition. My six former confinements being very severe, the time of
labour varying from twenty to thirty-six hours, followed by violent
inflammation, leaving me much exhausted.

I was looking forward to my seventh with great fear and dread, when I
heard of the wonderful efficacy of your system from two of my sisters,
who had received such great relief from the liquid they inhaled. I came
to town doubting I should derive the same benefit, when I considered
the agony I had endured on every previous occasion, both during and
after. I feel I cannot sufficiently express on paper the astonishing
fact, that for six hours, using the Inhaler myself the whole time, I was
perfectly free from pain, and without one moment's loss of
consciousness, occasionally talking and laughing with those around me;
and when told by yourself that my trouble was nearly over, it appeared
to me impossible; and so great was my joy, that I did not replace the
Inhaler the last few moments, consequently felt a pain with distension.
I quite believe, had I attended, and replaced the Inhaler in time, I
should not have felt the slightest pain. I was suffering much when you
came to me, but you were not in my room more than three minutes before I
was perfectly easy, and remained so the whole time until the birth of my
babe, when I experienced the pain I have named.

The after effects of your skilful process are equal, and even surpass,
the time of labour; not one adverse symptom attended or followed on the
present occasion to retard my recovery. I was better at the end of a
fortnight than I had previously been at two months. I assure you that I
cannot realize that I have been in so short a time reprieved from pain,
and feel most grateful under Providence to your skill and kind attention
from not being, as hitherto, not hours or weeks, but months, in a state
of suffering in mind and body.

Earnestly do I wish every such patient could receive the boon of your
assistance in their hour of anguish. Accept my own and my husband's best
thanks; and should I again require assistance, our chief anxiety would
be to secure the inestimable benefit to be derived from the use of your
Inhaler.

I remain,
Yours very truly,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Camberwell New Road.

Dear Sir,

Allow me to express my gratitude for the benefit I received under your
care during my two last confinements.

I had had four children when I first heard of your treatment in
alleviating the pains of childbirth; and having a great dread from
severe suffering in my former labours, I determined to place myself
under your care.

The first time you attended me, when you came I was in much agony;
immediately upon inhaling the vapour you gave me, I felt as if it ran
down my back to the exact spot where the pain was, which it immediately
relieved, and a sense of forcing, with a trifling uneasiness, was all I
experienced during the birth of my babe; and I can truly say that its
benefit during my labour this last time surpassed the first.

Having had chloroform three times previously, I can testify that the
effects of your treatment are quite different, and infinitely superior;
for while in the one case I lost my senses and power of action, under
you my senses were as acute as at any time in my life, and my bodily
powers the same.

No one can imagine the relief obtained under your process: it must be
felt to be believed.

With deep gratitude to God as the first cause of every blessing, and
with sincere thanks to yourself for the very great relief you gave me,

Believe me to remain,
Dear Sir,
Yours respectfully,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Kennington.

Dear Dr. Townley,

Having been so fortunate as to procure your professional services during
my accouchement, and receiving so much benefit thereby, I cannot allow
it to pass without expressing my admiration at the skill and success
with which you relieved me from all pain, whilst at the same time I
remained perfectly sensible.

Before you arrived I was suffering great agony, but you immediately
relieved it. The labour went on regularly for nearly five hours without
my feeling the _slightest_ particle of pain.

I can conscientiously state that I did not know the child was born till
I heard it cry, at the same time being perfectly sensible and able to
converse cheerfully with a friend I had with me.

I did not suffer from headache, fever, or any other bad symptom which
sometimes follows childbirth.

I consider the process you use in midwifery cases to be, without any
exception, the greatest boon which has been, or ever can be, given to
woman, and will, I trust, be appreciated as such. I have received the
wonderful benefit of it myself, as well as witnessing it in two other
cases; one an extremely difficult one, where I am fully convinced that
the patient must, in all human probability, have lost her life, had it
not been for your beautiful process, whereby she was totally relieved
from pain, which must in her case have exhausted nature.

I could add much more in favour of this great boon, but will not trouble
you with a tedious letter.

In conclusion, let me offer my sincere thanks to you for devoting your
time and talents to the discovery of so wonderful and useful a practice
in the most important branch of your profession; and you will, I am
sure, be fully repaid by knowing the amount of suffering you have
prevented, and, I may also add, the lives you have saved.

You are at liberty to show this letter to any one, or to refer them
personally to me.

It is my opinion that too much cannot be said in praise of your
beautiful process.

I remain,
Dear Dr. Townley,
Yours most sincerely,
* * *

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Stockwell.

My dear Sir,

Allow me to express my gratitude for your kind care and attention to me
during my two last confinements, and the great benefit I derived from
your mode of relieving the dreadful pains of childbirth.

When consulting you in the year 1859 relative to my approaching
confinement, which I very much dreaded, having upon two previous
occasions suffered intensely the pains of labour for the space of nearly
two days each time, I gladly accepted the proffered relief you offered
me, though I was somewhat sceptical it would afford me all the relief
you considered it was calculated to convey.

I now beg to state, for the information of any who may never have
participated in its inestimable benefit, that both in 1859 and in the
last month (March, 1861), I am perfectly convinced it has been under
Providence the means of saving my life; that its marvellous effects are
such that pain is scarcely felt or known; and while inhaling the vapour
there is not the slightest degree of unconsciousness. I was able to
converse and give directions with the same ability and readiness of
perception as a person in the most perfect health would do; in addition,
I may also state, that whereas in my previous labours I had always
suffered much pain from distension and soreness afterwards, in the two
last there was a total absence of both these inconveniences.

I cannot but express my fervent thankfulness for your skill and
watchfulness during my hour of need, and should only be too happy to
testify personally to any one expecting to take it, that they need be
under no apprehension whatever from ill effects, at the time or
afterwards, either to themselves or their infant. So beautiful is it,
that I told my nurse, as far as the pain at the time of labour went, I
should not mind going through the same every week.

Incredible as these results may appear to those who have never felt nor
witnessed your mode of alleviating the pains of labour, the earnest
desire of both myself and husband is, that by God's blessing your
valuable life may long be spared, and that you may enjoy the happiness
and privilege of being, to a constantly-increasing number of ladies, the
means of proving that what has hitherto been considered an impossibility
can be done--namely, the birth of a child without any pain or any loss
of consciousness to the mother throughout the whole of her labour.

I remain,
Dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
* * *

Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Camberwell.

Dear Dr. Townley,

I had great dread of going through my first confinement, and
accordingly, when a friend of mine, on whose experience of your aid I
could place the greatest reliance, recommended me to try your anodyne
treatment, I was very glad to avail myself of your scientific services.
I had expected that all you could do would be to relieve me of a little
of the usual pain of a confinement, but I can now confidently declare
that I did not feel any pain at all during my labour. For I knew very
well when every pain was approaching, and by using the Inhaler under
your direction, I was enabled to bear the labour without experiencing
any pain at all. What I really did feel was an unpleasant sensation of
extreme forcing, to which it would be wrong of me to give the name of
pain; that sensation is easily accounted for, since it was the opinion
of a medical friend who was present, that my child could not be born
without the use of the instruments; but I thank God, that with the help
of your anodyne, and with your own attentive encouragement, my child was
born alive, and without the use of the instruments. On the following day
I felt neither pain, nor stiffness, nor discomfort of any kind. With
many thanks for your kind attention,

I am,
Yours truly,
* * *

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           Vassall Road.

Dear Sir,

It is with mingled feelings of pleasure and gratitude that I take up my
pen to testify to the extraordinary results of your wonderful process
for alleviating and lessening the pains and perils of childbirth. I
have, as you are aware, thrice passed through this ordeal; the first
without the aid of your invaluable process, and well do I recollect the
agony I then endured; the second time I was induced to submit myself to
your new mode of treatment, and although it was a tedious and protracted
labour, I passed through it with little or none of the suffering I
experienced on the first occasion.

In my third and last confinement I cannot speak too highly of this
inestimable boon. I was in great agony on your arrival; but as soon as
I used the Inhaler, which I held in my own hand, I felt no more pain. I
was perfectly sensible the whole of the time, conversing freely with
those in the room. But what I consider most extraordinary was, when you
were obliged at the last, owing to the great size of the baby's head, to
have recourse to instruments; even at that trying time, I experienced
little or no pain or distension, to the utter astonishment and delight
of my mother and the nurse, who were present. As to myself, I could
hardly believe it possible that my trouble was over. My speedy recovery
is well known to you, being enabled to rise from my bed on the fifth day
after my confinement, quite strong, and to leave my room within the
fortnight, neither myself nor babe ever having since experienced the
least unpleasant effects from the astonishing relief afforded.

In conclusion, I beg you to accept the sincere thanks of myself and
husband for your great kindness and unremitting attention to me in the
hour of need, and trust you may long be spared to witness the marvellous
results of your arduous exertions for relieving suffering women.

I remain,
Dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           18th Feb., 1862.

Dear Sir,

When I was at Clapham last week, I heard that my confinement had been
hit upon by some persons (who are much prejudiced against your splendid
discovery) as an example of its _failure_; and as I do not think it
should be looked upon in that light, I am writing to say you are at
liberty to send any one to me, and I will tell them that, although I
cannot say (as I _know_ some of your ladies can) that I never felt a
pain, yet that the anodyne gave me such relief that I shall be thankful
to get the same alleviation another time. You will recollect you found
me in great pain, but that instantly subsided when I used the Inhaler as
you told me; and for an hour or two, strictly following your
directions, I could not believe that the labour was going on, as I felt
nothing, though perfectly conscious the whole time. But once allowing
the pains to get ahead, I seemed as if I could not listen to you. It
being my first confinement, I suppose I was frightened and nervous,
consequently, then, not being able to do as you told me, I suffered
intensely for a time, but towards the end I must have used the Inhaler
better, for I certainly did not feel my _great baby_ being born. You
yourself called it a _terrific bout_; but I recovered very rapidly,
which must be a proof that I did actually derive much benefit from the
anodyne, notwithstanding my having that interval of suffering when I did
not use the Inhaler properly, for I walked downstairs to dinner on the
fifth day, and was home at three weeks, and thirty miles down in the
country three days after. I speak of you and your wonderful discovery
whenever I get the opportunity, and sincerely hope I may have your
valuable assistance again, if I should be in a condition to need it.

Believe me,
Dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           April 12th, 1862.

My dear Dr. Townley,

I cannot allow the benefits that I have personally received from the
application of your valuable discovery in alleviating the pains and
anguish in the hour of childbirth to pass unacknowledged. I have delayed
writing earlier, being anxious to confirm the lasting benefits conferred
at the time. It is now five months since you attended me, and I
unhesitatingly affirm that on the three previous occasions of my
confinements, I have never been so fully recovered at the end of one
month, as I was on the last occasion at the end of a fortnight, as was
instanced by the fact, as you know, of my being obliged to closely watch
and nurse, night and day, my youngest boy, in a severe and critical
illness. Apart from the general and speedy restoration to health and
strength, I can safely state that while under the influence of the
anodyne, which I applied myself, retaining consciousness the whole
period, and when strictly following your directions, experienced no pain
whatever, although you are aware the difficulty in my case was increased
by being what is termed a cross-birth, and which I feel sure, under the
ordinary treatment, would have left me utterly prostrated through severe
and protracted suffering.

I willingly, and unsolicited, render you this simple tribute of my
sincere and best thanks, that under divine Providence, you have been
enabled to introduce so marvellous a relief in the hour of such
momentous maternal anxiety and suffering; and I shall be most happy to
satisfy any one who may wish for a reference as to the beneficial
effects of your wonderful discovery, so far as I have individually
experienced it, and readily accord you full liberty to make use of this
communication as may be most satisfactory to you; and with best wishes
for your continued success,

Believe me,
My dear Dr. Townley,
Yours very truly,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           13th May, 1862.

Dear Sir,

It is with great pleasure I testify to the wonderful effects of your
beautiful method of treatment during the agony of childbirth. Being my
first confinement, I was naturally nervous and fearful. I had been
suffering great pain more or less for five hours before I sent for you,
but had no sooner taken your Inhaler in my hand than all my nervousness,
fears, and pain vanished, and for the next six hours that my labour
lasted felt perfectly easy. The only pain I felt was when I removed the
Inhaler to have it replenished, my great anxiety being to get it back
again. I did not in the least lose my consciousness, but was laughing
and talking with my mamma and nurse the whole time. When my baby was
born, the feeling I experienced was just as if the parts had been
india-rubber--a gentle expanding, but not the least pain. I had no
after-pains, and there was no inconvenience afterwards, either to myself
or child, and I felt perfectly well, and strong enough to get up the
next day had I been allowed. Thanking you, dear Sir, for all your care
and watchfulness over me during my hour of need,

I remain,
Yours most respectfully,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           May 15th, 1862.

Dear Sir,

I cannot help expressing on paper, for the benefit of others who might
be as incredulous as I was myself, the perfect success of your
treatment. In a previous confinement, five years ago, I was obliged,
after a most protracted labour and much suffering, to be delivered by
instruments. This time, although it was a cross-birth from the time you
came, I suffered no pain; and after three hours using the Inhaler under
your direction, when you assured me the baby would soon be born, I could
not believe it, having no forcing or sensation of any kind. I was
perfectly sensible, and able to talk cheerfully with those around me.
Though some time under your hands whilst removing the after-birth, which
adhered, I had not the slightest pain. In all my previous confinements
I had been much troubled afterwards, in consequence of the protracted
and forcing nature of my labour, from piles and other inconveniences,
none of which I experienced under your care; consequently, I felt better
on the second day than I ever had before at the end of a fortnight.

All who have used your Inhaler must be thankful that you have been
directed by a gracious God to a means of mitigating such severe
suffering.

Believe me,
Dear Sir,
Yours truly,
* * *

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           May 20th, 1862.

Dear Sir,

With much pleasure I acknowledge the benefit I derived from inhaling
your anodyne during my recent confinement.

I confess it was with some fear and reluctance I yielded to the
persuasions of two of my friends (who themselves had experienced its
benefit) to try it. I could not forget how much I suffered some time
since from the use of chloroform administered to me for the extraction
of a tooth. On that occasion, after the tooth was out, they were obliged
to open the windows and deluge me with cold water. It was an hour and a
half before any signs of consciousness returned, and then the ringing in
my ears and distress in my head were dreadful. It was a full week before
I could bear any light or noise in my room, and even now a little
camphorated chloroform for toothache quite upsets me. In taking your
anodyne, however, I felt nothing of the kind. I was perfectly conscious
all the time, and whilst inhaling it suffered no pain. I have been
stronger and better since than in any of my four previous confinements.
This time I was dressed and sat up to dinner before baby was five days
old, without feeling the slightest inconvenience of any sort, and the
earliest time I have sat up to dinner before has been two weeks.

I am sure that ladies who suffer much at these times, or from debility
afterwards, will find it a very great boon.

I am,
Dear Sir,
Yours sincerely,
* * *

To Dr. Townley.

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Parturition without Pain or Loss of
Consciousness, by James Townley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARTURITION WITHOUT PAIN ***

***** This file should be named 34029.txt or 34029.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/0/2/34029/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
