The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Settlement of Illinois, 1778-1830 by
Arthur Clinton Boggess



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The Settlement of Illinois, 1778-1830

Author: Arthur Clinton Boggess

Release Date: October 9, 2010 [Ebook #34049]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SETTLEMENT OF ILLINOIS, 1778-1830***





             Chicago Historical Society's Collection.--Vol. V.

                        The Settlement of Illinois

                                1778-1830

                     by Arthur Clinton Boggess, Ph.D.

   Professor of History and political Science in Pacific University; a
 Director of the Oregon Historical Society; sometime Harrison Scholar in
  American History in the University of Pennsylvania; sometime Fellow in
             American History in the University of Wisconsin.

                                 Chicago

                         Published by the society

                                   1908





CONTENTS


Preface.
Chapter I. The County of Illinois.
Chapter II. The Period of Anarchy in Illinois.
Chapter III.
   I. The Land and Indian Questions. 1790 to 1809.
   II. Government Succeeding the Period of Anarchy, 1790 to 1809.
   III. Obstacles to Immigration. 1790 to 1809.
Chapter IV. Illinois During Its Territorial Period. 1809 to 1818.
   I. The Land and Indian Questions.
   II. Territorial Government of Illinois. 1809 to 1818.
   IV. Transportation and Settlement, 1809 to 1818.
   IV. Life of the Settlers.
Chapter V. The First Years of Statehood, 1818 to 1830.
   The Indian and Land Questions.
   The Government and Its Representatives, 1818 to 1830.
   Transportation.
   Life of the People.
Chapter VI. Slavery in Illinois As Affecting Settlement.
Chapter VII. Successful Frontiersmen.
Works Consulted.
Index.
Footnotes






PREFACE.


In the work here presented, an attempt has been made to apply in the field
of history, the study of types so long in use in biological science. If
the settlement of Illinois had been an isolated historical fact, its
narration would have been too provincial to be seriously considered, but
in many respects, the history of this settlement is typical of that of
other regions. The Indian question, the land question, the transportation
problem, the problem of local government; these are a few of the classes
of questions wherein the experience of Illinois was not unique.

This work was prepared while the writer was a student in the University of
Wisconsin. The first draft was critically and carefully read by Prof.
Frederick Jackson Turner, of that University, and the second draft was
read by Prof. John Bach McMaster, of the University of Pennsylvania. In
addition to suggestions received from my teachers, valuable aid has been
rendered by Miss Caroline M. McIlvaine, the librarian of the Chicago
Historical Society, who placed at my disposal her wide knowledge of the
sources of Illinois history.

The omission of any reference in this work to the French manuscripts,
found by Clarence W. Alvord, is due to the fact that at the time they were
found, my work was so nearly completed that it was loaned to Mr. Alvord to
use in the preparation of his article on the County of Illinois, while the
press of professional duties has been such that a subsequent use of the
manuscripts has been impracticable.

ARTHUR C. BOGGESS.

Pacific University,
Forest Grove, Oregon.
September 14, 1907.





CHAPTER I. THE COUNTY OF ILLINOIS.


An Act for establishing the County of Illinois, and for the more effectual
protection and defence thereof, passed both houses of the Virginia
legislature on December 9, 1778.(1) The new county was to include the
inhabitants of Virginia, north of the Ohio River, but its location was not
more definitely prescribed.(2)

The words "for the more effectual protection and defence thereof" in the
title of the Act were thoroughly appropriate. The Indians were in almost
undisputed possession of the land in Illinois, save the inconsiderable
holdings of the French. Some grants and sales of large tracts of land had
been made. In 1769, John Wilkins, British commandant in Illinois, granted
to the trading-firm of Baynton, Wharton and Morgan, a great tract of land
lying between the Kaskaskia and the Mississippi rivers. The claim to the
land descended to John Edgar, who shared it with John Murray St. Clair,
son of Gov. Arthur St. Clair. The claim was filed for 13,986 acres, but
was found on survey to contain 23,000 acres, and was confirmed by Gov. St.
Clair. At a later examination of titles, this claim was rejected because
the grant was made in the first instance counter to the king's
proclamation of 1763, and because the confirmation by Gov. St. Clair was
made after his authority ceased and was not signed by the Secretary of the
Northwest Territory.(3) In 1773, William Murray and others, subsequently
known as the Illinois Land Company, bought two large tracts of land in
Illinois from the Illinois Indians. In 1775, a great tract lying on both
sides of the Wabash was similarly purchased by what later became the
Wabash Land Company. The purchase of the Illinois Company was made in the
presence, but without the sanction, of the British officers, and Gen.
Thomas Gage had the Indians re-convened and the validity of the purchase
expressly denied. These large grants were illegal, and the Indians were
not in consequence disposessed of them.(4) Thus far, the Indians of the
region had been undisturbed by white occupation. British landholders were
few and the French clearings were too small to affect the hunting-grounds.
French and British alike were interested in the fur trade. A French town
was more suited to be the center of an Indian community than to become a
point on its periphery, for here the Indians came for religious
instruction, provisions, fire-arms, and fire-water. The Illinois Indian of
1778 had been degraded rather than elevated by his contact with the
whites. The observation made by an acute French woman of large experience,
although made at another time and place, was applicable here. She said
that it was much easier for a Frenchman to learn to live like an Indian
than for an Indian to learn to live like a Frenchman.(5)

In point of numbers and of occupied territory, the French population was
trifling in comparison with the Indian. In 1766-67, the white inhabitants
of the region were estimated at about two thousand.(6) Some five years
later,(7) Kaskaskia was reported as having about five hundred white and
between four and five hundred black inhabitants; Prairie du Rocher, one
hundred whites and eighty negroes; Fort Chartres, a very few inhabitants;
St. Philips, two or three families; and Cahokia, three hundred whites and
eighty negroes. At the same time, there was a village of the Kaskaskia
tribe with about two hundred and ten persons, including sixty warriors,
three miles north of Kaskaskia, and a village of one hundred and seventy
warriors of the Peoria and Mitchigamia Indians, one mile northwest of Fort
Chartres. It is said of these Indians: "They were formerly brave and
warlike, but are degenerated into a drunken and debauched tribe, and so
indolent, as scarcely to procure a sufficiency of Skins and Furrs to
barter for clothing," and a pastoral letter of August 7, 1767, from the
Bishop of Quebec to the inhabitants of Kaskaskia shows the character of
the French. The French are told that if they will not acknowledge the
authority of the vicar-general--Father Meurin, pastor of Cahokia--cease to
marry without the intervention of the priest, and cease to absent
themselves from church services, they will be abandoned by the bishop as
unworthy of his care.(8) Two years earlier, George Croghan had visited
Vincennes, of which he wrote: "I found a village of about eighty or ninety
French families settled on the east side of this river [Wabash], being one
of the finest situations that can be found.... The French inhabitants,
hereabouts, are an idle, lazy people, a parcel of renegadoes from Canada,
and are much worse than the Indians."(9) Although slave-holders, a large
proportion of the French were almost abjectly poor. Illiteracy was very
common as is shown by the large proportion who signed legal documents by
their marks.(10) The people had been accustomed to a paternal rule and had
not become acquainted with English methods during the few years of British
rule. Such deeds as were given during the French period were usually
written upon scraps of paper, described the location of the land deeded
either inaccurately or not at all, and were frequently lost.(11) Land
holdings were in long narrow strips along the rivers.(12)

The country was physically in a state of almost primeval simplicity. The
chief highways were the winding rivers, although roads, likewise winding,
connected the various settlements. These roads were impassable in times of
much rain. All settlements were near the water, living on a prairie being
regarded as impossible and living far from a river as at least
impracticable.(13) The difficulties of George Rogers Clark in finding his
way, overland, from the Ohio River to Kaskaskia and Vincennes on his awful
winter march, are such as must manifestly have confronted anyone who
wished to go over the same routes at the same season of the year.

Wild animals were abundant. A quarter of a century after the Revolution,
two hunters killed twenty-five deer before nine in the morning near the
Illinois settlements.(14) In 1787, the country between Vincennes and
Kaskaskia abounded in buffalo, deer, and bear.(15) For years, the chase
furnished a large part of the provisions. The raising of hogs was rendered
difficult by the presence of wolves. Game-birds were plentiful, and birds
were sometimes a pest because of their destruction of corn and smaller
grains and even of mast.

An early traveler wrote in 1796: "The province of the Illinois is,
perhaps, the only spot respecting which travelers have given no
exaggerated accounts; it is superior to any description which has been
made, for local beauty, fertility, climate, and the means of every kind
which nature has lavished upon it for the facility of commerce."(16) The
wide-spreading prairies added to the beauty of the country. Land which now
produces one hundred bushels of corn to the acre must have been capable of
producing wonderful crops at the beginning of its cultivation. Coal was
not known to exist in great quantities in the region nor was its use as a
fuel yet known.

Such was the country and such the people now organized into the County of
Illinois.(17) The Act establishing the county provided that the governor
and council should appoint a county-lieutenant or commandant-in-chief, who
should appoint and commission as many deputy-commandants, militia
officers, and commissaries as were needed. The religion, civil rights,
property and law of the inhabitants should be respected. The people of the
county should pay the salaries of such officers as they had been
accustomed to, but officers with new duties, including the
county-lieutenant, were to be paid by Virginia. The governor and council
might send five hundred troops, paid by Virginia, to defend Illinois.
Courts were to be established with judges elected by the people, although
the judges of other county-courts of Virginia were appointed by the
governor and council.(18)

While Gov. Patrick Henry was writing instructions concerning the
organization of government in Illinois, the British general, Hamilton, was
marching to take Vincennes. Henry did not know this particular fact, but
he had a keen perception of the difficulties, both civil and military,
which awaited the county. On December 12, 1778, without waiting for the
formal signing of the act creating the county, he wrote instructions to
George Rogers Clark, to Col. John Todd, jr., and to Lieut.-Col. John
Montgomery. Clark was instructed to retain the command of the troops then
in the Illinois country, and to assume command of five other companies,
soon to be sent out.(19) Col. Todd was appointed county-lieutenant or
commandant. His instructions contained much wise direction. He was to take
care to cultivate and conciliate the affections of the French and Indians,
to cooeperate with Clark and give the military department all the aid
possible, to use the French against the British, if the French were
willing, but otherwise to remain on the defensive, to inculcate in the
people an appreciation of the value of liberty, to see that the
inhabitants had justice done them for any injuries from the troops. A
neglect of this last instruction, it was pointed out, might be fatal.
"Consider yourself as at the head of the civil department, and as such
having the command of the militia, who are not to be under the command of
the military, until ordered out by the civil authority and act in
conjunction with them." An express was to be sent to Virginia every three
months with a report. A letter to the Spanish commandant at Ste. Genevieve
was inclosed, and Todd was told to be very friendly to him.(20) Col.
Montgomery, then in Virginia, was ordered to recruit men to reenforce
Clark. "As soon as the state of affairs in the recruiting business will
permit, you are to go to the Illinois country & join Col. Clarke, I need
not tell you how necessary the greatest possible Dispatch is to the good
of the service in which you are engaged. Our party at Illinois may be
lost, together with the present favorable Disposition of the French and
Indians there, unless every moment is improved for their preservation, &
no future opportunity, if the present is lost, can ever be expected so
favorable to the Interest of the commonwealth." Montgomery was urged not
to be daunted by the inclement season, the great distance to Illinois, the
"want of many necessaries," or opposition from enemies.(21) Gov. Henry
deserves much credit for his prompt and aggressive action at a time when
Virginia was in the very midst of the Revolution.

Col. Clark was much pleased with the appointment of Col. Todd, both
because civil duties were irksome to the conqueror and because of his
confidence in Todd's ability.(22) Upon the arrival of the new
county-lieutenant, Clark called a meeting of the citizens of Kaskaskia to
meet the new officer and to elect judges. He introduced Col. Todd as
governor and said that he was the only person in the state whom he had
desired for the place. The people were told that the government, Virginia,
was going to send a regiment of regular troops for their defense, that the
new governor would arrange and settle their affairs, and that they would
soon become accustomed to the American system of government. In regard to
the election of judges, Clark said: "I pray you to consider the importance
of this choice; to make it without partiality, and to choose the persons
most worthy of such posts."(23) The nine members of the court of
Kaskaskia, the seven members of the court of Cahokia, and the nine members
of the court of Vincennes, as also the respective clerks were French. Of
the three sheriffs, Richard Winston, sheriff of Kaskaskia, was the only
one who was not French.(24)

Military commissions were promptly made out, those of the districts of
Kaskaskia and Cahokia being dated May 14, 1779. So many of the persons
elected judges were also given military commissions that it seems probable
that the supply of suitable men was small. No fewer than fourteen such
cases occur. Of the militia officers appointed at Vincennes, P. Legras,
appointed lieutenant-colonel, had been a major in the British service, and
F. Bosseron, appointed major, had been a captain in the British
service.(25)

The position of Illinois among the counties of Virginia was necessarily
anomalous. All counties, except the County of Illinois, were asked to
furnish one twenty-fifth of their militia to defend the state. Illinois
county was omitted from the western counties enumerated in "An act for
adjusting and settling the titles of claimers to unpatented lands under
the present and former government, previous to the establishment of the
commonwealth's land office." Settlers northwest of the Ohio were warned to
remove. No settlement would be permitted there, and if attempted, the
intruder might be removed by force--"_Provided_, That nothing herein
contained shall be construed in any manner to injure or affect any French,
Canadian, or other families, or persons heretofore actually settled in or
about the villages near or adjacent to the posts reduced by the forces of
this state." These exceptions were made at the May session of 1779. At
this session, there was passed an act for raising one troop of cavalry,
consisting of one captain, one lieutenant, one cornet, and thirty-two
privates to defend the inhabitants of Illinois county. All officers were
to be appointed by the governor and council. The men were to receive the
same pay as Continentals. Any soldier who would serve in Illinois during
the war should receive a bounty of seven hundred and fifty dollars and a
grant of one hundred acres of land.(26)

Acting upon the policy that caused Virginia to warn all intruders not to
settle northwest of the Ohio, Todd issued a proclamation warning all
persons against such settlement, "unless in manner and form as heretofore
made by the French inhabitants." All inhabitants were ordered to file a
description of lands held by them, together with a deed or deposition, in
order to be ready for the press of adventurers that was expected.(27)

Some of the incidents of the summer of 1779 indicate difficulties of the
new government. When the governor was to be absent for a short time, he
wrote to Winston, who as commander of Kaskaskia would be acting governor,
telling him not to impress property, and by all means to keep up a good
understanding with Col. Clark and the officers. The judges of the court at
Kaskaskia were ordered to hold court "at the usual place of holding court
... any adjournment to the contrary notwithstanding." Richard McCarty, of
Cahokia, wrote to the county-lieutenant complaining that the writer's
stock had been killed by the French inhabitants. McCarty had allowed his
stock to run at large and they had destroyed uninclosed crops, which
crops, he contended, were not in their proper place. Two months later,
McCarty wrote from Cahokia: "Col. Todd residence hear will spoil the
people intirely. I think it would be a happy thing could we get Colol Todd
out of the country for he will possitively sett the Inhabitants and us by
the Ears. I have wrote him a pritty sharp Letter on his signing a Death
warrant against my poor hog's for runing in the Oppen fields ... on some
complaints by the Inhabitants the other day he wished that there was not a
Soldier in the country."(28) McCarty's hogs were not his only trouble. A
fellow-officer wrote: "I received a line from Capt. McCarty [captain of
troops at Cahokia] yesterday. He is well. He writes to me that he has lost
most of his French soldiers, and that the inhabitants are so saucy that
they threaten to drive him and his soldiers away, telling him that he has
no business there--nobody sent for him. They are very discontented. The
civil law has ruined them."(29)

Col. Todd's position was difficult because of the discontent prevailing
among both the French and the Americans in Illinois. His salary was so
small that he feared that he must sell his property in Kentucky to support
himself while in public service. He regarded Kentucky as a much better
place than Illinois for the ambitious man, the retired farmer, or the
young merchant.(30) He had been scarcely more than three months in office
when he wrote to the governor of Virginia: "I expected to have been
prepared to present to your excellency some amendments upon the form of
Government for Illinois, but the present will be attended with no great
inconveniences till the Spring Session, when I beg your permission to
attend and get a Discharge from an Office, which an unwholesome air, a
distance from my connexions, a Language not familiar to me, and an
impossibility of procuring many of the conveniences of Life suitable; all
tend to render uncomfortable."(31) This letter was intercepted by the
British and did not reach the governor.

Great difficulty was experienced in securing supplies for the soldiers. At
times, both troops and people suffered from lack of clothing. The Spanish
refused to allow the Americans to navigate the Mississippi, Virginia money
entirely lost its credit, hard money was scarce, and peltry was difficult
for the military commissaries to obtain. Col. Todd, in desperation,
refused to allow the commander at Kaskaskia to pay the people peltry for
provisions as had been promised, and calling the inhabitants in council,
he told them that if they would not sell on the credit of the state they
would be subject to military discipline.(32) The fall of 1779 saw the
garrison at Vincennes without salt, and starving; while at Kaskaskia the
money was worthless, troops were without clothes and deserting daily.(33)
This great lack of supplies resulted in the impressment of supplies, in
disagreement among the officers, and was a prominent factor in a
resolution to withdraw the troops from their several situations and
concentrate them at a single point on the Ohio River. The discontent of
the French was extreme, and it was increased by the departure of Col. Todd
for Virginia. The officers who were left in command ruled with a rod of
iron and took cattle, flour, wood, and other necessaries, without
payment.(34) Capt. Dodge, of Kaskaskia, refused to honor a draft
presented, apparently, by the government of Virginia, and when sued in the
civil court, he declared that he had nothing but his body and that could
not be levied upon; besides, he was an officer and as such was not
amenable to civil law.(35)

In the very midst of starvation, the French, unaccustomed to English ways,
were wishing to increase the expense of government. An unsigned official
letter says, in speaking of affairs in Illinois: "I find that justices of
the peace, appointed among them, expect to be paid, this not being the
practice under our laws, there is no provision for it. Would it not be
expedient to restrain these appointments to a very small number, and for
these (if it be necessary) to require small contributions either from the
litigants or the people at large, as you find would be most agreeable. In
time, I suppose even this might be discontinued. The Clerks & Sheriffs
perhaps may be paid, as with us, only converting Tobacco fees into their
worth in peltry. As to the rules of decision & modes of proceding, I
suppose ours can be only gradually introduced. It would be well to get
their militia disciplined by calling them regularly together according to
our usage; however, all this can only be recommended to your
Discretion."(36) Some eight years later the exaction of exorbitant fees
was one of the chief reasons which caused the reform of the French court
at Vincennes.(37)

The plan for concentrating most of the Illinois troops at a single point
was carried out in the spring of 1780. The chief objects sought were to
procure supplies and to prevent the advance of the Spaniards. At first, it
was thought advisable to locate the new fort on the north side of the Ohio
near the Mississippi, and Col. Todd made some grants of land to such
persons as were willing to settle in the vicinity and assist in raising
provisions, but the fact that Virginia currency, although refused in
Illinois, was accepted in Kentucky caused the fort to be built south of
the Ohio, and it is probable that Todd's grants of land at the site first
proposed lapsed.(38) As the troops had a great need for settlers to raise
crops, Capt. Dodge suggested to the governor of Virginia that immigrants
to Illinois should receive aid from Virginia. This would aid the troops
and would stop emigration to the Spanish possessions west of the
Mississippi.(39)

As the French could neither support the soldiers nor do without them,
commissions in blank were sent to Maj. Bosseron, district commandant at
Vincennes, with power to raise a company there, and to assure the company
that pay would be allowed by the government. It was feared that the
settlers at Vincennes would consider themselves abandoned upon the
withdrawal of troops. It was proposed to leave enough troops among the
French to satisfy them, but scarcely had the new fort been established
when the people of Cahokia sent a special messenger to Clark at Fort
Jefferson, the new fort, asking that troops be sent to protect them. The
Indians so surround the place, say the petitioners, that the fields can
not be cultivated. If troops are sent the people can not feed them, but if
they are not sent the people can not long feed themselves.(40) French
creditors of the government were unpaid and some of them must have been in
sore need.(41)

The act establishing the County of Illinois would terminate by limitation
at the end of the May session of 1780, unless renewed. At that session,
the act was renewed "for one year after the passing of this act, and from
thence to the end of the next session of assembly."(42)

The condition of the people in the county during the latter half of 1780
was one of misery. Contemporary accounts have a melancholy interest. An
attack by Indians upon Fort Jefferson being imminent, the few troops in
the outlying districts were ordered to come to the aid of the garrison.
The order reached Cahokia when its few defenders were sick and starving.
Corn, without grease or salt, was their only food. Deaths were of frequent
occurrence. The people of the village had petitioned Col. Montgomery to
ease their burden by quartering some of the troops in other villages, but
he refused the request of other officers for a council and threatened to
abandon the country entirely. In such a condition of affairs, Capt.
McCarty proceeded to obey the orders from Fort Jefferson. The only boats
at the disposal of the garrison were unseaworthy, so five small boats were
pressed for use. On the way, several of the famished soldiers became so
sick that they had to be left along the route. Even military discipline
was bad in the country. Capt. McCarty, upon being arrested for having
quarreled with Dodge, because the latter would not buy food for the
starving troops, was left for months without trial because Col. Montgomery
had left the country and a military court could not be convened.(43) In
October, McCarty wrote: "In short, we are become the hated beasts of a
whole people by pressing horses, boats, &c., &c., &c., killing cattle,
&c., &c., for which no valuable consideration is given; even many not a
certificate, which is here looked upon as next to nothing."(44)

Of the same tenor as McCarty's testimony to Illinois conditions is that of
Winston. A remonstrance of the civil authorities against the extravagance
of the military officers was treated as insolent and impertinent. The
military power refused the civil department the use of the military
prison, even when pay was offered, and made strenuous efforts to establish
military rule. Col. Montgomery and Capt. Brashears had departed for New
Orleans without settling the account for the peltry which Todd had
committed to the joint care of Montgomery and Winston. Montgomery was
openly accused of having taken a large amount of public property away with
him. Capt. Dodge was a notorious disturber of the peace, and Capt.
Bentley, a more recent arrival, was equally undesirable. In the closing
paragraph of a long letter is the significant statement: "It Being so long
a time since we had any news from you, we conclude therefrom that the
Government has given us up to do for Ourselves the Best we can, untill
such time as it pleases Some other State or Power to take us under their
Protection--a few lines from you would give Some of us great satisfaction,
yett the Generality of the People are of Opinion that this Country will be
given up to France...."(45)

At the close of October, the troops, with the exception of a very few,
were collected at Fort Jefferson. There the garrison was sick and
starving,(46) clothes were much needed, desertion was rife, and the
abandonment of the post seemed imminent.(47) Among the few troops that
were not called to Fort Jefferson were those of Capt. Rogers, at
Kaskaskia. This company "had to impress supplies, giving certificates for
the value--thus would kill cattle when they wanted them, hogs, & take flour
from the horse-mills--& thus lived very comfortably."(48)

Mutual recrimination was common among the officers. Todd, in a letter to
Gov. Jefferson, in which he inclosed letters from the Illinois officers,
said: "Winston is commandant at Kaskaskia; McCarty, a captain in the
Illinois regiment, who has long since rendered himself disagreeable by
endeavoring to enforce military law upon the civil department at Kohos.

"The peltry, mentioned by Winston as purloined or embezzled by Montgomery,
was committed to their joint care by me in Novr, 1779; and from the
circumstance of Montgomery's taking up with an infamous girl, leaving his
wife, & flying down the river, I am inclined to believe the worst that can
be said of him. Being so far out of the road of business, I can not do the
State that justice I wish by sending down his case immediately to the
Spanish commandants on the Mississippi."(49) From January 28, 1779, to
October 18, 1780, Montgomery drew drafts upon Virginia to the amount of
thirty-nine thousand three hundred twenty dollars.(50) Winston and McCarty
accused Capt. Rogers, who succeeded Col. Montgomery in command at
Kaskaskia, of shooting down the stock of the inhabitants without warrant.
In a dignified defence, Capt. Rogers declared that he took only so much
food as was absolutely required to save his starving sick, and that Mr.
Bentley, who endeavored to secure supplies from the people, offering his
personal credit, was persistently opposed by Winston and McCarty. "I can
not conclude without informing you that 'tis my positive opinion the
people of the Illinois & Post Vincennes have been in an absolute state of
rebellion for these several months past, & ought to have no further
indulgence shown them; and such is the nature of those people, the more
they are indulged, the more turbulant they grow. I look upon it that
Winston and McCarty have been principal instruments to bring them to the
pitch they are now at."(51) Capt. Dodge, against whom complaints had
become general, and Capt. McCarty, whose quarrel has been narrated, were
ordered to appear before a court of inquiry at Fort Jefferson.(52) Clark
was very angry at Montgomery's conduct. He sent a message to New Orleans
ordering him to return for trial; he warned all persons against trusting
the offender on the credit of the State, and he requested the governor of
Virginia to arrest the fugitive if he should come to Richmond.(53) How low
public morals had sunk is shown by the fact that Montgomery had the
effrontery to return to Fort Jefferson, where he arrived on May 1, 1781,
and resumed his command. In February, 1783, he made his defense and asked
for his pay.(54) In April, 1781, Todd wrote: "I still receive complaints
from the Illinois. That Department suffers, I fear, through the avarice
and prodigality of our officers; they all vent complaints against each
other. I believe our French friends have the justest grounds of
dissatisfaction."(55)

On June 2, 1781, Capt. McCarty was killed in a fight between the Illinois
troops and some Indians on the one side and a party of Ouia Indians, who
favored the British, on the other. The engagement took place near the
Wabash. McCarty's papers were sent to the British, who laconically
reported: "They give no information other than that himself and all the
Inhabitants of the Illenoise were heartily tired of the Virginians."(56)
There is slight reason to doubt the truth of the statement. It is enforced
by the fact that in 1781, a letter written in French to the governor of
Virginia and said to be signed in the name of the inhabitants of Vincennes
and to give the views of the people of Vincennes, Kaskaskia, Vermilion,
Ouia, etc., declared that the French had decided to receive no troops
except those sent by the king of France to aid in defeating the enemies of
the country. The Indians who are friendly to the French, said the writer,
would regard the coming of Virginia troops as a hostile act. A copy of the
memoir sent by the French settlers to the French minister Luzerne was
inclosed.(57)

On June 8, 1781, the garrison of Fort Jefferson, being without food,
without credit, and for more than two years without pay, evacuated the
place and withdrew to the Falls of Ohio, only to find themselves without
credit in even the adjoining counties of Virginia. The troops were
billeted in small parties.(58) Once again there comes a despairing plea
from the feeble garrison at Vincennes, in the County of Illinois. The
commander wrote: "Sir, I must inform you once more that I can not keep
garrison any longer, without some speedy relief from you. My men have been
15 days upon half-allowance; there is plenty of provisions here but no
credit--I can not press, being the weakest party--Some of the Gentlemen
would help us, but their credit is as bad as ours, therefore, if you have
not provisions send us Whisky which will answer as good an end."(59)

In the Virginia House of Delegates, a committee for courts of justice
reported that the laws which would expire at the end of the session had
been examined, together with certain other laws, and that a series of
resolutions had been agreed upon by the committee. Among these resolutions
was the following: "_Resolved, That it is the opinion of this committee_,
That the act of assembly, passed in the year 1778, entitled 'an act, for
establishing the county of Illinois, and for the more effectual protection
and defence thereof;' which was continued and amended by a subsequent act,
and will expire at the end of this present session of assembly, ought to
be further continued." This report was presented and the resolutions
agreed to by the House on November 22, 1781. Three days later, a bill in
accordance with the resolution was presented. The consideration of the
bill in a committee of the whole House was postponed from day to day until
December 14, when it was considered and the question being upon
engrossment and advancement to a third reading, it passed in the
negative.(60) On January 5, 1782, the General Assembly adjourned, and the
County of Illinois ceased to exist.(61) So far as instituting a civil
government was concerned, the county was a failure. Its military history
shows a mixture of American, British, French, and Spanish efforts at
mastery.

The first important military operation in which the County of Illinois was
concerned, after the well-known movements of Clark and Hamilton, was
organized by the British at Detroit in compliance with a circular letter
from Lord George Germain. The plan was to attack St. Louis, the French
settlements near it on the east side of the Mississippi, Vincennes, Fort
Nelson at the falls of the Ohio, and Kentucky. Large use was to be made of
Indians, and British emissaries were busy among the tribes early in 1780.
An expedition was to be led against Kentucky, while diversions should be
made at outlying posts. It was thought that the reduction of St. Louis
would present little difficulty, because it was known to be unfortified,
and was reported to be garrisoned by but twenty men. In addition to this,
it was regarded as an easy matter to use Indians against the place from
the circumstance that many Indians frequented it. Less assurance was felt
as to holding the place after it should have been captured, and to make
this easier, it was proposed to appeal to the cupidity of the British fur
traders. By the middle of February, a war-party had been sent out from
Michilimackinac to arouse and act with the Sioux Indians, and early the
next month another party was sent out to engage Indians to attack St.
Louis and the Illinois towns. Seven hundred and fifty traders, servants,
and Indians having been collected, on the 2d of May they started down the
Mississippi, and at the lead mines, near the present Galena, seventeen
Spanish and American prisoners were taken. In conjunction with this
expedition, another, with a chosen band of Indians and French, was to
advance by way of Chicago and the Illinois River; a third was to guard the
prairies between the Wabash and the Illinois; and the chief of the Sioux
was to attack St. Genevieve and Kaskaskia.(62)

The expedition against St. Louis and the Illinois towns, as well as in its
larger aspect, was not successful. It was impossible to keep it secret and
as early as March, an attack was expected. Spanish and Americans joined in
repulsing the intruders. Another potent element in the failure was the
treachery of some of the traders who acted as leaders for the British,
notably that of Ducharme and Calve, who had a lucrative trade and regarded
the prospect of increasing it by the proposed attack as doubtful. In the
last week of May, 1780, the attack on St. Louis was made. Several persons
were killed, but the place was not taken. Cahokia was beleaguered for
three days, but it was so well defended by George Rogers Clark that on the
third night the enemy withdrew, when Clark hastened to intercept the
expedition against Kentucky, while the Illinois and Spanish troops pursued
the retreating enemy and burned the towns of the Sauk and Fox Indians. The
British were much chagrined at the result of the expedition, yet they
resolved to continue their plan of using Indians and sending out several
parties at once.(63)

An expedition which gains much interest from the character of its leader
was that of Col. Augustin Mottin de la Balme. This man had been
commissioned quartermaster of gendarmerie, by the authorities of
Versailles, in 1766; had come to America and been recommended by Silas
Deane and Benjamin Franklin to the president of Congress, John Hancock, as
a man who would be of service in training cavalry; had been breveted
lieutenant-colonel of cavalry, in May, 1777; made inspector of cavalry,
with the rank of colonel, in July following; and had resigned in October
of the same year. The next year, a public notice, in French with English
and German translations, announced that carpenters, bakers, and some other
classes of laborers could find shelter and employment at a workshop
established by La Balme, twenty-eight miles from Philadelphia.(64) In the
summer of 1780, La Balme went from Fort Pitt to the Illinois country.

A contemporary who writes from Vincennes speaks of La Balme as a French
colonel. He was regarded by the Americans with much suspicion. Capt.
Dalton, the American commander at Vincennes, whose character was later
much questioned, allowed him to go among the Indians,(65) whereupon La
Balme advised them to send word to the tribes which Clark was preparing to
attack and to warn them of their danger. La Balme also ingratiated himself
with the discontented French, asking why they did not drive "these
vagabonds," the American soldiers, away, and saying that to refuse to
furnish provisions was the most efficient method. "Everything he advances
tends to advance the French interest and depreciate the American. The
people here are easily misled; buoy'd up with the flattering hopes of
being again subject to the king of France, he could easily prevail on them
to drive every American out of the Place and this appears to me to be his
Plan." After thoroughly stirring up the people at Vincennes, the
adventurer left, with an escort of thirty French and Indians, to visit
Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and St. Louis. He and Col. Montgomery, then the
superior officer in Illinois, did not meet, and he received not the
slightest countenance from the Spanish commandant at St. Louis. By the
French inhabitants, La Balme "was received ... just as the Jews would
receive the Messiah--was conducted from the post here [at Kaskaskia] by a
large detachment of the inhabitants as well as different tribes of
Indians." The French in the towns near the Mississippi were so
enthusiastic that La Balme had little difficulty in raising forty or fifty
troops for an expedition against Detroit. Some of the American soldiers at
Cahokia deserted to him, and when placed under arrest by the military
authorities were rescued by a mob. On October 5, 1780, after telling the
Indians to be quiet because they would see the French in Illinois in the
spring, the French troops set out from Cahokia.(66)

The troops from Illinois were to be joined by a body from Vincennes, but
without waiting for them La Balme pushed on to the Miami towns, where he
hoped to capture a British Indian trader who was especially hated by the
French. The trader was not found, but his store of goods to the amount of
one hundred horse-loads was seized. The expected reinforcements not
arriving, La Balme felt too weak to attack Detroit and started to return.
He was attacked by the Indians on the river Aboite, eleven miles southwest
of the present Fort Wayne, and he and some thirty of his men were killed
and at least one hundred horses, richly laden with plunder, were taken by
the Indians. It was reported that disaffected inhabitants of Detroit had
concealed five hundred stands of arms with which to assist the forces of
La Balme in taking the place. Among La Balme's papers, which fell into the
hands of the British and are now in the Canadian archives, were addresses,
in French, by M. Mottin de la Balme, French colonel, etc., to the French
settled on the Mississippi, dated St. Louis, September 17, 1780; a
declaration, in French, in the name of the inhabitants of the village of
Cahokia, addressed to La Balme: "We unanimously request you to listen with
a favorable ear to the declaration which we venture to present to you,
touching all the bad treatment we have suffered patiently since the
Virginian troops unfortunately arrived amongst us till now," dated
Cahokia, September 21, 1780; a note from F. Trottier, a member of the
court of Cahokia, elected under the Virginia government, to La Balme,
saying that no meeting can be held until Sunday next, when he hopes the
young men will show themselves worthy the high idea La Balme has of them,
but that at present there are only twelve entirely determined to follow
him wherever he goes, although others may follow their example, and asking
La Balme to receive depositions against the Virginians, dated Cahokia,
September 27, 1780; a petition, in French, addressed to the Chevalier de
la Luzerne, minister plenipotentiary from France to the United States, by
inhabitants of Post Vincennes, dated Vincennes, August 22, 1780; and a
commission to Augustin Mottin de la Balme as quartermaster of gendarmerie,
dated Versailles, February 23, 1766.(67) The British promptly set about
promoting the Indian trader whom La Balme and the French had sought to
kill, believing that he would be serviceable as a spy.(68)

In the autumn of 1780, a party of seventeen men from Cahokia went on an
expedition against St. Josephs. The party was commanded by "a half
Indian," and seems to have included but one American. The attack was so
timed as to come when the Indians in the vicinity of St. Josephs were out
hunting. The place was taken without difficulty, the traders of the place
were captured and plundered, and the party, laden with booty, set out on
the route to Chicago. A pursuing party was quickly organized and at the
_Riviere du Chemin_, a small stream in Indiana, emptying into the
southeastern part of Lake Michigan, the returning victors were summoned to
surrender, on December 5, 1780. Upon their refusal, four were killed, two
wounded, seven made prisoners, while three escaped.(69) The one American,
Brady, was among the prisoners. He told the British that the party was
sent by the creoles to plunder St. Josephs, and that there was not a
Virginian in all the Illinois country, including Vincennes.(70)

In the very midst of winter, on January 2, 1781, an expedition commanded
by Eugenio Pierre, a Spanish captain of militia, set out from St. Louis
against St. Josephs. According to a Spanish account, the party consisted
of sixty-five militia men and sixty Indians, while an American account
declares it to have contained thirty Spaniards, twenty men from Cahokia,
and two hundred Indians.

The purpose of the expedition was to retaliate upon the British for the
attack on St. Louis and for the defeat of La Balme. On the march, severe
difficulties incident to the season were encountered. The post was easily
taken, the Indians were conciliated by a liberal proportion of the booty,
the Spanish flag was raised and the Illinois country with St. Josephs and
its dependencies was claimed for the crown of Spain. The British flag was
given to Commandant Cruzat, of St. Louis. These proceedings made some
prominent Americans fear that Spain would advance claims to the region at
the close of the Revolution.(71)

In the summer of 1781, a party of seven men was sent out by the commandant
at Michilimackinac with a letter to the inhabitants of Cahokia and
Kaskaskia asking them to furnish troops to be paid by the king of England,
and to assume the defensive against the Spaniards. The men reached St.
Louis before visiting Cahokia or Kaskaskia, and were arrested by the
Spanish commandant, who sent a copy of the letter to Major Williams,
knowing no officer in Illinois superior to him. This created jealousy at
Cahokia and Kaskaskia, each of several officers claiming superiority.
Charles Gratiot, a man of some ability, who had removed from Cahokia to
St. Louis because unable to endure the lawlessness at the former place,
wrote that he did not know what course the Illinois people might have
taken if Cruzat had not intercepted the British agents. Illinois was a
country without a head where everyone expected to do as he pleased.(72)

In noting the operations of the medley of military forces in the County of
Illinois, it is easy to conceive how the result might have been different,
but the fact is that as the county ceased to exist, no nation had
established a better title to the region than that of the Americans.





CHAPTER II. THE PERIOD OF ANARCHY IN ILLINOIS.(73)


Illinois was practically in a state of anarchy during the time that it was
a county of Virginia, and when that county ceased to be, anarchy became
technically as well as practically its condition, and remained so until
government under the Ordinance of 1787 was inaugurated in 1790.

Virginia's legacy from her ephemeral county was one of unpaid bills.
Scarcely had the general assembly adjourned, in January, 1782, when
Benjamin Harrison wrote: "We know of no power given to any person to draw
bills on the State but to Colo Clarke and yet we find them drawn to an
immense amount by Colo Montgomery, and Captn Robt. George and some others;
we have but too much reason to suppose a collusion and fraud betwixt the
drawers and those they are made payable to; most of them are for specie
when they well knew we had none amongst us, and from the largeness of the
sums, proves the transactions must have been in paper and the depreciation
taken into account, when the bargains were made; indeed George confesses
this to have been the case when he gave Philip Barbour a bill for two
hundred and thirty two thousand, three hundred and twenty Dollars and uses
the plea of ignorance." The transactions of Oliver Pollock, purchasing
agent at New Orleans, should be carefully examined from the time he began
to act with Montgomery.(74) Thimothe Demunbrunt, as he signed his name,
asked pay for his services as lieutenant, in order that he might not be a
charge to his friends--a thing which would be shameful to one of noble
descent. He wished to be able to support his family and to go with Clark
on a proposed expedition. His petition was supported by a certificate from
Col. Montgomery, testifying that Demunbrunt had been active in his
military duty, had gone against the savages in the spring of 1780, had
gone on the "Expedition up the Wabash," and had gone to the relief of Fort
Jefferson when Montgomery could raise only twelve men.(75)

The military troubles continued. The commander at Vincennes reported his
troops as destitute and unpaid. Richard Winston, of Kaskaskia, who had
succeeded Todd as head of the civil government in Illinois, was arrested
by military force and put in jail. The prisoner claimed that the
proceedings were wholly irregular and that he was unacquainted with the
nature of the charge against him.(76) The next year, he was accused of
treason, the accuser declaring that Winston had proposed to turn Illinois
over to Spain, but that his proposal had been despised by the Spanish
commandant.(77) Upon Winston was also laid the chief blame for the
discontent of the French, he being charged with having told Montgomery
that the French were strangers to liberty and must be ruled with a rod of
iron or the bayonet, and that if he wanted anything he must send his
guards and take it by force; while, at the same time, he told the French
that the military was a band of robbers and came to Illinois for
plunder.(78) However, numerous and well-founded as the accusations might
be, both accused and accuser laid their claims for salary before the
Virginia Board of Commissioners for the Settlement of Western
Accounts.(79) Even the notorious Col. Montgomery presented before this
board his defence, which consisted of a recital of his meritorious deeds,
others being omitted.(80)

Another visitor to the Board of Commissioners was Francis Carbonneaux,
prothonotary and notary public for the Illinois country. Although he came
to get some private affairs settled, his chief mission was to lay before
the Board the confusion in Illinois, and the Board correctly surmised that
if Virginia did not afford relief the messenger would proceed to
Congress.(81) It was but natural that at this time, the people of Illinois
should be in doubt as to whom to present their petition, because Virginia
had offered to cede her western lands to Congress, although the terms of
cession were not yet agreed upon. Carbonneaux complained that Illinois was
wholly without law or government; that the magistrates, from indolence or
sinister views, had for some time been lax in the execution of their
duties, and were now altogether without authority; that crimes of the
greatest enormity might be committed with impunity, and a man be murdered
in his own house and no one regard it; that there was neither sheriff nor
prison; and to crown the general confusion, that many persons had made
large purchases of three and four hundred leagues, and were endeavoring to
have themselves established lords of the soil, as some had done in Canada,
and to have settlements made on these purchases, composed of a set of men
wholly subservient to their views. The Spanish traded freely in Illinois,
but strictly prohibited Illinois from trading in Spanish dominions.
Complaint was also made that the Board of Commissioners had not settled
the Illinois accounts in peltry according to the known rule and practice,
namely: that fifty pounds of peltry should represent one hundred livres in
money.

The petitioners prayed that a president of judicature be sent to them,
with executive powers to a certain extent, and that subordinate civil
officers be appointed, to reside in each village or station, with power to
hear and decide all causes upon obligations not exceeding three hundred
dollars, higher amounts to be determined by a court to be held at
Kaskaskia and to be composed of the president and a majority of the
magistrates. It was desired that the grant in which the Kaskaskia
settlements lay should be considered as one district. It contained five
villages, of which Kaskaskia and Cahokia were the largest. The grant
extended to the headwaters of the Illinois River on the north. The land
had been granted to the settlers by the Indians, and the Indians, having
given their consent by solemn treaties, had never denied the sale. The
tract referred to was probably the two purchases of the Illinois Company.
Maps give but one of these and, in fact, the other was said to be so
described as to comprise _a line only_. Naturally, this fact was not known
at the time of purchase.

It was frankly acknowledged that Illinois had no man fitted for the office
of president. It was hoped that Virginia would furnish one, and would send
with him a company of regulars to act under his direction and enforce laws
and authority. The president should be empowered to grant land in small
tracts to immigrants. The privilege of trading in Spanish waters,
especially on the Missouri, was much desired. It was said that Carbonneaux
"appears to have been instructed as to the ground of his message by the
better disposed part of the inhabitants of the country whose complaints he
represents."(82)

At the time of Carbonneaux's petition, there was no legal way by which
newcomers to Illinois could acquire public land. Virginia had prepared to
open a land-office, soon after the conquest of the Illinois country, but
she seems to have heeded the recommendation of Congress that no
unappropriated land be sold during the war.(83) Some grants had been made
by Todd, Demunbrunt, the Indians, and others with less show of right, but
they were made without governmental authority. The Indians had presented a
tract of land to Clark, but the view consistently held was that
individuals could not receive Indian land merely upon their own
initiative.(84) One of the grants made at Vincennes, which seems to have
been a typical one, was signed by Le Grand, "Colonel commandant and
President of the Court," and was made by the authority granted to the
magistrates of the court of Vincennes by John Todd, "Colonel and Grand
civil Judge for the United States." The purpose of the grant, which
comprised four hundred arpents "in circumference," was to induce
immigration.(85) The grants made by the court of Vincennes became
notorious from the fact that thousands of acres were granted by the court
to its own members.(86)

On March 1, 1784, Virginia ceded her western lands to the United States,
thus transferring to the general government the question of land titles.
The country had been in a state of unconcealed anarchy for more than two
years, all semblance of Virginia authority having ceased, and the cession
is quite as much a tribute to Virginia's shrewdness as to her generosity.
Never was so large a present made with less sacrifice. The cession was
made with the following conditions, some of which were to have a direct
and potent influence upon the settlement of the ceded region:

1. The territory should be formed into states of not less than one hundred
nor more than one hundred and fifty square miles each;

2. Virginia's expenses in subduing and governing the territory should be
reimbursed by the United States;

3. Settlers should have their "possessions and titles confirmed;"

4. One hundred and fifty thousand acres, or less, should be granted to
George Rogers Clark and his soldiers;

5. The Virginia military bounty lands should be located north of the Ohio
River, unless there should prove to be enough land for the purpose south
of that river;

6. The proceeds from the sale of the lands should be for the United
States, severally.(87)

In the year of the Virginia cession, Congress passed the Ordinance for the
Government of the Western Territory, but as it never went into effect, its
importance is slight except as indicative of the trend of public feeling
on the subjects which it involved. Should Jefferson's plan, proposed at
this time, have been carried out, Illinois would have been parts of the
states of Polypotamia, Illinois, Assenisipia, and Saratoga.(88)

Carbonneaux, the messenger from Illinois to Virginia, carried his petition
to Congress. Congress paid the messenger, referred the petition to a
committee, and upon the report of the committee voted to choose one or
more commissioners to go to Illinois and investigate conditions there.(89)
No record of the appointment of such commissioners has been found.
Congress considered Carbonneaux's petition early in 1785. In November of
the same year comes a record of the anarchy in Illinois. This was
addressed to George Rogers Clark, who was the hope of the people of that
neglected country. The commandant at St. Louis is afraid of an attack from
the Royalists at Michilimackinac, or he has given orders for all the
people in that place to be in readiness when called on, with their arms.

"The Indians are very troublesome on the rivers, and declare an open war
with the Americans, which I am sure is nothing lessened by the advice of
our neighbors, the French in this place, and the people from
Michilimackinac, who openly say they will oppose all the Americans that
come into this country. For my part, it is impossible to live here, if we
have not regular justice very soon. They are worse than the Indians, and
ought to be ruled with a rod of iron."(90)

During the year 1786, George Rogers Clark was the chief factor in Illinois
affairs. He was regarded by the people as their advocate before Congress.
In March, seven of the leading men of Vincennes, at the request of the
French and American inhabitants, sent a petition to him asking him to
persuade Congress to send troops to defend them from the Indians, and also
saying: "We have unanimously agreed to present a petition to Congress for
relief, apprehensive that the Deed we received from an office, established
or rather continued by Colo Todd for lands, may possibly be a slender
foundation; so that after we have passed through a scene of suffering in
forming settlements in a remote and dangerous part may have the
mortification to be totally deprived of our improvements."(91) In June,
seventy-one American subscribers from Vincennes, "in the County of
Illinois," asked Congress to settle their land-titles and give them a
government. They held land from grants from an office established by Col.
Todd, whose validity they questioned. The commandant and magistracy had
resigned because of the disobedience of the people. There was no
executive, no law, no government, and the Indians were very hostile.(92)

Clark was not unmindful of the needs of the people. He wrote to the
president of Congress: "The inhabitants of the different towns in the
Illinois are worthy the attention of Congress. They have it in their power
to be of infinite service to us, and might act as a great barrier to the
frontier, if under proper regulation; but having no law or government
among them, they are in great confusion, and without the authority of
Congress is extended to them, they must, in all probability, fall a
sacrifice to the savages, who may take advantage of the disorder and want
of proper authority in that country. I have recommended it to them, to
re-assume their former customs, and appoint temporary officers until the
pleasure of Congress is known, which I have flattered them would be in a
short time. How far the recommendation will answer the desired purpose is
not yet known."(93)

Clark's fears of the Indians were only too well grounded. During the
summer, the American settlers were compelled to retire to a fort at
Bellefontaine, and four of their number were killed. At the same time,
about twenty Americans were killed about Vincennes. The French were still
safe from Indian attacks and were very angry because the Americans
complained of existing conditions.(94) The strife between the French and
the Americans at Vincennes, over the proper relations of the whites to the
Indians, became intense. The French contended that the Indians should be
allowed to come and go freely, while the Americans held that it was unsafe
to grant such freedom. At last, upon the occasion of the killing of an
Indian by the Americans, after they had been attacked by the Indians, the
French citizens ordered all persons, who had not permission to settle from
the government under which they last resided, to leave at once and at
their own risk. The French told the Americans plainly that they were not
wanted, and that they, the French, did not know whether the place belonged
to the United States or to Great Britain.(95) This last assertion was
probably true. The British Michilimackinac Company had a large
trading-house at Cahokia for supplying the Indians, they held Detroit, and
their machinations among the Indians were constant. The feeling of all
intelligent Americans in Illinois must have been expressed by John Edgar
when he wrote that the Illinois country was totally lost unless a
government should soon be established.(96) Clark wrote a vigorous letter
to the people at Vincennes, telling them that unless they stopped
quarreling military rule would be established; that the government
established under Virginia was still in force, having been confirmed by
Congress upon the acceptance of the Virginia deed of cession, and that the
court, if depleted, should be filled by election.(97)

In one respect, even during this trying period, the western country gave
promise of its future growth. There was a large crop. Flour and pork,
quoted, strangely enough, together, sold at the Falls of Ohio at twelve
shillings per hundred pounds, while Indian corn sold at nine pence per
bushel.(98)

On August 24, 1786, Congress ordered its secretary to inform the
inhabitants of Kaskaskia that a government was being prepared for
them.(99) In 1787, conditions in the Illinois country became too serious
to be ignored. The Indian troubles were grave and persistent, but graver
still was the danger of the rebellion or secession of the Western Country
or else of a war with Spain. The closure of the Mississippi by Spain made
the West desperate. Discontent, anarchy, and petitions might drag a weary
length, but when troops raised without authority were quartered at
Vincennes, when these troops seized Spanish goods, and impressed the
property of the inhabitants of Vincennes, and proposed to treat with the
Indians, the time for action was at hand. In April, Gen. Josiah Harmar,
then at Falls of Ohio, was ordered to move the greater part of his troops
to Vincennes to restore order among the distracted people at that place.
Intruders upon the public lands were to be removed, and the lawless and
illegally levied troops were to be dispersed.(100)

Arrived at Vincennes, Gen. Harmar proceeded with vigor. The resolution of
Congress against intruders on the public lands was published in English
and in French. The inhabitants, especially the Americans whose hold on
their lands was the more insecure, were dismayed, and French and Americans
each prepared a petition to Congress, and appointed Bartholomew Tardiveau,
who was to go to Congress within a month, as their agent. Tardiveau was
especially fitted for this task by his intimate acquaintance with the land
grants of the region. Each party at Vincennes also prepared an address to
Gen. Harmar, the Americans declaring that they were settled on French
lands and feared that their lands would be taken from them without payment
and asking aid from Congress, and the French expressing their joy at being
freed from their former bad government. Many of Clark's militia had made
tomahawk-rights, and this added to the confusion of titles.(101)

From August 9 to 16, Gen. Harmar, with an officer and thirty men, some
Indian hunters, and Tardiveau, journeyed overland from Vincennes to
Kaskaskia, where conditions were to be investigated. The August sun poured
down its rays upon the parched prairies and dwindling streams. Water was
bad and scarce, but buffalo, deer, bear, and smaller game were abundant.

Harmar found life in the settlements he visited as crude as the path he
traveled. Kaskaskia was a French village of one hundred and ninety-one
men, old and young, with an accompaniment of women and children of various
mixtures of white and red blood. Cahokia, then the metropolis, had two
hundred and thirty-nine Frenchmen, old and young, with an accompaniment
similarly mixed. Between these settlements was Bellefontaine, a small
stockade, inhabited altogether by Americans, who had settled without
authority. The situation was a beautiful one; the land was fertile; there
was no taxation, and the people had an abundance to live upon. They were
much alarmed when told of their precarious state respecting a title to
their lands, and they gave Tardiveau a petition to carry to Congress. On
the route to Cahokia, another stockade, Grand Ruisseau, similarly
inhabited by Americans, was passed. There were about thirty other American
intruders in the fertile valleys near the Mississippi, and they, too, gave
Tardiveau a petition to Congress.

The Kaskaskia, Peoria, Cahokia, and Mitcha tribes of Indians numbered only
about forty or fifty members, of whom but ten or eleven individuals
composed the Kaskaskia tribe; but this does not mean that danger from the
Indians was not great, because other and more hostile tribes came in great
numbers to hunt in the Illinois country. The significance of the
diminished numbers of these particular tribes lies in the fact that they
had the strongest claim to that part of Illinois which would be first
needed for settlement. At Kaskaskia and Cahokia, the French were advised
to obey their magistrates until Congress had a government ready for them,
and Cahokia was advised to put its militia into better shape, and to put
any turbulent or refractory persons under guard until a government could
be instituted.(102)

Having finished his work in the settlements near the Mississippi, Harmar
returned to Vincennes, where he held councils with the Indians, and on
October 1, set out on his return to Fort Harmar. Although without
authority to give permanent redress, he had persuaded the French at
Vincennes to relinquish their charter and to throw themselves upon the
generosity of Congress. "As it would have been impolitic, after the parade
we had made, to entirely abandon the country," he left Maj. John F.
Hamtramck, with ninety-five men, at Vincennes.(103) Harmar's visit was
doubtless of some value, but he had not been gone five weeks when
Hamtramck wrote to him: "Our civil administration has been, and is, in a
great confusion. Many people are displeased with the Magistrates; how it
will go at the election, which is to be the 2d of Decr, I know not. But it
is to be hoped that Congress will soon establish some mode of government,
for I never saw so injudicious administration. Application has repeatedly
been made to me for redress. I have avoided to give answer, not knowing
how far my powers extended. In my opinion, the Minister of War should have
that matter determined, and sincerely beg you would push it. I confess to
you, that I have been very much at a loss how to act on many
occasions."(104)

Not earlier than the 24th of November, Tardiveau set out for Congress with
his petitions from the Illinois country. Harmar was much pleased to have
so able a messenger, and spoke of him as sensible, well-informed, and able
to give a minute and particular description of the western country,
particularly the Illinois. He had been preceded to Congress by Joseph
Parker, of Kaskaskia. Harmar seems to have regarded Tardiveau as a sort of
antidote to Parker, for he closes his recommendation of the former by
saying: "There have been some imposters before Congress, particularly one
Parker, a whining, canting Methodist, a kind of _would-be governor_. He is
extremely unpopular at Kaskaskia, and despised by the inhabitants."(105)

This detracts from the value of Parker's representations, which had been
made in a letter to St. Clair, the President of Congress. After explaining
that when he left Kaskaskia, on June 5, 1787, the people did not have an
intended petition ready, Parker complained of the lack of government in
Illinois, the presence of British traders, the depopulation of the country
by the inducements of the Spaniards, and the high rate at which it was
proposed to sell lands. His complaints were true, although he may have
failed to give them in their proper proportion.(106)

On July 13, 1787, the Ordinance of 1787 had been passed by Congress. The
Illinois country was at that time ready for war against the Spanish, who
persisted in closing the Mississippi. The troops, irregularly levied by
George Rogers Clark at Vincennes, had seized some Spanish goods on the
theory that if the Spanish would not allow the United States to navigate
the lower Mississippi, the Spanish should not be allowed to navigate the
upper Mississippi. John Rice Jones, later the first lawyer in Illinois,
was Clark's commissary.(107)

The Ordinance of 1787 was the only oil then at hand for these troubled
waters. The situation in Illinois was a complicated one, and probably the
numerical weakness of the population alone saved the country from
disastrous results. The few Americans in Illinois desired governmental
protection from the Spanish, the Indians, the British, and any Americans
who might seek to jump the claims of the first squatters; the few French
desired protection from the Spanish, the Americans, the British, and soon
from the Indians; the numerous Indians, permanent or transient, desired
protection from the Spanish, the Americans, and in rare cases from an
Americanized Frenchman. Americans, French, Spanish, British, and Indians
made an opportunity for many combinations.

For the French inhabitants, the somewhat paternal character of the
government provided for by the Ordinance was a matter of no concern. The
great rock of offense for them was the prohibition of slavery. An exodus
to the Spanish side of the Mississippi resulted and St. Louis profited by
what the older villages of Illinois lost.(108) In addition to a
justifiable feeling of uncertainty as to whether they would be allowed to
retain their slaves, the credulous French had their fears wrought upon by
persons interested in the sale of Spanish lands. These persons took pains
to inculcate the belief that all slaves would be released upon American
occupancy. The Spanish officials were also active. The commandant at St.
Louis wrote to the French at Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennes,
respectively, inviting them to settle west of the Mississippi and offering
free lands.(109) Mr. Tardiveau, the agent for the Illinois settlers to
Congress, tried to induce Congress to repeal the anti-slavery clause of
the Ordinance. He said that it threatened to be the ruin of Illinois.
Designing persons had told the French that the moment Gen. St. Clair
arrived all their slaves would be free. Failing in his efforts to secure a
repeal, he wrote to Gen. St. Clair, asking him to secure from Congress a
resolution giving the true intent of the act.(110) In this letter,
Tardiveau advanced the doctrine, later so much used, that the evils of
slavery would be mitigated by its diffusion.(111) The first panic of the
French only gradually subsided and the question of slavery was a
persistent one.

One of the most industrious of those interested in the sale of Spanish
lands was George Morgan, of New Jersey.(112) In 1788, he tried to secure
land in Illinois also. He and his associates petitioned Congress to sell
them a tract of land on the Mississippi. A congressional committee found
upon investigation that the proposed purchase comprised all of the French
settlements in Illinois.(113) Thereupon was passed the Act of June 20,
1788. According to its provisions, the French inhabitants of Illinois were
to be confirmed in their possessions and each family which was living in
the district before the year 1783 was to be given a bounty of four hundred
acres. These bounty-lands were to be laid off in three parallelograms, at
Kaskaskia, Prairie du Rocher, and Cahokia, respectively. They were to be
bounded on the east by the ridge of rocks--a natural formation trending
from north to south, a short distance to the east of the French
settlements. Morgan was to be sold a large described tract for not less
than sixty-six and two-thirds cents per acre. Indian titles were to be
extinguished if necessary.(114)

The Act of June 20, 1788, is an important landmark in the settlement of
Illinois. The grant of bounty-lands was made for the purpose of giving the
French settlers a means of support when the fur-trade and hunting should
have become unprofitable from the advance of American settlement. This was
a clear acknowledgment that the Indians were right in believing, as they
did, that the American settlement would be fatal to Indian
hunting-grounds. The Indians were soon bitterly hostile. Then, too, the
claims of the settlers to land, founded upon French, British, or Virginia
grants, were to be investigated. This investigation dragged on year after
year, even for decades, and as it was the policy of the United States not
to sell public land in Illinois until these claims were settled, the
country became a great squatters'(115) camp. The length of the
investigation was doubtless due in part to the utter carelessness of the
French in giving and in keeping their evidences of title.

By a congressional resolution of August 28, 1788, it was provided that the
lands donated to Illinois settlers should be located east, instead of
west, of the ridge of rocks. As this would throw the land too far from the
settlements to be available, petitions followed for the restoration of the
provisions of June 20, and in 1791 the original location was decreed. By a
resolution of August 29, 1788, the governor of the Northwest Territory was
ordered to carry out the provisions of the acts of June 20 and August 28,
1788, respectively.(116)

The beginning of operations, in accordance with the acts just cited, was
delayed by the fact that the governor and judges, appointed under the
Ordinance of 1787, and who alone could institute government under it, did
not reach the Illinois country until 1790. In the meantime, anarchy
continued. Contemporary accounts give a good idea of the attempts at
government during the time, and the fact of their great interest, combined
with the fact that most of them are yet unpublished, seems to warrant
treatment of the subject at some length.

The court at Kaskaskia met more than a score of times during 1787 and
1788. Its record consists in large part of mere meetings and adjournments.
All members of the court were French, while litigants and the single jury
recorded were Americans. Jurors from Bellefontaine received forty-five
livres each, and those from Prairie du Rocher, twenty-five livres each.
This court seems to have been utterly worthless.(117) At Vincennes,
matters were at least as bad. "It was the most unjust court that could
have been invented. If anybody called for a court, the president had 20
livers in peltry; 14 magistrates, each 10 livers; for a room, 10 livers;
other small expenses, 10 livers; total in peltry, 180 livers--which is 360
in money. So that a man who had twenty or thirty dollars due, was obliged
to pay, if he wanted a court, 180 livers in peltry: This court also never
granted an execution, but only took care to have the fees of the court
paid. The government of this country has been in the Le Gras and Gamelin
family for a long time, to the great dissatisfaction of the people, who
presented me a Petition some days ago, wherein they complained of the
injustice of their court--in consequence of which, I have dissolved the old
court, ordered new magistrates to be elected, and established new
regulations for them to go by."(118) Upon the dissolution of the court,
Maj. Hamtramck issued the following:

"REGULATIONS FOR THE COURT OF POST VINCENNES.

"In consequence of a Petition presented to me by the people of Post
Vincennes, wherein they complain of the great expence to which each
individual is exposed in the recovery of his property by the present
court, and as they express a wish to have another mode established for the
administration of justice--I do, therefore, by these presents, dissolve the
said court, and direct that five magistrates be elected by the suffrages
of the people who, when chosen, will meet and settle their seniority.

"One magistrate will have power to try causes, not exceeding fifty livers
in peltry. Two magistrates will determine all causes not exceeding one
hundred livers in peltry,--from their decision any person aggrieved may (on
paying the cost of the suit) appeal to the District Court, which will
consist of three magistrates; the senior one will preside. They will meet
the third Tuesday in every month and set two days, unless the business
before them be completed within that time. All causes in this court shall
be determined by a jury of twelve inhabitants. Any person summoned by the
sheriff as a juryman who refuses or neglects to attend, shall be fined the
price of a day's labour. In case of indisposition, he will, previous to
the sitting of the court, inform the clerk, Mr. Antoine Gamelin, who will
order such vacancies to be filled.

"The fees of the court shall be as follows: A magistrate, for every cause
of fifty livers or upwards in peltry, shall receive one pistole in peltry,
and in proportion for a lesser sum. The sheriff for serving a writ or a
warrant shall receive three livers in peltry; for levying an execution, 5
per cent, including the fees of the clerk of the court.

"The clerk for issuing a writ shall receive three livers in peltry, and
all other fees as heretofore. The jury being an office which will be
reciprocal, are not to receive pay. All expenses of the court are to be
paid by the person that is cast. This last part may appear to you to be an
extraordinary charge--but my reason for mentioning it is, that formerly the
court made the one who was most able pay the fees of the court, whether he
lost or no.

"The magistrates, before they enter into the execution of their office,
will take the following oath before the commandant: I, A., do swear that I
will administer justice impartially, and to the best of my knowledge and
understanding, so help me God.

"Given under my hand this 5th day of April, 1788."

(Signed) J. F. HAMTRAMCK,
Majr. Comd'g.(119)

A little later, Hamtramck wrote: "Our new government has taken place; five
magistrates have been elected by the suffrage of the people, but not one
of the Ottoman families remains in. One Mr. Miliet, Mr. Henry, Mr.
Bagargon, Capt. Johnson, and Capt. Dalton, have been elected. You will be
surprised to see Dalton in office; but I found that he had too many
friends to refuse him. I keep a watch-side eye over him, and find that he
conducts himself with great propriety."(120)

The relief afforded by the new court was not complete, for soon came the
report: "The people are very impatient to see Gen. St. Clair or some of
the judges; in fact, they are very much wanted."(121) The term of the
members of the court expired in April, 1789, and no new members were
elected, because the early arrival of Gen. St. Clair was expected.(122) An
interregnum occurred, and in November, 1789, Hamtramck wrote to Harmar:
"It is high time that government should take place in this country, and if
it should happen that the Governor was not to come, nor any of the Judges,
I would beg (for the sake of the people) that his Excellency would give me
certain powers to create magistrates, a Sheriff and other officers, for
the purpose of establishing Courts of Justice--for, at present, there are
none, owing to the daily expectation of the arrival of the Governor. Those
that had been appointed by the people last year, their authority has been
refused in the courts of Kentucky, they declaring that by the resolve of
Congress, neither the people of Post Vincennes, or the commanding officer,
had a right to appoint magistrates; that the power was vested in the
Governor only, and that it was an usurped authority. You see, Sir, how
much to the prejudice of the people their present situation is, and how
necessary it is that some steps should be taken to relieve them.

"The powers of the magistrates may be circumscribed as his Excellency may
think proper, but the necessity of having such characters will appear when
I assure you that at present no person here, can administer an oath which
will be considered legal in the courts of Kentucky--and for the reasons
above mentioned."(123)

At last, on June 19, 1790, the judges for the Northwest Territory arrived
at Vincennes.(124)

The situation at Kaskaskia was even worse than that at Vincennes, because
Vincennes had a garrison. To understand the complaints of the time, it is
necessary to notice the relations with Spain. On the first day of 1788,
Hamtramck wrote: "The Spanish commanding officers of the different posts
on the Mississippi are encouraging settlers by giving them lands gratis. A
village by the name of Zewapetas, which is about thirty miles above the
mouth of the Ohio, and which was begun last summer, consists now of thirty
or fifty families."(125) In the following October, Morgan made flattering
offers to persons who would settle at New Madrid.(126) At the same time,
the Mississippi was closed to Americans. Joseph St. Marie, of Vincennes,
sent his clerk with a load of peltry to be traded to the Indians on the
banks of the Mississippi. His goods were seized and confiscated by the
Spanish commander at the Arkansas Post. The commander said that his orders
were to seize all goods of Americans, found in the Mississippi below the
mouth of the Ohio. Upon appeal to Gov. Miro, of Louisiana, the governor
said that the court of Spain had given orders to send offending traders
prisoners to the mines of Brazil.(127)

The combination of inducements to such as would become Spanish subjects
and of severity to such as would not do so, secured Spain some settlers.
Hamtramck said: "I am fearful that the Governor will not find many people
in the Illinois, as they are daily going on the Spanish side. I believe
that all our Americans of Post Vincennes will go to Morgan--a number of
them are already gone to see him. I am told that Mr. Morgan has taken
unwarrantable measures to invite the people of Illinois to come to him,
saying that the Governor never would come in that country, and that their
negroes were all free the moment the government should be established--for
which all the remaining good inhabitants propose to go to him. I can not
give you this for certain; I will know better in a short time, and inform
you."(128) "I have the honor to enclose you Mr. Morgan's letter _at his
request_, and one for you. You will see in Mr. Morgan's that a post will
be established opposite the Ohio; and if what Mr. Morgan says is true
(which I doubt not), respecting the inhabitants of the Illinois, the
Governor will have no occasion to go there. Will you be so good as to
inform me if Congress have changed their resolution respecting the freedom
of the negroes of this country; and if they are free from the day of the
resolve, or if from the day it is published in a district."(129) A few
weeks later, Harmar wrote to St. Clair: "The emigration continues, it
possible, more rapid than ever; within these twenty days, not less than
one hundred souls have passed [Fort Harmar, at Falls of Ohio] daily: the
people are all taken up with Col. Morgan's New Madrid.... The generality
of the inhabitants of Kaskaskias, and a number of those at Post Vincennes,
I am informed, have quit those villages, and gone over to the Spanish
side. The arrival of your Excellency amongst them, I believe is anxiously
expected."(130)

The Indians were very hostile, and it is noteworthy that by the middle of
1789, the comparative immunity of the French from attack had ceased. Only
negroes were safe, and they, probably, because they sold well.(131) Civil
government was at low ebb in the Kaskaskia region. By January, 1789, the
court at Kaskaskia had dissolved.(132)

The depopulation of Illinois led Hamtramck to write to Bartholomew
Tardiveau, at the Falls of Ohio, asking whether it were true that the
slaves of the French were to be free. Tardiveau responded that it was not
true, and that he had written from New York, the preceding December, to
Hamtramck and to Illinois concerning the matter, but that his letters had
been intercepted. The true meaning of the resolve of Congress was
published at Vincennes upon the receipt of Tardiveau's letter and was to
be published in Illinois at the first opportunity. The narration of these
facts was closed by the statement that if the governor or the judges did
not come soon, most of the people would go to the Spanish side, "for they
begin to think there are no such men as a Governor or Judges."(133)

In September, 1789, Hamtramck received the following petition from
Kaskaskia:

"To John Francis Hamtramck, Esqr., Major of the 1st U. S. Regt. and
commandant at Post Vincennes, &c. &c.

"The inhabitants of Kaskaskias, in the Illinois, beg leave to address you,
as the next commanding officer in the service of the United States, to lay
before you the deplorable situation we are reduced to, and the absolute
necessity of our being speedily succoured to prevent as well our total
ruin, as that of the place.

"The Indians are greatly more numerous than the white people, and are
rather hostilely inclined; the name of an American among them is a
disgrace, because we have no superior. Our horses, horned cattle, and corn
are stolen and destroyed without the power of making any effectual
resistance. Our houses are in ruin and decay; our lands are uncultivated;
debtors absconded and absconding; our little commerce destroyed. We are
apprehensive of a dearth of corn, and our best prospects are misery and
distress, or what is more than probable an untimely death by the hands of
Savages.

"We are well convinced that all these misfortunes have befallen us for
want of some superior, or commanding authority; for ever since the cession
of this Territory to Congress, we have been neglected as an abandoned
people, to encounter all the difficulties that are always attendant upon
anarchy and confusion; neither did we know from authority until latterly,
to what power we were subject. The greater part of our citizens have left
the country on this account to reside in the Spanish dominions; others are
now following, and we are fearful, nay, certain, that without your
assistance, the small remainder will be obliged to follow their example.

"Thus situated, our last resource is to you, Sir, hoping and praying that
you will so far use your authority to save an almost deserted country from
destruction, and to order or procure the small number of twenty men with
an officer, to be stationed among us for our defence; and that you will
make order for the establishment of a civil court to take place
immediately and to continue in force until the pleasure of his Excellency
the Governor shall be known, and to whom we beg you would communicate our
distress.

"We beg your answer by the return of the bearer, addressed to the Revd Mr.
Le Dru, our Priest, who signs this in the name and at the request, of the
inhabitants.

"Dated at Kaskaskia the fourteenth day of September, 1789.

"Ledru, cure Des Kaskaskias pour tous les habitans Francais de l'endroit
et outres voisins de la partie Americaine.

"JNO EDGAR."(134)

John Edgar offered to furnish provisions for the twenty soldiers asked for
in the petition, and to take bills on Congress in payment.(135)

Hamtramck responded to the petition by saying that sickness prevailed
among the troops at Vincennes to such an extent that twenty men could not
be sent thence to Kaskaskia, but that the request would be sent to
headquarters. As to the civil department, the people were advised to elect
two or three magistrates in every village. These should prevent debtors
from leaving, and should levy on the goods of such debtors as had already
gone to the Spanish side. "Let your magistrates be respectable men by
their moral character, as well as in point of property; let them attend
with vigilance to all disputes that may arise amongst you, and in a
particular manner to the Indian affairs."(136) This reply reached Edgar on
the night of October 27, 1789. The next day, Edgar wrote to Hamtramck
saying that it was probable that the recommendations in regard to
establishing a civil government could not be carried out without a
military force. The French were easily governed by a superior, but they
knew nothing of government by an equal. Indians were constantly incited by
the Spanish. They stole horses and escaped to the Spanish side. Edgar
enclosed correspondence and depositions showing that on the night of the
eighth of October, John Dodge and Michael Antanya, with a party of whites
and Indians, came from the Spanish side to Kaskaskia, made an unsuccessful
attempt to carry off some of Edgar's slaves, and threatened to burn the
village. He adds "[In] the spring it is impossible I can stand my ground,
surrounded as we are by savage enemies. I have waited five years in hopes
of a government; I shall still wait until March, as I may be able to
withstand them in the winter season, but if no succour nor government
should then arrive, I shall be compelled to abandon the country, and I
shall go to live at St. Louis. Inclination, interest and love for the
country prompt me to reside here, but when in so doing it is ten to one
but both my life and property will fall a sacrifice, you nor any impartial
mind can blame me for the part I shall take."(137)

One day later, John Rice Jones wrote from Kaskaskia. The answer to the
petition sent by Ducoigne and addressed to Ledru and Edgar, had been
opened by the latter in the absence and by the consent of the former.
Ledru had gone to be priest at St. Louis. At first he had refused the
offer of the position, but when he received his tithes at Kaskaskia, he
found that they would not support him, so he was compelled to move. He met
no better treatment than de la Valiniere and Gibault before him, and no
priest was likely to fare any better until a government was established.
St. Pierre, priest at Cahokia, had gone to be priest at Ste. Genevieve,
and it was said that Gibault was to be priest at L'Anse a la Graisse (New
Madrid). Morgan had been coolly received at New Orleans, and his boasted
settlement at New Madrid was almost broken up. The attempted seizure of
Edgar's negroes could not be punished, because there was no one with
authority to remonstrate with the Spanish, and private remonstrances were
unheeded. The Spanish were making every effort to depopulate Illinois.
They well knew that the people would follow their priests. Flattering
offers had been made to Edgar by the Spanish, among them being free lands,
no taxes, and free permission to work at the lead mines and salt springs.
He had refused all offers, but if government was not established by the
next March he would go to St. Louis, and if he went, Kaskaskia would be
practically at an end. Twenty-four British trading-boats from
Michilimackinac were on the Mississippi on the American side opposite the
mouth of the Missouri. Their purpose was to attract Indian trade.(138)

Gov. St. Clair arrived at Kaskaskia on March 5, 1790.(139) With his coming
anarchy technically ceased, but naturally the institution of an orderly
government was a gradual process. In August, Tardiveau wrote to Hamtramck
from Kaskaskia, saying that he hoped that Maj. Wyllys had given Hamtramck
such a specimen of the difficulty of establishing a regular government and
organizing the militia in Illinois as would induce the sending of a few
regular troops from Vincennes. Even ten men would be a help. The Indians
daily stole horses, and Tardiveau tried to raise a force to go and punish
the offenders, but he was effectually opposed by a lawless band of
ringleaders. A militia law and the Illinois civil power were useless to
remedy the matter. There were plenty of provisions in Illinois to supply
any soldiers that might be sent.(140) Tardiveau was then
lieutenant-colonel of the first regiment of militia, and also judge of
probate, having been appointed by the governor.(141) Harmar replied that
it was utterly impracticable to comply with Tardiveau's request for
soldiers.(142)

On June 20, 1788, a congressional committee reported that there were about
eighty families at Kaskaskia, twelve at Prairie du Rocher, four or five at
Fort Chartres and St. Philips, and about fifty at Cahokia, making one
hundred and forty-six or one hundred and forty-seven families in these
villages.(143) In 1766-7, the same villages, with Vincennes, were supposed
to have about two thousand inhabitants(144); and about five years later,
1772, there were some fifteen hundred inhabitants in these villages, not
including Vincennes.(145)

It is not surprising that the population of the Illinois country decreased
from 1765 to 1790. During these years, British and Americans had attempted
to impose upon the French settlers a form of government for which they had
neither desire nor aptitude. The attempt to immediately transform a
subject people was a signal failure, but neither the attempt nor the
failure was unique.





CHAPTER III.




I. The Land and Indian Questions. 1790 to 1809.


A proclamation issued by Estevan Miro, Governor and Intendant of the
Provinces of Louisiana and Florida in 1789, offered to immigrants a
liberal donation of land, graduated according to the number of laborers in
the family; freedom of religion and from payment of tithes, although no
public worship except Catholic would be allowed; freedom from taxation;
and a free market at New Orleans for produce or manufactures. All settlers
must swear allegiance to Spain.(146) This proclamation came at a time when
the West was divided in opinion as to whether to make war upon Spain for
her closure of the Mississippi or to secede from the United States and
become a part of Spain.(147) It tended to continue the emigration from the
Illinois country to Spanish territory, for public land was not yet for
sale in Illinois.

To the professional rover, the inability to secure a title to land was the
cause of small concern, but the more substantial and desirable the
settler, the more concerned was he about the matter. Settlement and
improvements were retarded. Before the affairs of the Ohio Company had
progressed far enough to permit sales of land to settlers, the little
company at Marietta saw, with deep chagrin, thousands of settlers float by
on their way to Kentucky, where land could be bought.(148) Squatters in
Illinois were constantly expecting that the public lands would soon be
offered for sale. The natural result was petitions for the right of
preemption, because without such a right, the settler was in danger of
losing whatever improvements he had made. In 1790, James Piggott and
forty-five others petitioned for such a right. The petitioners stated that
they had settled since 1783 and had suffered much from Indians. They could
not cultivate their land except under guard. Seventeen families had no
more tillable land than four could tend. The land on which they lived was
the property of two individuals.(149)

                     [Illustration: Indian Cessions.]

Petitions from various classes of settlers, not provided for by the acts
of June 20, August 28, and August 29, 1788, led Congress to pass the act
of March 3, 1791. By this act, four hundred acres was to be given to each
head of a family who, in 1783, was resident in the Illinois country or at
Vincennes, and who had since moved from the one to the other. The same
donation was to be made to all persons who had moved away, if they should
return within five years. Such persons should also have confirmed to them
the land they originally held. This was intended to bring back persons who
had gone to the Spanish side of the Mississippi. Grants previously made by
courts having no authority should be confirmed to persons who had made
improvements, to an extent not exceeding four hundred acres to any one
person. As these lands had in some cases been repeatedly sold, the parties
making the improvements were frequently guiltless of any knowledge of
fraud. The Cahokia commons were confirmed to that village. One hundred
acres was to be granted to each militiaman enrolled on August 1, 1790, and
who had received no other grant.(150) This act throws considerable light
on the causes of discontent then prevailing among the settlers and on the
conditions to which immigrants came.

This same spring, about two hundred and fifty of the inhabitants of
Vincennes had gone to settle at New Madrid.(151) It is not strange that
the act of March 3, 1791, made provisions intended to induce the Americans
who had emigrated to the Spanish possessions to return. The history of the
threatened Spanish aggression upon the western part of the United States
is known in essence to anyone who has made the slightest special study of
the period at which it was at its height. Morgan's scheme for a purchase
of land in Illinois was not carried out, and he turned his attention to
peopling his settlement at New Madrid. Down the Mississippi to New Orleans
seemed the natural route for Illinois commerce. Slavery flourished
unmolested west of the Mississippi. In 1794, Baron de Carondolet gave
orders to the governor of Natchez to incite the Chickasaw Indians to expel
the Americans from Fort Massac. The governor refused to obey the order,
because Fort Massac had been occupied by the Americans in pursuance of a
request by the Spanish representative at the capital of the United States
that the president would put a stop to the proposed expedition of the
French against the Spanish. The claim was advanced by Carondolet that the
Americans had no right to the land on which the fort stood, but that the
land belonged to the Chickasaws, who were independent allies of Spain. Two
other reasons given for not obeying the order were that it would preclude
the successful issue of the Spanish intrigue for the separation of
Kentucky from the United States, and would hinder negotiations, then
pending, for a commercial treaty between Spain and the United States.(152)
Carondolet regarded the Indians as Spain's best defence against the
Americans,(153) yet the whites prepared for defence, and in anticipation
of the proposed French expedition of George Rogers Clark, a garrison of
thirty men and an officer was placed at Ste. Genevieve, opposite
Kaskaskia. Carondolet said: "This will suffice to prevent the smuggling
carried on by the Americans of the settlement of Kaskaskias situated
opposite, which increases daily."(154)

Early in 1796, a petition was sent from Kaskaskia to Congress. The
petitioners desired that they might be permitted to locate their donation
of four hundred acres per family on Long Prairie, a few miles above
Kaskaskia, on the Kaskaskia River, and that the expense of surveying the
land might be paid by the United States. The act granting the
donation-land had provided for its location between the Kaskaskia and the
Mississippi. This land the petitioners declared to be private land and
some of it was of poor quality.(155) Confirmation of land claims directed
to be made upon the Governor's visit in 1790 were delayed by the lack of a
surveyor and the poverty of the inhabitants.(156) The petition was signed
by John Edgar, William Morrison, William St. Clair, and John Demoulin(157)
"for the inhabitants of the counties of St. Clair and Randolph"(158)--the
Illinois counties. The petitioners ranked high in the mercantile and legal
life of the Illinois settlements, but they must have been novices in the
art of petitioning if they thought that a petition signed by four men from
the Illinois country, with no sign of their being legally representative,
would be regarded by Congress as an expression of the opinion of the
Northwest Territory. The part of the petition relating to lands was
granted, but the major part, which related to other subjects, was denied
on the ground that the petitioners probably did not represent public
sentiment.(159) During this same year Congress denied a number of
petitions for the right of preemption in the Northwest Territory, because
such a right would encourage illegal settling. It was also during this
year that the first sales of public land in the Northwest Territory were
authorized. The land to be sold was in what is now Ohio. No tract of less
than four thousand acres could be purchased.(160)

In 1800, two hundred and sixty-eight inhabitants of Illinois, chiefly
French, petitioned Congress that Indian titles to land in the southern
part of Illinois might be extinguished and the land offered for sale; that
tracts of land at the distance of a day's journey from each other, lying
between Vincennes and the Illinois settlements, might be ceded to such
persons as would keep taverns, and that one or two garrisons might be
stationed in Illinois. The petitioners state that the Kaskaskia tribe of
Indians numbered not more than fifteen members and that their title to
land could be easily extinguished; that not enough land is open to
settlement to admit a population sufficient to support ordinary county
establishments; that roads are much needed, and that many of the
inhabitants are crossing the Mississippi with their slaves. The petition
was not considered.(161)

A new factor now appears in the forces affecting Illinois settlement. The
Northwest Territory having advanced to the second grade of territorial
government, in December, 1799, its delegate took his seat in Congress. The
step was an important one for the struggling colony. Before this time such
petitions as were prepared by inhabitants of the territory for the
consideration of Congress had been subjected to all the vicissitudes of
being addressed to some public officer or of being confided to some member
of Congress who represented a different portion of the country. Up to this
time the public lands could only be bought in tracts of four thousand
acres. Largely through the influence of the delegate from the Northwest
Territory, a bill was passed which authorized the sale of sections and
half-sections. In consequence, emigration soon began to flow rapidly into
Ohio. Land in Illinois was not yet offered for sale, but this bill is
important because the policy of offering land in smaller tracts was to
continue.(162)

The territorial delegate was also active in procuring the passage of a
bill for the division of the Northwest Territory. While the bill was
pending, a petition from Illinois, praying for the division and for the
establishment of such a government in the western part as was provided for
by the Ordinance of 1787, was presented. The act for division was signed
by the President on May 7, 1800; it formed Indiana Territory, with
Vincennes as its capital.(163)

The propositions made by a convention of representatives elected by the
citizens of Indiana to prepare petitions to Congress, near the close of
1802, illustrate the needs of the time. It was desired that the Indian
title to land lying in Southern Illinois and Southwestern Indiana might be
extinguished and the land sold in smaller tracts and at a lower
price;(164) that a preemption act might be passed; that a grant of
seminary and school lands might be made; that land for taverns, twenty
miles or less apart, might be granted along certain specified routes; that
donation-lands might be chosen in separate tracts, instead of in three
specified areas, in order to avoid "absolutely useless" prairies, and also
lands claimed by ancient grants; and that the qualification of a freehold
of fifty acres of land, prescribed for the electors of representatives to
the territorial legislature, might be changed to manhood suffrage, because
the freehold qualification was said to tend "to throw too great a weight
in the scale of wealth." The petition was considered in committees, but it
led to no legislation.(165)

None of the above complaints was better founded than that concerning the
restriction of the suffrage, and it is well to note subsequent proceedings
in regard to it. No qualification less suitable to the time and place
could well have been devised, and this is especially true of the Illinois
portion of the territory, because there unsettled French claims were to
delay the sales of public lands until 1814, and thus early settlers could
neither buy land nor vote unless they owned it, unless indeed they
purchased land claims from the needy and unbusiness-like French. An
interesting petition of 1807 from the settlement on Richland Creek,(166)
for the right of preemption, throws light upon conditions then obtaining.
The petitioner inclosed a map of the settlement, with the following
explanation: "Those persons whose names are enclosed in said plot, within
surveyed lines, have confirmed and located rights, amounting to 3,775
acres; ... the residue of the said settlers, occupying about 6,000 acres
of land, have, without any right, settled upon the public land." The map
shows that there were eleven owners and twenty-two squatters.(167) As the
law then stood, the twenty-two squatters, occupying more than three-fifths
of the land, could not vote. The eleven land-owners must have secured
their land either under the acts of 1788 or that of 1791, or by the
purchase of French claims, a trade vigorously carried on. In 1808,(168)
Congress so far extended the suffrage in Indiana as to make the ownership
of a town lot worth one hundred dollars an alternative qualification to
the possession of a freehold of fifty acres. This was in advance of the
law in some of the Eastern states.

After 1802, the land question can not be traced without reference to the
Indian question in Illinois. That question became important as soon as
American occupation was assured, and it remained important for fifty years
after the Revolution. The desire of the American settlers for land was
directly counter to the desire of the Indians to preserve their
hunting-grounds. Before the close of the eighteenth century, the list of
bloody deeds in Illinois had grown long.(169) The United States Government
appreciated the gravity of the situation and early made efforts to
purchase the land from the Indians. That part of the treaty of Greenville,
of 1795, which affected Illinois, extinguished the Indian title to a tract
six miles square, at the mouth of Chicago River; one six miles square, at
Peoria; one twelve miles square, near the mouth of the Illinois River; the
post of Fort Massac, and the land in the possession of the whites.(170)
The treaty of Fort Wayne, in 1803, ceded four square miles or less, at the
salt springs on Saline Creek, and some land west and southwest from
Vincennes. This treaty, with another made in the following August, ceded
three tracts of land, each one mile square, between Vincennes and
Kaskaskia, to be sites for taverns.(171) The treaty of Vincennes, of
August, 1803, ceded land in Illinois bounded by the Ohio, the Mississippi,
the Illinois, and the western watershed of the Wabash, except three
hundred and fifty acres near Kaskaskia, and twelve hundred and eighty
acres to be located. This last treaty was made with the depleted Kaskaskia
tribe.(172) As the claims of various tribes overlapped, an Indian treaty
rarely signifies that all controversy in regard to the land ceded is at an
end. Frequently one or more treaties must yet be made with other tribes,
and frequently a tribe refuses to abide by its agreement.

Previous to 1804, no land was sold in the Northwest Territory west of the
mouth of the Kentucky River. An act of March 26 of that year provided for
the opening of a land-office at Detroit to sell lands north of Ohio; one
at Vincennes to sell lands in its vicinity ceded by the treaty of Fort
Wayne; and one at Kaskaskia to sell so much of the land ceded by the
treaty of Vincennes (August, 1803) as was not claimed by any other tribe
than those represented in the cession. The register and the receiver of
public moneys of these respective districts were to be commissioners to
settle private land claims. Evidences of claims should be filed before
January 1, 1805, and after the adjustment of claims the public lands
should be sold at auction to the highest bidder. Two dollars per acre was
to be the minimum price; no land should be sold in less than
quarter-sections, except fractional portions caused by irregularities in
topography or survey, and lands unsold after the auction might be sold at
private sale. Although this act provided for the sale of public lands in
Illinois after private claims should have been satisfied, and directed
that such claims should be filed not later than January 1, 1805, Congress
repeatedly extended the time for the filing of claims, and ten years after
the passage of this act there were still unsatisfied claims.(173) Not
until 1814 did sales of public land begin in Illinois. The delay retarded
immigration of that class which would have made the most desirable
citizens.

By the treaty of St. Louis, November 3, 1804, the Sauk and Foxes ceded
that part of Illinois west of the Illinois and Fox rivers. Black Hawk, the
principal chief of the Sauk, did not sign the treaty.(174) By the treaty
of Vincennes, 1805, the Piankashaws ceded a tract lying between the lower
Wabash and its western watershed.(175) No more Indian titles to land in
Illinois were extinguished, and no public land was sold in Illinois until
after that part of the country became a separate territory.

Early in 1806, there came to Congress from Illinois a petition which
betrayed the anxiety of the French settlers, and of the Americans who had
bought French claims, lest the peculiar shape of their holdings should be
disturbed by the orderly system of government surveys. The petitioners
asked that a line might be run from a point north of Cahokia to an
unspecified river south of Kaskaskia, in such a manner as to include all
settlements between the two points, and that the land so included be
exempt from the mode of survey and terms of sale of other public lands of
the United States. The petition was apparently not reported upon, but a
detailed map of the region referred to shows that the holdings were left
in their bewildering complexity.(176)

By the time Indiana Territory was divided some progress had been made in
extinguishing Indian titles, and some also in investigating land claims of
the French and their assignees; but the American immigrant had still the
hard choice of buying a French claim with uncertain title or squatting on
government land with the risk of losing whatever improvement he might
make, and often the added risk of being killed by the suspicious, hostile,
untrustworthy Indians. This was one class of hindrances to settlement.
Another hindrance, next to be noticed, was the unstable governmental
conditions following the anarchy already recited.




II. Government Succeeding the Period of Anarchy, 1790 to 1809.


When St. Clair County was formed, in 1790, it was made to include all the
settlements of the Northwest Territory to the westward of Vincennes. On
account of its geographical extent it was divided into three judicial
districts, but it could not be made into three separate counties, because
there were not enough men capable of holding office to furnish the
necessary officials. The American settlers were few and a large proportion
of them were unskilled in matters of government, while the French were
totally unfit to govern. In 1795, St. Clair, when referring to conditions
in 1790, wrote that since then the population of Illinois had decreased
considerably.(177) Combining this decrease with the fact that there were
in the settlements in what is now Missouri 1491 inhabitants in 1785, 2093
in 1788, and 6028, including 883 slaves, in 1799,(178) the conclusion is
inevitable that emigration across the Mississippi was the immediate cause
of the decrease in Illinois.

In 1795, notwithstanding the decreased population, and perhaps in the hope
of checking the decrease, St. Clair County was divided by proclamation of
Governor St. Clair. The division was by an east and west line running a
little south of the settlement of New Design.(179) St. Clair County lay to
the north, Randolph County to the south of the line.(180)

The early laws of the Northwest Territory throw light upon the conditions
existing upon the frontier. Minute provisions for establishing and
maintaining ferries, with no mention of bridges, indicate the primitive
methods of travel.(181) Millers were required to use a prescribed set of
measures and to grind for a prescribed toll, the toll for the use of a
horse-mill being higher than that for a water-mill, unless the owner of
the grain furnished the horses.(182) Guide-posts were to be put up at the
forks of every public road.(183) No stray stock should be taken up between
the first of April and the first of November, unless the stray should have
broken into the inclosure of the taker-up.(184) In those days stock was
turned out and crops were fenced in. Prairies or cleared land were not to
be fired except between December 1 and March 10, unless upon one's own
land.(185) The following rates of county taxation were prescribed:

Horses, per head, not more than $.50
Neat cattle, not more than  .12-1/2
Bond servant, not more than 1.00
Single man, 21 yrs. or older, with less than $200 worth of property, not
            more than 2.00 nor less than .50
Retail merchants, not more than 10.00(186)

A bounty, varying at different times between 1799 and 1810 from 50 cents
to $2 per head, was given for killing wolves.(187) Imprisonment for debt,
a law antedating by many years similar laws in several of the other parts
of the United States, was practically abolished.(188) A frontier region
does not have that social stratification which makes oppression of the
debtor class easy. A county too poor to build a log jail without
difficulty is not likely to be so senseless as to make a practice of
confining and boarding its debtor class.

For the purpose of taxation land was to be listed in three classes
according to value. No specification as to the value of the respective
classes was prescribed. The tax was eighty-five, sixty, or twenty-five
cents per one hundred acres, according as land was first, second, or third
class. No unimproved land in Illinois was to be listed higher than second
class.(189)

The laws above cited were enacted by the legislature of the Northwest
Territory. In May, 1800, that territory was divided, the western part,
including Illinois, becoming Indiana Territory. This made the Illinois
country more distinctly frontier by again reducing it to the first grade
of territorial government, Indiana Territory, as such, not being
represented in Congress until December, 1805.(190) Among the reasons
advanced for dividing the Northwest Territory was the fact that in five
years there had been but one court for criminal cases in the three western
counties.(191)

Illinois soon sought admission to the second grade of territorial
government. In April, 1801, John Edgar wrote from Kaskaskia to St. Clair:
"During a few weeks past, we have put into circulation petitions addressed
to Governor Harrison, for a General Assembly, and we have had the
satisfaction to find that about nine-tenths of the inhabitants of the
counties of St. Clair and Randolph approve of the measure, a great
proportion of whom have already put their signatures to the petition.... I
have no doubt but that the undertaking will meet with early success, so as
to admit of the House of Representatives meeting in the fall."(192) The
movement for advancement to the second grade was not, however, destined to
such early success, and when it did take place such a change had occurred
that Illinois was much enraged.

The Illinois country early became restive under the government of Indiana
Territory. Much the same causes for discontent existed as had caused
Kentucky to wish to separate from Virginia, Tennessee from North Carolina,
and the country west of the Alleghanies from the United States. In each
case a frontier minority saw its wishes, if not its rights, infringed by a
more eastern majority. In each case the eastern people were themselves too
weak to furnish sufficient succor to the struggling West. The conflict was
natural and inevitable. The grave charge against Governor Harrison, who
had large powers of patronage, was local favoritism. So discontented was
Illinois, that in 1803 it had petitioned for annexation to the territory
of Louisiana when such territory should be formed.(193) Antagonism to the
Indiana government became still more bitter when, in December, 1804, after
an election which was so hurried that an outlying county did not get to
vote, the territory entered the second grade of territorial
government.(194)

In the summer of 1805, discontent in Illinois was again expressed in a
memorial to Congress. About three hundred and fifty inhabitants of the
region petitioned for a division of Indiana Territory, From the Illinois
settlements to the capital, Vincennes, was said to be one hundred and
eighty miles, "through a dreary and inhospitable wilderness, uninhabited,
and which during one part of the year, can scarcely afford water
sufficient to sustain nature, and that of the most indifferent quality,
besides presenting other hardships equally severe, while in another it is
part under water, and in places to the extent of some miles, by which the
road is rendered almost impassable, and the traveler is not only subjected
to the greatest difficulties, but his life placed in the most imminent
danger." It resulted that the attendance of Illinois inhabitants upon
either the legislature or the supreme court was fraught with many
inconveniences. Because of the extensive prairies between Illinois and
Vincennes, "a communication between them and the settlements east of that
river [the Wabash] can not in the common course of things, for centuries
yet to come, be supported with the least benefit, or be of the least
moment to either of them." Illinois objected to having been precipitated
into the second grade of government. In the election for that purpose,
said the memorialists, only Knox county voted in the affirmative, and
Wayne county did not vote, because the writs of election arrived too late.
Since entering the second grade the County of Wayne (Michigan) had been
struck off. It was believed that if the prayer for separation should be
granted, the rage for emigration to Louisiana would, in great measure,
cease, the value of public lands in Illinois would be increased, and their
sale would also be more rapid, while an increased population would render
Illinois flourishing and self-supporting rather than a claimant for
governmental support.(195)

At the same time that Congress received the above memorial, it received a
petition from a majority of the members of the respective houses of the
Indiana legislature. This petition asked that the freehold qualification
for electors be abolished; that Indiana Territory be not divided, and that
the undivided territory be soon made a state. It was said that the people
were too poor to support a divided government, and that as the general
court met annually in each county it was slight hardship to the frontier
to have the supreme court meet at Vincennes.(196) It was probably true at
this time, as it certainly was in 1807, that the general court met as
above stated. Appeal by bill of exceptions was, however, allowed. The
supreme court had no original, exclusive jurisdiction.(197) Nothing
daunted by this memorial from the legislature, Illinois, in a short time,
prepared another memorial--this time with twenty signatures. This adds to
the grievances recited in the previous memorial that the wealthy appeal
cases against the Illinois poor to the supreme court at Vincennes; that
landholders on the Wabash are interested in preventing the population of
lands on the Mississippi; that preemption is needed, and that it is hoped
that the general government will not pass unnoticed the act of the last
legislature authorizing the importation of slaves into the territory. It
violates the Ordinance of 1787. The memorialists desired such importation,
but it must be authorized by Congress to be legal. The population of
Illinois was given as follows:


    By the census of April 1, 1801: 2,361

    Inhabitants of Prairie du Chien and on the Illinois River, not
    included in above: 550

    "Emigration" since 1801, at least one-third increase: 750

    Settlements on the Ohio River: 650

    4,311(198)


The truth of some of the complaints from Illinois is apparent. That a land
company on the Wabash wished to hinder settlement on the Mississippi is
probably true, for Matthew Lyon, of Kentucky, said in Congress, in the
winter of 1805-6: "The price of lands is various. I know of two hundred
thousand acres of land on the Wabash, which is offered for sale at twenty
cents per acre."(199) It is to be presumed that the company making the
offer could not give a secure title to the land.

In 1806, a congressional committee reported on the various memorials and
petitions from Illinois, but the report led to no legislation and thus
settled nothing, and in 1807 petitioning continued.(200) Illinois again
petitioned for separation from the remainder of Indiana Territory, this
petition bearing seventeen signatures. An inclosed census is lost, but a
population of five thousand is spoken of. A new and significant paragraph
occurs: "When your Memorialists contemplate the probable movements which
may arise out of an European peace, now apparently about to take place,
they cannot but feel the importance of union, of energy, of population on
this shore of the Mississippi--they cannot but shudder at the horrors which
may arise from a _disaffection in the West_...." A government was needed,
and that of Indiana Territory was not acceptable to the people of
Illinois. One hundred and two inhabitants of Illinois sent a
counter-petition, in which they said that Illinois had paid no taxes and
needed no separate government, also that the committee that prepared the
above petition was not legally chosen. Most of the signers of the petition
were Americans, while most of the signers of the counter-petition were
French, forty-two of the latter being illiterate.(201) The report of a
congressional committee on the petition was adverse,(202) as was also a
report on three petitions for division that came from Illinois in the
spring of 1808.(203) In the following December, the representative of
Indiana Territory in Congress was appointed chairman of a committee to
consider the expediency of dividing the territory, and to this committee
petitions both for and against division were referred. This territorial
delegate was in favor of division, and his committee presented a favorable
report, in which the number of inhabitants of Indiana east of the Wabash
was estimated to be seventeen thousand, and the number west of the Wabash
to be eleven thousand--numbers thought to be sufficiently large to justify
division, and an estimate which the census of 1810 proves to have been
almost correct. In February, 1809, the bill providing for the division so
ardently desired by Illinois was approved, the division to take place on
the first of the next March. The western division was to be known as
Illinois Territory and was to have for its eastern boundary a line due
north from Vincennes to the Canadian line.(204) In the debate in the House
of Representatives, preceding the passage of the bill for division, the
arguments in its favor were that the Wabash was a natural dividing line;
that a wide extent of wilderness intervened between Vincennes and the
western settlements; that the power of the executive was enervated by the
dispersed condition of the settlements; that to render justice was almost
impossible; that the United States would be more than compensated for the
increased expense by the rise in value of the public lands. Opponents of
the bill declared that the complaints made by Illinois were common to many
parts of the country; that the number of officers would be needlessly
increased by the proposed division; and that "a compliance with this
petition would but serve to foster their factions, and produce more
petitions." No significant geographical division of the vote on the bill
is apparent.(205)




III. Obstacles to Immigration. 1790 to 1809.


In addition to the inability to secure land titles on account of unsettled
French claims, to the presence of Indians and to the discontent with the
government of Indiana Territory, almost every cause which made settlement
on the frontier difficult was found in the Illinois country in its most
pronounced form, because Illinois was the far corner of the frontier. The
census reports of the United Status give the following statistics of
population:

              1790.     1800.     1810.
Kentucky     73,677   220,955   406,511
Ohio                   45,365   230,760
Indiana                 2,517    24,520
Illinois                2,458    12,282

These figures show how conspicuously small was the immigration to
Illinois. Enough has already been said to show some of the reasons for
this sluggish settlement. When, in 1793, Governor St. Clair wrote to
Alexander Hamilton, "In compassion to a poor devil banished to another
planet, tell me what is doing in yours, if you can snatch a moment from
the weighty cares of your office,"(206) he doubtless felt that the
language was not too strong, and voiced a feeling of loneliness that was
common to the settlers. Nor was there a lack of land in the East to make
westward movement imperative. Massachusetts was much opposed to her people
emigrating to Ohio, because she wished them to settle on her own eastern
frontier (Maine), and Vermont and New York had vacant lands.(207)

One who settled in Illinois at this period came through danger to danger,
for Indians lurked in the woods and malaria waited in the lowlands. The
journey made by the immigrants was tedious and difficult, and was often
rendered dangerous by precipitous and rough hills and swollen streams, if
the journey was overland, or by snags, shoals and rapids, if by water. A
large proportion of the settlers came from Maryland, Virginia, or the
Carolinas. Those from Virginia and Maryland were induced to emigrate by
the glowing descriptions of the Illinois country given by the soldiers of
George Rogers Clark, and these soldiers sometimes led the first
contingent. A typical Virginia settlement in Illinois was that called New
Design, located in what is now Monroe county, between Kaskaskia and
Cahokia. Founded about 1786 by a native of Berkeley county, the settlement
received important additions in 1793, and four years later a party of more
than one hundred and fifty arrived from near the headwaters of the south
branch of the Potomac, this last contingent led by a Baptist minister, who
had organized a church on a previous visit.(208) In general, persons
Scotch-Irish by birth were opposed to slavery, as were also the members of
the Quaker church. This caused a considerable emigration from the
Carolinas. Another motive for people from all sections was that expressed
by settlers of Illinois, in 1806, when they said that they came west in
order to secure "such an establishment in land as they despaired of ever
being able to procure in the old settlements."(209) We have seen how long
deferred was the fulfillment of their hope of getting a title to the
coveted land. Although the East was not crowded, it is true that land
there was more expensive than that of the same quality in the West. In
1806, three dollars per acre was the maximum price in even the settled
parts of Indiana Territory, while fifty dollars per acre had been paid for
choice Kentucky land.(210)

The greater number of immigrants came by water, but a family too poor to
travel thus, or whose starting-point was not near a navigable stream,
could come overland. Illinois was favored by having a number of large
rivers leading toward it; the Ohio, Kentucky, Cumberland, Tennessee, and
their tributaries were much used by emigrants. The chief route by land was
the Wilderness Road, over which thousands of the inhabitants of Kentucky
had come. Its existence helps to explain the wonderful growth of
Kentucky--in 1774 the first cabin, in 1790 a population of 73,000. It
crossed the mountains at Cumberland Gap, wound its way by the most
convenient course to Crab Orchard, and was early extended to the Falls of
the Ohio and later to Vincennes and St. Louis. The legislature of Kentucky
provided, in 1795, that the road from Cumberland Gap to Crab Orchard
should be made perfectly commodious and passable for wagons carrying a
weight of one ton, and appropriated two thousand pounds for the work. Two
years later five hundred dollars were appropriated for the repair of the
road, and the highway was made a turnpike with prescribed toll, although
it did not become such a road as the word turnpike suggests.(211)

A traveler of 1807 described the river craft of the period. The smallest
kind in use was a simple log canoe. This was followed by the pirogue,
which was a larger kind of canoe and sufficiently strong and capacious to
carry from twelve to fifteen barrels of salt. Skiffs were built of all
sizes, from five hundred to twenty thousand pounds burden, and batteaux
were the same as the larger skiffs, being indifferently known by either
name. Kentucky boats were strong frames of an oblong form, varying in size
from twenty to fifty feet in length and from ten to fourteen in breadth,
were sided and roofed, and guided by huge oars. New Orleans boats
resembled Kentucky boats, but were larger and stronger and had arched
roofs. The largest could carry four hundred and fifty barrels of flour.
Keel boats were generally built from forty to eighty feet in length and
from seven to nine feet in width. The largest required one man to steer
and two to row in descending the Ohio, and would carry about one hundred
barrels of salt; but to ascend the stream, at least six or eight men were
required to make any considerable progress. A barge would carry from four
thousand to sixty thousand pounds, and required four men, besides the
helmsman, to descend the river, while to return with a load from eight to
twelve men were required.(212)

Shipments of produce from Illinois were usually made in flat-bottomed
boats of fifteen tons burden. Such a boat cost about one hundred dollars,
the crew of five men was paid one hundred dollars each, the support of the
crew was reckoned at one hundred dollars, and insurance at one hundred
dollars, thus making a freightage cost of eight hundred dollars for
fifteen tons. The boat was either set adrift or sold for the price of
firewood at New Orleans. It was estimated that the use of boats of four
hundred and fifty tons burden would save four dollars per barrel on
shipping flour to New Orleans, where flour had often sold at less than
three dollars per barrel, but such boats were not yet used in the
West.(213) Canoes cost an emigrant from one to three dollars; pirogues,
five to twenty dollars; small skiffs, five to ten dollars; large skiffs or
batteaux, twenty to fifty dollars; Kentucky and New Orleans boats, one
dollar to one and one-half dollars per foot; keel boats, two dollars and a
half to three dollars per foot; and barges, four to five dollars per
foot.(214)

Horses, cattle, and household goods were carried on boats. Travel by
either land or water was beset with difficulties. The river, without pilot
or dredge, had dangers peculiar to itself. Sometimes, when traveling
overland, a broken wheel or axle, or a horse lost or stolen by Indians,
caused protracted and vexatious delays. It is well to notice, also, that
to travel a given distance into the wilderness was more than twice as
difficult as to travel one-half that distance, because of the constantly
increasing separation between the traveler and what had previously been
his base of supplies.(215)

Sometimes immigrants debarked at Fort Massac and completed their journey
by land. Two roads led from Fort Massac, one called the lower road and the
other the upper road, the former, practicable only in the dry season and
then only for travel on foot or on horseback, was some eighty miles long,
while the latter was one hundred and fifty miles long. Roads of a like
character connected Kaskaskia and Cahokia.(216)

A party of more than one hundred and fifty, which came from Virginia to
the New Design settlement in 1797, set out from the south branch of the
Potomac. They came from Redstone (now Brownsville), on the Monongahela, to
Fort Massac, on flat-boats, and then by land, in twenty-one days, to New
Design. The summer was wet and hot, a malignant fever broke out among the
newcomers, and one-half of them died before winter. The old settlers were
not affected by the fever, but they were too few to properly care for so
many immigrants.(217)

Commerce in Illinois was in its infancy. Some cattle, corn, pork, and
various other commodities were sent at irregular intervals to New
Orleans.(218) The fur trade was carried on much as under the French
regime. Salt was made at the salt springs on Saline Creek, the labor being
performed chiefly by Kentucky and Tennessee slaves under the supervision
of contractors who leased the works from the United States. The
contractors agreed to sell no salt at the works for more than fifty cents
per bushel, but by means of silent partners to whom the entire supply was
sold, the price was sometimes raised as high as two dollars per
bushel.(219) The commerce of the West suffered from a lack of vessels
going from New Orleans to Atlantic ports, and as a result corn sold in New
Orleans at fifty cents per bushel in 1805, while in some of the Atlantic
ports it sold for more than two dollars. At the same time the West had a
good crop, and Kentucky alone could have spared five hundred thousand
bushels of corn, if it could have been shipped.(220)

To secure laborers was difficult. A petition of 1796 said that farm
laborers could not be secured for less than one dollar per day, exclusive
of washing, lodging, and boarding; that every kind of tradesman was paid
from one dollar and a half to two dollars per day, and that at these
prices laborers were scarce. Labor was cheaper on the Spanish side of the
Mississippi, because of the larger proportion of slaves.(221) These wages
were doubtless high in comparison with those paid in the East, just as the
one dollar per day and board paid at the Galena lead mines in 1788 was
more than double the wages then paid in New England,(222) but an Illinois
price list of 1795 shows that the wages of 1796 were by no means
comparable to those of today in purchasing power. Making shoes was two
dollars per pair; potatoes were one dollar per bushel; brandy, one dollar
per quart; corn, one dollar per bushel.(223)

Among the early difficulties in the way of settlement, one of the most
persistent was the presence of prairies. This is by no means far-fetched,
although it sounds so to modern ears. In 1786, Monroe wrote to Jefferson
concerning the Northwest Territory: "A great part of the territory is
miserably poor, especially that near Lakes Michigan and Erie, and that
upon the Mississippi and the Illinois consists of extensive plains which
have not had, from appearances, and will not have, a single bush on them
for ages. The districts, therefore, within which these fall will never
contain a sufficient number of inhabitants to entitle them to membership
in the confederacy."(224) Some of the most fertile of the Illinois
prairies were not settled until far into the nineteenth century. The false
prophets of the early days will be judged less harshly if we recall that
wood was then a necessity, that no railroads and few roads existed, that
wells now in use in prairie regions are much deeper than the early
settlers could dig, and that the vast quantities of coal under the surface
of Illinois were undiscovered.

As causes for the fact that more than a quarter of a century after the
Revolution, Illinois had a population estimated at only eleven thousand,
may be suggested the presence of hostile Indians; the inability of
settlers to secure a title to their land; the unsettled condition of the
slavery question; the great distance from the older portions of the United
States and from any market; the fact that Kentucky, Ohio, and Indiana had
vast quantities of unoccupied land more accessible to emigrants than was
Illinois; the danger and the cost of moving; privation incident to a
scanty population, such as lack of roads, schools, churches and mills; the
existence of large prairies in Illinois. To remove or mitigate these
difficulties was still the problem of Illinois settlers. On some of them a
beginning had been made before 1809, but none were yet removed.





CHAPTER IV. ILLINOIS DURING ITS TERRITORIAL PERIOD. 1809 TO 1818.




I. The Land and Indian Questions.


Probably nothing affected settlement in Illinois from 1809 to 1818 more
profoundly than did changes in the land question, for during this period
Congress passed important acts relative to land sales, and this was also
the period of the first sales of public lands in the territory. It seems
strange that such sales should have been so long delayed, yet the
settlement of French claims, although begun by the Governor of the
Northwest Territory at an early day, and continued by commissioners
authorized by Congress and appointed in 1804, was incomplete when Illinois
became a separate territory, and the United States government adhered to
its policy of selling no land in the territory until the claims were
finally adjudicated. When a list of decisions reported by the
commissioners to Congress late in 1809 was confirmed in the following
May,(225) and the next year a long list of rejected claims arising chiefly
from the work of professional falsifiers, was reported,(226) it seemed
probable that the work was nearing completion, but a final settlement was
still delayed, and the long-suffering Illinois squatters were bitterly
disappointed when, in February, 1812, in accordance with a resolution
presented by the Committee on Public Lands, Congress made provision for
the appointment of a committee to revise the confirmations made by the
Governor years before.(227) The first legislature of Illinois met in the
succeeding November, and adopted a memorial to Congress in which it was
pointed out that the establishment of a land-office in the territory,
several years before, had led to the opinion that the public land would
soon be sold, and that because of this opinion those who constituted the
majority of the inhabitants of the territory had been induced to settle,
hoping that they would have an opportunity to purchase land before they
should have made such improvements as would tempt the competition of
avaricious speculators. The fulfillment of this hope having been long
deferred, many squatters had now made valuable improvements which they
were in danger of losing, either at the public sales of land or through
the designs of the few speculators who had bought from the needy and
unbusinesslike French most of the unlocated claims. For the relief of the
squatters a law was desired that would permit actual settlers to enter the
land on which their improvements stood, and requiring persons holding
unlocated claims to locate them on unimproved lands lying in the region
designated by Congress for that purpose. It was also hoped that as
Congress had given one hundred acres of land to each regular soldier, as
much would be granted to each member of the Illinois militia, since the
militiaman had not only fought as bravely as the regular, but had also
furnished his own supplies. If such a donation was not made it was hoped
that a right of preemption would be given to the militia, or failing even
this, that they might be given the right, legally, to collect from anyone
entering their land, the value of their improvements.(228) In proof of the
fact stated in the memorial, that speculators had bought many French
claims, it may be noted that William Morrison had ninety-two of the claims
granted at Kaskaskia, his affirmed claims comprising more than eighteen
thousand acres, exclusive of a large number of claims measured in French
units, while John Edgar received a satisfactory report on claims
aggregating more than forty thousand acres, in addition to a number of
claims previously affirmed to him.(229)

A few days after preparing the above memorial, the legislature prepared an
address to Congress, in which reference was made to the arrangement made
between Congress and Ohio by the Act of April 30, 1802, granting to Ohio
two salt springs on condition that the state should agree not to tax such
public lands as should be sold within her borders, until after five years
from the date of sale. Illinois wished in similar fashion to gain control
of the salt springs on Saline creek. The Illinois delegate in Congress was
instructed that if the bargain could not be made, he should attempt to
secure an appropriation for opening a road from Shawneetown to the Saline
and thence to Kaskaskia. It was also desired that the Secretary of the
Treasury should authorize the designation of the college township reserved
by the Ordinance of 1787 and by the Act of 1804, and because "labor in
this Territory is abundant, and laborers at this time extremely scarce,"
it was hoped that slaves from Kentucky or elsewhere might be employed at
the salines for a period of not more than three years, after which they
should return to their masters.(230) Each prayer of this address was
granted. The enabling act and the Illinois constitution ceded the salt
springs to the state and agreed that public lands sold in Illinois should
be exempt from taxation for five years from date of sale; the Illinois
Constitution provided for the employment of slaves at the salt works; an
act provided for the location of the college township; and in 1816 the
making of the desired road was authorized, although at the beginning of
1818 the route had been merely surveyed and mapped.(231)

The memorial which preceded the address was also in large measure
successful. An act of February, 1813, granted to the squatters in Illinois
the right of preempting a quarter section, each, of the lands they
occupied, and of entering the land upon the payment of one-twentieth of
the purchase money, as was then required in private sales.(232) This act
was of prime importance. For more than thirty years settlers in Illinois
had improved their lands at the risk of losing them. Since the
appointment, in 1804, of commissioners to settle the French land claims,
the settlers had been expecting the public lands, including those they
occupied, to be offered for sale; thus it was inevitable that anxiety
concerning the right of preemption should increase as the settlement of
claims neared completion, and contemporaries record that the inability to
secure land titles seriously retarded settlement;(233) now, however, the
granting of the right of preemption, before any public lands in Illinois
were offered for sale, ended the long suspense of the settlers. Years
before this, Kentucky, now selling its public lands at twenty cents per
acre, had passed liberal preemption laws, and they were repeatedly
renewed,(234) facts which increased the anxiety of Illinois.

Year after year the settlement of land claims dragged on, thus delaying
the sales of land.(235) In an official report of December, 1813, it is
stated that: "In the Territory of Illinois, two land-offices are directed
by law to be opened; one at Kaskaskia, the other at Shawneetown, so soon
as the private claims and donations are all located, and the lands
surveyed, which are in great forwardness."(236) A tract of land was set
apart in April, 1814, to satisfy the claims recommended by the
commissioners for confirmation.(237) A report of November, 1815, said that
the commissioners hoped to open the land-office at Kaskaskia on May 15,
1816; and finally, in a report on the public lands sold from October 1,
1815, to September 30, 1816, we find that about thirty-four thousand acres
have been sold at Shawneetown and somewhat less than thirteen thousand
acres at Kaskaskia, the price at the latter place being precisely the two
dollars per acre which was then the minimum, while that at Shawneetown was
slightly higher,(238) presumably due to the sale of town lots, which had
been authorized in 1810, although no sales took place earlier than
1814.(239)

The long delay in opening the land-offices in Illinois was fatal to an
early settlement of the region, because the old states had public lands
which they offered for sale at low rates, thus depriving Illinois of a
fair chance as a competitor. In 1779 Kentucky granted to each family which
had settled before January 1, 1778, the right of preemption--four hundred
acres if no improvement had been made and one thousand acres if a hut had
been built. The preemptor, by a law of 1786, was to pay 13_s_. 4_d._ per
one hundred acres.(240) In 1781 the sheriffs of Lincoln, Fayette, and
Jefferson counties, Virginia, were authorized to survey not more than four
hundred acres for each poor family in Kentucky, for which twenty shillings
per one hundred acres should be paid within two and one-half years.(241)
In 1791 more than three and one-half millions of acres were sold in New
York at eight pence per acre, while many thousands of acres in addition
were sold for less than four shillings per acre--many for less than two
shillings.(242) Pennsylvania offered homestead claims, in 1792, at seven
pounds ten shillings per hundred acres.(243)

In December, 1796, Kentucky sheriffs were ordered to sell no more land for
taxes until directed by the legislature to do so.(244) In 1800, and again
in 1812, Kentucky offered land at twenty cents per acre, and in 1820 at
fifteen cents per acre,(245) while during the interval preemption acts
were repeatedly passed.(246) Land in Tennessee sold at from twelve and
one-half to twenty-five cents per acre in 1814, and in 1819 at fifty
cents.(247)

In 1816 various classes of claimants were given increased facilities and
an extension of time for locating their claims in Illinois. The business
of satisfying claims was to linger for years, but with the opening of the
land-offices it ceased to be a potent factor in retarding settlement.(248)

One writer says of Illinois: "The public lands have rarely sold for more
than five dollars per acre, _at auction_. Those sold at Edwardsville in
October, 1816, averaged four dollars. Private sales at the land-office are
fixed by law, at two dollars per acre. The old French locations command
various prices, from one to fifty dollars. Titles derived from the United
States government are always valid, and those from individuals rarely
false."(249) At this time emigrants were going in large numbers to
Missouri, and the Illinois river country, not yet relieved of its Indian
title, was being explored.(250)

Reports concerning the sales of public lands give the quantity of land
sold in Illinois toward the close of the territorial period, the figures
for 1817 and 1818 being as follows:

                    Acres in   Acres in    Jan. 1,      Sept. 30,
                    1817.      1818.       1818.        1818.
Shawneetown           72,384    216,315   $291,429       $637,468
Kaskaskia             90,493    121,052    209,295        406,288
Edwardsville(251)    149,165    121,923    301,701   451,499(252)
                     312,042    459,290   $802,425     $1,495,255

The percentage of debt showed a marked increase in the first nine months
of 1818. There were received in three-quarters of 1817 and 1818,
respectively:

                    1817.      1818.
At Shawneetown    $32,837   $112,759
At Kaskaskia       41,218     68,975
At Edwardsville    41,426     78,788

During this same period the receipts at Steubenville, Marietta, and
Wooster, Ohio, decreased,(253) showing that Illinois was beginning to
surpass Ohio as an objective point for emigrants wishing to enter land.

The Indian question was interwoven with the land question during the
territorial period. In 1809 the Indians relinquished their claim to some
small tracts of land lying near the point where the Wabash ceases to be a
state boundary line.(254) No more cessions were made until after the war
of 1812. Although the population of Illinois increased, during the
territorial period, from some eleven thousand to about forty thousand, the
increase before the war was slight, and thus it came about that during the
war the few whites were kept busy defending themselves from the large and
hostile Indian population. So well does the manner of defence in Illinois
illustrate the frontier character of the region that a sketch of the same
may be given. When, in 1811, the Indians became hostile and murdered a few
whites, the condition of the settlers was precarious in the extreme. Today
the term city would be almost a favor to a place containing no more
inhabitants than were then to be found in the white settlements in
Illinois. Moreover, few as were the whites, they were dispersed in a long
half-oval extending from a point on the Mississippi near the present Alton
southward to the Ohio, and thence up that river and the Wabash to a point
considerably north of Vincennes. This fringe of settlement was but a few
miles wide in some places, while so sparse was the population near the
mouth of the Ohio that the communication between northern and southern
Indians was unchecked. Carlyle was regarded as the extreme eastern
boundary of settlements to the westward; a fort on Muddy River, near where
the old Fort Massac trace crossed the stream, was considered as one of the
most exposed situations; and Fort La Motte, on a creek of the same name
above Vincennes, was a far northern point. The exposed outside was some
hundreds of miles long, and the interior and north were occupied by ten
times as many hostile savages as there were whites in the country, the
savages being given counsel and ammunition by the British garrisons on the
north.(255) Under conditions then existing, aid from the United States
could be expected only in the event of dire necessity. Stout frontiersmen
were almost ready to seek refuge in flight, but no general exodus took
place, although in February, 1812, Governor Edwards wrote to the Secretary
of War: "The alarms and apprehensions of the people are becoming so
universal, that really I should not be surprised if we should, in three
months, lose more than one-half of our present population. In places, in
my opinion, entirely out of danger, many are removing. In other parts,
large settlements are about to be totally deserted. Even in my own
neighborhood, several families have removed, and others are preparing to
do so in a week or two. A few days past, a gentleman of respectability
arrived here from Kentucky, and he informed me that he saw on the road, in
one day, upwards of twenty wagons conveying families out of this
Territory. Every effort to check the prevalence of such terror seems to be
ineffectual, and although much of it is unreasonably indulged, yet it is
very certain the Territory will very shortly be in considerable danger.
Its physical force is very inconsiderable, and is growing weaker, while it
presents numerous points of attack."(256)

To the first feeling of fear succeeded a determination to hold the ground.
Before the middle of 1812, Governor Edwards had established Fort Russell,
a few miles northwest of the present Edwardsville, bringing to this place,
which was to be his headquarters, the cannon which Louis XIV. had had
placed in Fort Chartres;(257) and two volunteer companies had been raised,
and had "ranged to a great distance--principally between the Illinois and
the Kaskaskia rivers, and sometimes between the Kaskaskia and the
Wabash--always keeping their line of march never less than one and
sometimes three days' journey outside of all the settlements"(258)--which
incidentally shows what great unoccupied regions still existed even in the
southern part of Illinois. As the rangers furnished their own supplies,
the two companies went out alternately for periods of fifteen days.
Sometimes the company on duty divided, one part marching in one direction
and the other in the opposite, in order to produce the greatest possible
effect upon the Indians. Settlers on the frontier--and that comprised a
large proportion of the population--"forted themselves," as it was then
expressed. Where a few families lived near each other, one of the most
substantial houses was fortified, and here the community staid at night,
and in case of imminent danger in the daytime as well. Isolated outlying
families left their homes and retired to the nearest fort. Such places of
refuge were numerous and many were the attacks which they successfully
withstood.

Rangers and frontier forts were used with much effect, but the great
dispersion of settlement and the large numbers of Indians combined to make
it wholly impossible to make such means of defence entirely adequate. In
August, 1812, the Governor wrote to the Secretary of War: "The principal
settlements of this Territory being on the Mississippi, are at least one
hundred and fifty miles from those of Indiana, and immense prairies
intervene between them. There can, therefore, be no concert of operations
for the protection of their frontiers and ours.... No troops of any kind
have yet arrived in this Territory, and I think you may count on hearing
of a bloody stroke upon us very soon. I have been extremely reluctant to
send my family away, but, unless I hear shortly of more assistance than a
few rangers, I shall bury my papers in the ground, send my family off, and
stand my ground as long as possible."(259) The "bloody stroke" predicted
by the Governor fell on the garrison at Fort Dearborn, where Chicago now
stands. Some regular troops were subsequently sent to the territory, but
the war did not lose its frontier character. One of the most
characteristic features was that troops sometimes set out on a campaign of
considerable length, in an uninhabited region, without any baggage train
and practically without pack horses, the men carrying their provisions on
their horses, and the horses living on wild grass.(260) Unflagging energy
was shown by the settlers, several effective campaigns being carried on,
and by the close of 1814 the war was closed in Illinois.(261)

Extinction of Indian titles to land was retarded by the war and also by
the policy of the United States, which was expressed by Secretary of War
Crawford, in 1816, as follows: "The determination to purchase land only
when demanded for settlement will form the settled policy of the
Government. Experience has sufficiently proven that our population will
spread over any cession, however extensive, before it can be brought into
market, and before there is any regular and steady demand for settlement,
thereby increasing the difficulty of protection, embarrassing the
Government by broils with the natives, and rendering the execution of the
laws regulating intercourse with the Indian tribes utterly
impracticable."(262) Some progress, however, was made in extinguishing
Indian titles during the territorial period after the close of the war. In
1816, several tribes confirmed the cession of 1804 of land lying south of
an east and west line passing through the southern point of Lake Michigan,
and ceded a route for an Illinois-Michigan canal.(263) At Edwardsville, on
September 25, 1818, the Peoria, Kaskaskia, Michigamia, Cahokia, and
Tamarois ceded a tract comprising most of southern and much of central
Illinois.(264) The significance of this cession would have been immense
had it not been that it was made by weak tribes, while the powerful
Kickapoo still claimed and held all that part of the ceded tract lying
north of the parallel of 39 deg.--a little to the north of the mouth of the
Illinois river. This Kickapoo claim included the fertile and already
famous Sangamon country, in which the state capital was eventually to be
located, and squatters were pressing hard upon the Indian frontier, yet
the Indians still held the land when Illinois became a state.

During the territorial period, Illinois gained the long-sought right of
preemption; the French claims ceased to retard settlement; some progress
was made in the extinction of Indian titles, and the sale of public land
was begun. The new state was to find the Indian question a pressing one,
and some changes in the land system were yet desired, but the crucial
point was passed.




II. Territorial Government of Illinois. 1809 to 1818.


The act for the division of Indiana Territory provided that Illinois,
during the first stage of its territorial existence, should have a
government similar to that of the Northwest Territory under the Ordinance
of 1787. In 1809 there were in Illinois two distinct and hostile parties,
which had been formed on questions arising in Indiana Territory before
division. It was with sound judgment, therefore, that the President, going
outside of Illinois, appointed as Governor, Ninian Edwards of Kentucky, a
native of Maryland, who successfully resisted all efforts to involve him
in party quarrels.(265)

Laws for the government of the territory were to be chosen by the Governor
and the judges from the laws of the states. The judges were Jesse B.
Thomas and William Sprigg, natives of Maryland, and Alexander Stuart, a
native of Virginia. It is worthy of note that of the twelve laws chosen
before the meeting of the first territorial legislature, five were from
Kentucky, three from Georgia, two from Virginia, one from South Carolina,
and one from Pennsylvania.(266) A people practically southern in origin
was being governed by officials from the south under southern laws.

Illinois entered the second grade of territorial government in 1812,
electing its first legislature in October.(267) In the preceding May,
Congress had passed an act making radical and most important extensions in
the suffrage in Illinois, over that which had been prescribed by the
Ordinance of 1787. The new provision was: "Every free white male person
who shall have attained the age of twenty-one years, and who shall have
paid a county or territorial tax, and who shall have resided one year in
said Territory previous to any general election, and be at the time of any
such election a resident thereof, shall be entitled to vote for members of
the Legislative Council and House of Representatives of the said
Territory." Each county was to elect one member of the Legislative
Council, to serve for four years. The territorial delegate to Congress was
also made elective by the citizens.(268) One has but to consider what a
complete revolution this act brought about to appreciate its great
significance. Previously the Legislative Council had been appointive by
the President of the United States, from nominees of the territorial House
of Representatives, the nominees being twice the number necessary; the
delegate to Congress had not been chosen by popular vote; and a freehold
qualification for the elective franchise had obtained. Early petitions
show how much the people complained of a landed aristocracy,(269) and
letters written by Governor Edwards early in 1812 show how well founded
was the complaint. No preemption act had yet been passed, and of the more
than twelve thousand inhabitants of Illinois some two hundred and twenty
possessed a freehold of fifty acres, thus giving the balance of power, if
the territory should enter the second grade under the old provision, to
one hundred and eleven persons. Nearly one-third of the entire population
lived either near the Ohio or between it and the Kaskaskia, and among them
there were not more than three or four freeholders, and not one who
possessed two hundred acres--the necessary qualification for a
representative. With no public lands yet offered for sale, with no right
of preemption, with a freehold qualification for the suffrage, this law
enfranchising squatters was of prime importance.(270)

The first legislature had few French members, and was apparently southern
in nativity.(271) After more than three years and a half of legislation by
the Governor and judges, the inhabitants at last had an elective
legislature. The journals of the two houses indicate that the belief that
had been expressed in petitions to Congress some years before that such a
body would provide an efficient government, was well founded. The laws
passed were eminently practical for the frontier conditions under which
they were to operate.(272) A man contemplating settlement in Illinois
could now be sure that he would be governed by Illinois men whom he had a
share in electing.

The rude character of the facilities for transportation is indicated by
the fact that the earlier laws of the territory deal with ferries only
rarely and with bridges not at all, while as time progresses and
population increases, ferries multiply and bridges begin to be
constructed. By 1817-18 the desire for banks and for internal
improvements, which was to be disastrous to the state at a later period,
began to show itself. As examples, the Bank of Cairo and the Illinois
Navigation Company will suffice. Nine men purchased the low peninsula
lying near the junction of the Ohio and the Mississippi, and were
incorporated by "An Act to Incorporate the City and Bank of Cairo." A site
for a city comprising at least two thousand lots, with streets eighty feet
wide, was to be laid out. The lots were to be sold at one hundred and
fifty dollars each and were to be not less than one hundred and twenty by
sixty-six feet in size. Of the purchase money, two-thirds should go into
the stock of the Bank of Cairo, and one-third to a fund to build dykes to
keep the city from being flooded.(273) Considering the time and the
location, the scheme was utterly impracticable. "An Act to Incorporate the
Stockholders of the Illinois Navigation Company" authorized the formation
of a company with a capital of one hundred thousand dollars, for the
purpose of cutting a canal through the peninsula between the Ohio and the
Mississippi. Within twelve years a canal sufficiently large for the
passage of a vessel of twenty tons burden should be completed. The company
was given the right of eminent domain.(274) Here again the character of
the project was unsuited to existing conditions. Population was increasing
rapidly at the time these laws were passed, but they required for their
success an increase much more rapid. They were, however, pleasing to the
settlers and the prospective settlers of the day.

On January 16, 1818, Mr. Pope, of Illinois, was appointed chairman of a
select committee to consider a petition from the Illinois legislature
praying for a state government. One week later the committee reported a
bill to enable Illinois to form such a government, and to admit the state
into the union. When the enabling act came up for discussion, Mr. Pope
offered the amendment which changed the northern boundary of Illinois from
a line due west from the southern extremity of Lake Michigan, as provided
by the Ordinance of 1787, to a line running from that lake to the
Mississippi on the parallel of 42 deg. 30'. "The object of this amendment, Mr.
Pope said, was to gain, for the proposed state, a coast on Lake Michigan.
This would offer additional security to the perpetuity of the union,
inasmuch as the state would thereby be connected with the states of
Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York, through the lakes. The facility
of opening a canal between Lake Michigan and the Illinois River, said Mr.
Pope, is acknowledged by every one who has visited the place. Giving to
the proposed state the port of Chicago (embraced in the proposed limits),
will draw its attention to the opening of the communication between the
Illinois River and that place, and the improvement of that harbor. It was
believed, he said, upon good authority, that the line of separation
between Indiana and Illinois would strike Lake Michigan south of Chicago,
and not pass west of it, as had been supposed by some geographers...."
Although an avowed violation of the Ordinance of 1787, the amendment was
adopted without division or recorded debate. Mr. Pope also secured an
amendment to the effect that the state's proportion of the proceeds of the
sales of public lands, instead of being applied to the making of roads and
canals in the state, should be used in making roads leading to the state,
and for the encouragement of learning, two-fifths being applied to the
former purpose. Pope pointed out that people would build roads as they
needed them, much more readily than they would supply schools, and that
waste school lands in a new country would produce slight revenue.
Subsequent history of the state justified both statements. The enabling
act met with little opposition and was signed by President Monroe on April
18, 1818.(275)

One of the provisions of the enabling act was that, in order to become a
state, Illinois must have as many as forty thousand inhabitants. In
anticipation of such a provision, the territorial legislature had passed a
law in January, 1818, providing that a census of the territory should be
taken between April 1 and June 1. A supplemental act provided that as a
great increase in population might be expected between June 1 and
December, census takers should continue to take the census in their
districts of all who should remove into them between June 1 and December
1. The law as framed gave an opportunity to count not only immigrants, but
to re-count all who moved from one county to another (such moving being
common), and to count in each successive county persons passing through
the state. There is no reasonable doubt that at the time the census was
taken, the territory had fewer than forty thousand inhabitants. Dana gives
a census of 1818, in which the number is given as thirty-four thousand six
hundred and sixty-six, and adds: "Another enumeration having been taken a
few months after, the amount of population returned was forty thousand one
hundred and fifty-six, which exceeded the number entitling the territory
to become a state."(276)

In August, 1818, the Constitution of Illinois was completed. Its
provisions most likely to influence settlement were those concerning the
elective franchise and slavery. It provided that "In all elections, all
white male inhabitants above the age of twenty-one years, having resided
in the state six months next preceding the election, shall enjoy the right
of an elector; but no person shall be entitled to vote except in the
county or district in which he shall actually reside at the time of the
election." Slaves could not hereafter be brought into the state, but
existing slavery was not abolished, and existing indentures--and some were
for ninety-nine years--should be carried out, although future indentures
should not run for a longer term than one year. Male children of slaves or
indentured servants should be free at the age of twenty-one, and females
at eighteen. Slaves from other states could be employed only at the Saline
Creek salt works, and there only until 1825.(277)

During the congressional debate on the acceptance of the Illinois
Constitution, objection to admitting the state was made on the ground that
the number of inhabitants was doubtful, and that slavery was not
distinctly prohibited, Tallmadge, of New York, who later wished to
restrict slavery in Missouri, being the chief objector. The state was
admitted, however, and on December 4, 1818, the representatives and
senators from Illinois took their seats in Congress.(278)

Between 1809 and 1818, Illinois passed from a non-representative
territorial government to a liberal state government. The energy of the
settlers had done much to hasten the change, and the change, in turn, did
much to hasten settlement.




IV. Transportation and Settlement, 1809 to 1818.


At the close of the War of 1812, an unparalleled emigration to the
frontiers of the United States began. Contemporary accounts speak of its
great volume. "Through New York and down the Alleghany River is now the
track of many emigrants from the east to the west. Two hundred and sixty
waggons have passed a certain house on this route in nine days, besides
many persons on horseback and on foot. The editor of the Gennessee Farmer
observes, that he himself met on the road to Hamilton a cavalcade of
upwards of twenty waggons, containing one company of one hundred and
sixteen persons, on their way to _Indiana_, and all from one town in the
district of Maine. So great is the emigration to _Illinois_ and _Missouri_
also, that it is apprehended that many must suffer for want of provisions
the ensuing winter."(279) "Nothing more strongly proves the superiority of
the western territory than the vast emigration to it from the eastern and
southern states; during the eighteen months previous to April, 1816,
fifteen thousand waggons passed over the bridge at Cayuga, containing
emigrants to the western country."(280) "Old America seems to be breaking
up, and moving westward.... The number of emigrants who passed this way
[St. Clairsville, Ohio], was greater last year than in any preceding; and
the present spring they are still more numerous than the last. Fourteen
waggons yesterday, and thirteen today, have gone through this town.
Myriads take their course down the Ohio. The waggons swarm with children.
I heard today of three together, which contain forty-two of these young
citizens."(281) From Hamilton, New York: "It is estimated, that there are
now in this village and its vicinity, three hundred families, besides
single travellers, amounting in all to fifteen hundred souls, waiting for
a rise of water to embark for 'the promised land.' "(282) "The numerous
companies of emigrants that flock to this country, might appear, to those
who have not witnessed them, almost incredible. But there is scarce a day,
except when the river is impeded with ice, but what there is a greater or
less number of boats to be seen floating down its gentle current, to some
place of destination. No less than five hundred families stopped at
Cincinnati at one time, and many of them having come a great distance, and
being of the poorer class of people, before they could provide for
themselves, were in a suffering condition; but to the honor of the
citizens of Cincinnati, they raised a donation and relieved their
distress."(283) Of the remote districts, Missouri and Michigan were
receiving crowds of immigrants.(284)

The changes in government and in the land question in Illinois were
typical of changes in other frontier regions, but although worthy of note
as helping to make a more attractive place for settlement, they are by no
means sufficient to account for the great migration to the westward. Why
that migration took place and how it was accomplished are interesting and
important questions.

Emigration from New England resulted largely from financial and industrial
disorganization caused by the close of the war, and a year of such
continued cold weather as to produce a famine. This movement was
interesting, dramatic, and large in volume, but its influence upon
Illinois was slight, because the tide was stayed to the eastward of that
state.(285) Migration from the South was also large, and it was from this
source that most of the immigrants to Illinois came. In 1816 there was a
severe drought in eastern North Carolina, and many planters cut their
immature corn for their cattle, while great numbers sold their property
and joined the emigrants.(286) Kentucky, still a favorite place for
settlement, was in the midst of a land boom which reached such proportions
as to cause a large volume of emigration to Illinois, Missouri, and the
southwest. The buyer of Kentucky land was often a neighbor who wished to
enlarge his farm and work on a larger scale, or some well-to-do immigrant
who preferred the location to a more remote region. Land sold on credit
and at fictitious prices, the seller in turn buying land for which he
frequently could make only the first payment. Retribution did not come,
however, until after 1820, and for some years it seemed as if Kentucky was
to become a source of population, for it was to Illinois and Missouri, and
to a lesser degree to Alabama, what New England was to Ohio.(287) Probably
chief among the reasons for migration from the South was the increase of
slavery, with the resulting changes in industrial and social conditions.
Early in the century the growing importance of the cotton crop began to
hasten a stratification of opinion which was determined by physiographic
areas. The western parts of Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina,
the northern part of Georgia, and the eastern parts of Kentucky and
Tennessee, respectively, being hilly and less fertile than the coastal
plain, became the center of the southern anti-slavery sentiment. On the
plain settled the wealthy planters, and later the poorer Germans and
Quakers settled in the uplands. Only when cotton-raising became very
profitable was slavery to intrude upon the latter location.(288)

During the war the production of cotton in the United States had been
almost constant in amount and less than in preceding years, but 1815 saw
an increase of over forty-two per cent and 1816 an increase of twenty-four
per cent,(289) while in the latter year South Carolina, after an interval
of thirteen years, resumed its slavery legislation by passing the first of
a series of acts which show that the slavery problem was becoming
increasingly difficult. Similar legislation took place in Tennessee, and
to a lesser degree in Kentucky.(290) Increased production of cotton was
accompanied by an increase in price, middling upland cotton selling at New
York at 15 cents per pound in 1814, at 21 cents in 1815, at 29-1/2 cents in
1816, at 26-1/2 cents in 1817, and at 34 cents in 1818, while South Carolina
sea-island cotton sold at Charleston in 1816 at 55 cents a pound.(291) An
increase in cotton production meant an increase of the plantation system
with its slaves, this meant an increased demand for large farms, and also
a strengthening of the antagonism between pro-slavery and anti-slavery
parties. Even in 1812, a man who wished to sell, lease, or rent his
manufacturing establishment in the northwestern part of Virginia,
Frederick county, lamented in his advertisement that "some good men of
strict moral or religious principles should object against forming settled
abodes in Virginia" or other slave states.(292) Census reports show that
the proportion of negroes to whites increased in the western counties of
North Carolina during the decade 1810 to 1820 over the proportion in 1800
to 1810. Conditions above described naturally led to the emigration of at
least four classes of people: those who were anti-slavery, those who did
not wish to change from small farming to the plantation system, the poor
whites who found themselves increasingly disgraced and who at the same
time found that their land was in demand, the slave-holder who wished a
large tract of virgin soil. It is very important to note that these forces
were merely beginning to operate in the time from 1814 to 1818, and that
they did not reach their maximum of influence until after 1830, yet as the
population of Illinois increased less than twenty-eight thousand from 1810
to 1818, it is altogether probable that a considerable proportion were
influenced by the causes suggested. It is also true that some pioneers
moved merely from habit, without any well-defined cause.

Although it is true that the first steamboat that passed down the Ohio and
Mississippi made its trip in the winter of 1811-12, and by 1816 an
enterprising captain had made a successful experiment of running a
steamboat with coal for fuel, also that the speed of steamboats in eastern
waters was a matter for enthusiastic comment, yet it is also true that
immigrants to Illinois did not usually arrive by steamer.(293) The
development of steamboat navigation in western waters was slow, the first
steamboat reaching St. Louis on August 2, 1817.(294) Peter Cartwright
wrote of his trip from the West to the General Conference in Baltimore, in
1816: "We had no steamboats, railroad cars, or comfortable stages in those
days. We had to travel from the extreme West on horseback. It generally
took us near a month to go; a month was spent at General Conference, and
nearly a month in returning to our fields of labor."(295)

Some instances of the manner and cost of emigration may be given. A man
with his wife and brother having arrived at Philadelphia from England, _en
route_ to Birkbeck's settlement(296) in Illinois, the party was directed
to Pittsburg, which they reached after a wearisome journey of over three
hundred miles across the mountains. At Pittsburg they bought a little boat
for six or seven dollars, and came down the Ohio to Shawneetown, whence
they proceeded on foot.(297) In the summer of 1818, a party of
eighty-eight came over the same route in much the same manner, using
flat-boats on the river.(298) In 1817, John Mason Peck, with his wife and
three children, went from Litchfield, Connecticut, to Shawneetown,
Illinois, in a one-horse wagon. The journey was begun on July 25 and
Shawneetown was reached on the sixth of November. "Nearly one month was
occupied in passing from Philadelphia through the State of Pennsylvania
over the Alleghany Mountains, till on the 10th of September he passed into
Ohio. Three weeks he journeyed in that State, and on the 23d of October
recrossed the Ohio River into the State of Kentucky ..., and on the 6th of
November again crossed the Ohio River, into the then Territory of
Illinois, at Shawneetown."(299) Here the family was delayed by floods
which rendered the roads impassable. Leaving the horse and wagon at
Shawneetown to be brought on by a friend, they proceeded to St. Louis in a
keel-boat, paying twenty-five dollars fare, and arrived at their
destination on the first of December.(300)

Shawneetown was a sort of center from which emigrants radiated to their
destinations. It owed much to its location, being on the main route from
the southern states to St. Louis and what was then called the Missouri,
and being also the port for the salt works on Saline Creek. It was the
seat of a land-office. The town thus had a business which was out of all
proportion to the number of its permanent inhabitants. In 1817 it
consisted of but about thirty log houses, a log bank, and a land-office.
When a certain traveler came to the place from the South, in 1818, he
found the number of wagons, horses, and passengers waiting to cross the
Ohio, on the ferry, so great that he had to wait "a great part of the
morning" for his turn.(301)

During the latter part of the territorial period freight charges from
Philadelphia to Pittsburg, by land, were from seven to ten dollars per
hundredweight;(302) from Pittsburg to Shawneetown, one dollar; from
Louisville to Shawneetown, thirty-seven cents; and from New Orleans to
Shawneetown, four dollars and a half.(303) The use of arks was common.
These were flat-bottomed boats of a tonnage of from twenty-five to thirty
tons, covered, square at the ends, of a uniform size of fifty feet in
length and fourteen in breadth, usually sold for seventy-five dollars, and
would carry three or four families. A common practice was to re-sell them
at a somewhat reduced price to someone going further down the river. Two
dollars was the charge for piloting an ark over the falls of the
Ohio.(304)

There is much truth in the remarks made by a German traveler in 1818-19.
He said: "The State of Illinois is from one thousand to twelve hundred
miles distant from the sea ports. The journey thither is often as costly
and tedious, for a man with a family, as the sea passage. Any father of a
family, unless he is well-to-do, can certainly count on being impoverished
upon his arrival in Illinois. At Williamsport, on the Susquehanna, I found
a Swiss, who, with his wife and ten children, had spent one thousand
French crown-dollars for their journey. In the village of Williamsport, an
old German schoolmaster, who seems to have been formerly a merchant in
Nassau, told me that the passage of himself and family had cost thirteen
hundred dollars. For an adult the fare is seventy-five dollars--one dollar
is equal to one thaler, ten groschen, Prussian--for children under twelve
years, half so much, for children of two years, one-fourth so much, and
only babes in arms go free."(305)

It can now be understood why people emigrated to the West, and also why
many went overland. A family too poor to go by water could go in a buggy
or wagon, and if poorer still they might walk, as many actually did. The
immigration to Illinois, which was but a small fraction of the great
westward movement, was still largely southern in origin, Ohio, Michigan,
Indiana, and even New York still staying, in large measure, the tide from
New England. In New England it was the "Ohio fever" and not the Illinois
fever which carried away the people, and the designation is geographically
correct. The men prominent in Illinois politics at the close of the
territorial period, and at the beginning of the state period, were natives
of southern states, a fact hardly conceivable if New England had been
largely represented in Illinois. Then, too, the natural routes from the
South led to, or near to, Illinois, the great road from the South crossing
the Ohio River at Shawneetown, and the Kentucky and Cumberland rivers
being natural water routes. Another fact to be noticed is that much of the
emigration was of relatives and friends to join those who had gone before,
and as Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, Tennessee, the Carolinas, and even
Georgia, had furnished a large number of early settlers to Illinois, this
was a powerful inducement to continued emigration from the same sources.
Similarly Ohio and Michigan had early received settlers from the East.

Immigration to Illinois was not large in comparison to that to neighboring
states or territories. Indians still held the greater part of Illinois,
and the inconveniences incident to frontier life were more pronounced as
the distance from the East increased. Pro-slavery men, and anti-slavery
men as well, were still in doubt as to the ultimate fate of slavery in
Illinois. This had a deterrent effect upon immigration.




IV. Life of the Settlers.


According to the marshal's return the manufactures in Illinois, in 1810,
were as follows:

Spinning-wheels, $630
Looms, 460; cloth produced, 90,039 yards, $54,028
Tanneries, 9; leather dressed, $7,750
Distilleries, 10,200 gallons, $7,500
Flour, 6,440 barrels, $32,200
Maple sugar, 15,600 lbs., $1,980(306)--$104,088

This list incidentally indicates the average price of several manufactured
articles. For the first six months of 1814, the internal revenue assessed
in Illinois was:

Licenses for stills and boilers, $490.14
Carriages, $62.00
Licenses to retailers, $835.00
Stamps, $5.60--$1392.74

Of this amount ($1392.74), $1047.37 had been paid by October 10,
1814.(307) For the period from April 18, 1815, to February 22, 1816, the
following were the internal duties:

Hats, caps, and bonnets, $ 66.50-1/2
Saddles and bridles, $65.25
Boots and bootees, $7.26
Leather, $184.35-1/2--$323.37

This was the smallest sum listed in any part of the United States, except
Michigan Territory.(308) For 1818:

Licenses for stills, $214.91
Licenses  at 20c. per gal., $549.23
Duty on spirits at 25c. per gal., $701.26
On eighteen carriages, $36.75
Licenses to retailers, $1248.80
On stamped paper and bank-notes, $4.50
Manufactured goods, $220.14--$2975.59

Of this amount, $1966.41 was paid, only Indiana and Missouri territories
paying a smaller proportion of their assessment.(309) The small proportion
paid in these three territories may have been due to the poverty of their
inhabitants.

Most of the manufactured articles were consumed within the territory. Both
cotton and flax were raised and made into cloth; maple sugar was sometimes
sold and exported, but a large proportion of the supply was used as a
substitute for sugar, another substitute much used being wild honey. A
certain Smith's Prairie was celebrated for the numerous plum and crabapple
orchards that grew around its borders. The large red and yellow plums grew
there in such abundance that people would come from long distances and
haul them away by the wagon-loads, and would preserve them with honey or
maple sugar, which was the only sweetening they had in pioneer times.(310)

Previous to the War of 1812, little commerce was carried on, although a
few trips had been made to New Orleans with keel-boats or pirogues, and
some goods were occasionally brought over the Alleghany Mountains by means
of wagons. The round trip to New Orleans and back then required six
months; the trip down was easy and required a comparatively short time,
but the return trip was slow. It was entirely a barter trade, money being
almost unknown. Furs, wild honey, and other commodities of Illinois, as
well as lead from the Missouri mines, were carried down and exchanged for
groceries, cloth, and other articles of a large value and small bulk. As a
natural consequence of having to be transported up stream, goods of that
nature were extremely dear, the common price of tea being sixteen dollars
a pound, of coffee fifty cents, and of calico fifty cents per yard.(311)
To go up the Mississippi from St. Louis to Prairie du Chien, in 1815,
required from twelve days to a month, while the return trip was made in
from six to ten days.(312)

In the great American Bottom of the Mississippi, extending from the mouth
of the Kaskaskia almost to the mouth of the Illinois, cattle raising was a
leading industry, the cattle being driven to the Philadelphia or Baltimore
markets.(313) Towards the close of the period land could easily be secured
by government entry. The fertility of the land was such as must have been
new to those immigrants who came from the poorer parts of the older
states. Land was subject to a tax of a little more that two cents per
acre, the tax being about equally divided between the territory and the
county.(314) Public lands were not to be taxed by the state, after 1818,
until five years from the date of their sale. Governor Edwards, who was a
large landowner, offered to pay three dollars per acre for plowing.(315)
Prairies were not yet settled to any considerable extent, but it is worthy
of note that a traveler of 1818-19 suggested what was eventually to be the
solution of the question of prairie settlement. He wrote: "It will
probably be some time before these vast prairies can be settled, owing to
the inconvenience attending the want of timber. I know of no way, unless
the plan is adopted of ditching and hedging, and the building of brick
houses, and substituting the stone coal for fuel. It seems as if the
bountiful hand of nature, where it has withheld one gift has always
furnished another; for instance, where there is a scarcity of wood, there
are coal mines."(316) The remedy suggested was the one adopted, except
that brick houses did not become common.

Really good roads were entirely lacking. Most of the settlements were
connected by roads that were practicable at most seasons for packers and
travelers on horseback, but in times of flood the suspension of travel by
land was practically complete. A post-road had been established between
Vincennes and Cahokia in 1805, and in 1810 a route was established from
Vincennes, by way of Kaskaskia, Prairie du Rocher, and Cahokia, to St.
Louis. At this time and place, however, a post-route does not necessarily
imply anything more than a bridle-path. Mail was received at irregular
intervals, although the trips were regularly made in good weather. The
post-office nearest Chicago was Fort Wayne, Indiana, whence a soldier on
foot carried the mail once a month.(317) A report for the first six months
of 1814 shows, in Illinois, nine post-offices, three hundred and
eighty-eight miles of post-roads, about $143 received for postage, and
$1002 paid for transportation of mail--a balance of some $859 against the
United States.(318) At this time even Cleveland, Chillicothe, and Marietta
received mail but twice per week.(319)

Books were very scarce,(320) and no newspapers had been published in
Illinois before its separate territorial organization. Between 1809 and
1818 there were founded the _Illinois Herald_ and the _Western
Intelligencer_, at Kaskaskia, the latter becoming the _Illinois
Intelligencer_ on May 27, 1818; and the _Shawnee Chief_, at
Shawneetown.(321) In 1816 the citizens of Shawneetown gave notice through
the papers of Kaskaskia, Frankfort, Kentucky, and Nashville, Tennessee,
that they would apply to the Legislature of Illinois for the establishment
of a bank.(322) This may indicate that the papers of the places named had
a considerable circulation in Illinois.

The character of the immigrants left much to be desired. A good observer
wrote: "After residing awhile in White County, Tennessee, I migrated in
May, 1817, to the southern part of the then Territory of Illinois, and
settled in Madison County, twenty-five miles east of St. Louis, which town
then contained about five thousand inhabitants. The surrounding country,
however, was quite sparsely settled, and destitute of any energy or
enterprise among the people; their labors and attention being chiefly
confined to the hunting of game, which then abounded, and tilling a small
patch of corn for bread, relying on game for the remaining supplies of the
table. The inhabitants were of the most generous and hospitable character,
and were principally from the southern states; harmony and the utmost good
feeling prevailed throughout the country."(323) Naturally this description
was not of universal application, but the source of the population and the
reasons for removing from the old homes make it probable that it was
widely appropriate.

If it was difficult for an emigrant to reach Illinois, and if, after
reaching it, he was inconvenienced by the poor facilities for commerce,
the bad roads, the infrequency of mails, the scarcity of schools and
churches, he at least found it easy to obtain a living, and to some of the
immigrants of the territorial period it was worth something not to starve,
even though living was reduced to its lowest terms. The poorest immigrant
had access to land on the borders of settlement, because the laws against
squatting were not enforced. This same class could procure game in
abundance, while maple sugar, wild honey, persimmons, crabapples, nuts,
pawpaws, wild grapes, wild plums, fish, mushrooms, "greens," berries of
several kinds, and other palatable natural products known to the Illinois
frontiersman, were to be had in most, if not all, of the localities then
settled. Hogs fattened on the mast. Log houses could be built without
nails. The problem of clothing was probably more difficult at first than
that of food, but although clothing could not be picked up in the woods,
the materials for making it could be grown in the fields. Spinning, and
the processes necessarily preceding and following it, involved a certain
amount of labor. Taxes were not high, nor were tax laws rigidly enforced.
It is thus easy to understand the reasoning that may have led a large
proportion of the immigrants during this period to leave their old homes.





CHAPTER V. THE FIRST YEARS OF STATEHOOD, 1818 TO 1830.




The Indian and Land Questions.


One of the most important cessions of land in Illinois ever made by the
Indians was that made by the Kickapoo in 1819, of the vast region lying
north of the parallel of 39--a little north of the mouth of the Illinois
River, and southeast of the Illinois River.(324) Settlement had been
crowding hard upon this region and many squatters anxiously awaited the
survey and sale of the land, especially of that in the famous Sangamon
country. In northern Illinois settlement was still retarded by the
presence of Indians. In 1825, the Menominee, Kaskaskia, Sauk and Fox,
Potawatomi, and Chippewa tribes claimed over 5,314,000 acres of land in
Illinois,(325) and there was a licensed Indian trader at Sangamo, one at
the saline near the present Danville, and two on Fever River.(326) Two
years later there were three such traders at Fever River, and two at
Chicago,(327) and in 1827-28 there was one at Fever River with a capital
of about $2000.(328) In February, 1829, there were Indian agents at
Chicago, Fort Armstrong, Kaskaskia, and Peoria, as well as others near the
borders of Illinois.(329) At this time, the Ottawa, Chippewa, Potawatomi,
Kaskaskia, and Winnebago claimed land in the state, although only about
6000 of the more than 25,000 members of these tribes resided in the state.
The eight members of the Kaskaskia tribe held a small reservation near the
Kaskaskia River. Of the twenty-two hundred members of the Kickapoo tribe,
which had relinquished all claim to land east of the Mississippi, about
two hundred still lived on the Mackinaw River, but they were expected to
move in a few weeks.(330) By a treaty of July 29, 1829, the Chippewa,
Ottawa, and Potawatomi ceded their claims in northern Illinois.(331) There
still remained the Winnebago tribe, and not until 1833 was Illinois to be
free from Indian claims.(332)

A war with the Winnebago tribe was imminent in 1827. Settlers in the
northern part of the state either fled to the southward or collected at
such points as Galena or Prairie du Chien. "This was a period of great
suffering at Galena. The weather was inclement and two or three thousand
persons driven suddenly in, with scant provisions, without ammunition or
weapons encamped in the open air, or cloth tents which were but little
better, were placed in a very disagreeable and critical position."(333)
The prompt action of Governor Lewis Cass, of Michigan, averted what would
in all probability have been a bloody war, if prompt action had not been
taken.(334)

To September 30, 1819, the record of land sales in Illinois was as
follows:

                  Acres Unsold.   Acres Sold.         Price.
Shawneetown           4,561,920       562,296     $1,153,897
Kaskaskia             2,188,800       407,027      1,781,773
Edwardsville          2,625,960       394,730   795,531(335)

The balances unpaid by purchasers of public lands steadily increased from
1813 to 1819 until on September 30, 1819, there was due from purchasers of
land in the area of the old Northwest Territory nearly ten million
dollars.(336) An increase would have resulted merely from an increased
sale of public lands under the credit system, but it is also true that the
difficulty of collecting the unpaid balances became so great that the
government at last abolished the credit system, by the act of April 24,
1820. The act provided that after July 1, 1820, no credit whatever should
be given to the purchasers of public lands; that land might be sold in
either sections, half-sections, quarter-sections, or eighth-sections; that
the minimum price should be reduced from two dollars to one dollar and
twenty-five cents per acre; and that reverted lands should be offered at
auction before being offered at private sale.(337) At least two of the
provisions of this act had long been desired by Illinois in common with
other frontier regions: the reduction of the minimum price and the sale in
smaller tracts. Under the new law a man with one hundred dollars could buy
eighty acres of land, while previously the same man would have had to pay
eighty of his one hundred dollars as the first payment on one hundred and
sixty acres, the smallest tract then sold. The great danger had been that
the second, third, and fourth payments could not be made. In Illinois,
before July 1, 1820, there had been sold 1,593,247.53 acres of the public
land at an average price of about $2.02 per acre. Some of this reverted
from non-payment.(338)

                     [Illustration: Indian Cessions.]

During the third quarter of 1820, all sales in Illinois were at the
minimum price and a considerable proportion were of the minimum area. At
the same time, some of the land in Ohio, and a very few tracts in Indiana,
sold at a higher price, one tract in Ohio, but only one, selling for more
than seven dollars per acre.(339) To October 1, 1821, the land-offices in
Illinois reported:

                  Acres Sold.   Surveyed, but
                                Unsold.
Shawneetown           592,464       2,401,936
Kaskaskia             419,898       1,615,942
Palestine                 714       2,880,720
Edwardsville          437,993       2,696,727
Vandalia                7,923       2,545,677

All land in the districts of Shawneetown and Kaskaskia had been surveyed,
but the remaining districts were still indefinite on the north.(340) At
this time, Illinois money passed in the state at par, and the Bank of
Illinois was among those whose notes were received in payment for public
lands.(341)

As more and more land was opened to settlement, a new difficulty arose and
became increasingly troublesome. All public land was to be entered at the
same minimum price, and as a natural result, the poorest land was not
taken up and settlement became widely dispersed on the best tracts of
land. In December, 1824, the Illinois legislature sent a memorial to
Congress portraying the evils of sparse settlement, and asking that land
that had been offered for sale for five years or more might be sold at
fifty cents per acre. Better roads, better markets, and better
institutions were expected to result from such sales.(342) Two years
later, another memorial was sent. This asked that land be offered for sale
at prices graduated according to the quality of the land, suggested that
the poorest land might well be donated to settlers, and declared that
settlement was retarded by the high minimum price of land.(343) Governor
Ninian Edwards pointed out that in 1790, Hamilton had recommended that
public lands be sold at twenty cents per acre, which "was the price at
which Kentucky, long afterward, sold her lands."(344) In 1828, the
Committee on Public Lands recommended that public lands unsold at public
sale be first offered at one dollar per acre, and if still unsold, that
the price be reduced twenty-five cents per acre each two years until sold
or reduced to twenty-five cents per acre; that eighty-acre homestead
claims be given to such persons as would cultivate and occupy them for
five years; and that lands unsold at twenty-five cents per acre be ceded
to the states in which they lay, upon payment of the cost of survey and
twenty-five cents per acre. At this time, there was in Illinois 1,403,482
acres surveyed and sold; 19,684,186 acres surveyed and unsold, of the
39,000,000 acres estimated to be in the State.(345) Still another memorial
from the legislature was sent to Congress in 1829. It pointed out, in
strong terms, the inconvenience arising from the high price at which
public land was offered for sale. Unsold public land could neither be
taxed nor legally settled. It was stated that of the forty millions of
acres in Illinois, little over one and one-half millions had been sold at
public sales. A granting of the right of preemption, which implies the
presence in the state of squatters, is suggested.(346)

The implication of the presence of squatters was well founded. When Peter
Cartwright, in 1823, visited a settlement in the Sangamon country, he
found it a community of squatters, on land which had been surveyed, but
was not yet offered for sale. Money was hoarded up to enter land when
Congress should order sales. Cartwright paid a squatter two hundred
dollars for his improvement and his claim, bought some stock, and rented
out the place, to which he was to remove from Kentucky the following
year.(347) This squatting on surveyed land, and even on unsurveyed land,
was a regular procedure. It added much to the difficulty of governing the
state--hence the memorials to Congress, and hence the great significance to
Illinois of an act of May 29, 1830, which gave to all settlers who had
cultivated land in 1829 the right to preempt not more than one hundred and
sixty acres.(348) This law was of general application. Even now the
Illinois legislature sent another petition concerning preemption to
Congress, because one of the provisions of the act of May, 1830, was that
the plat of survey should have been filed in the land-office, and this
provision debarred about one thousand Illinois squatters from the benefit
of the act. A modification in their favor was desired.(349)

The land claims of the ancient settlers, as they are called in government
documents, continued to occupy the attention of Congress, in a desultory
way, throughout the period, but their influence upon settlement had
practically ceased with the opening of the public land-offices.(350)

Among the obstacles to settlement was the holding of land by
non-residents. Such lands were subject to a triple tax in case of
delinquency, and when sold for taxes and costs frequently did not bring
enough for that purpose, in which event they reverted to the state and the
state paid the costs. Redemption, although possible, was rare.(351) In
1823, about nine thousand quarter-sections of land in the Military Tract,
lying between the Illinois and the Mississippi, were advertised for sale,
because of the non-payment of taxes by non-resident landholders.(352) At
this time, two of the prominent men of the state who wished to dispose of
a large amount of state paper, advertised that they would pay such
delinquent taxes at twenty-five per cent discount.(353) In 1826,
thirty-eight pages of the _Illinois Intelligencer_ were filled with a
description, in double column, of lands owned by non-residents, the lands
being for sale for taxes. In 1829, a similar list filled thirty-two
pages.(354) Much discontent was manifested in the state on account of the
laws concerning the public lands, and Governor Edwards' message to the
legislature, in 1830, elaborated a theory that all public lands belonged
of right to the states in which they lay.(355)

Illinois early understood that an Illinois-Michigan canal would help to
people her northern lands. This led to many efforts to secure such a
waterway. In 1819 a favorable topographical report concerning the route
for the proposed canal was made,(356) and in 1822 the state was authorized
to construct the canal, but no tangible aid was given.(357) In 1825 the
legislature petitioned Congress for a grant of the townships through which
the canal would pass. A committee report of March, 1826, which was almost
identical with another presented in February, 1825, pointed out that the
cost of transporting a ton of merchandise from Philadelphia, New York, or
Baltimore was about ninety dollars, and required from twenty to twenty-two
days. The probable cost by the proposed canal, the Lakes, and the Erie
Canal, from St. Louis to New York was from sixty-three to sixty-five
dollars per ton, and the time from twelve to fifteen days. The canal would
bind Illinois and Missouri to the North.(358) Congress received a memorial
from the legislature on the same subject in January, 1827, requesting the
grant of "two entire townships, along the whole course of the canal," and
declaring that markets at New Orleans fluctuated because of speculators,
and that grain and goods sent from the West to the Atlantic ports by way
of New Orleans was exposed to the dangers of both the southern climate and
the sea.(359) A few weeks later the desired grant was made, the state
being given one-half of five sections in width on each side of the canal,
the United States reserving the alternate sections.(360) The canal
commissioners promptly platted the original town of Chicago and sold lots
at from twenty to eighty dollars each, but no immediate settlement
followed the land sale, and Chicago remained for some years longer an
Indian town. The prospect of having a canal doubtless had some influence
upon settlement, but at the close of 1830 the actual construction of the
canal was still a thing of the future. By the close of 1828, Congress had
donated to Illinois, for various purposes, chiefly for schools and
internal improvements, 1,346,000 acres.(361)

The salt springs had been vested in the state of Illinois with the
provision that no part of the reservations should be sold. Large
reservations were made at the Saline River salt works and at the Vermilion
saline near Danville, the object being to reserve a supply of wood for the
making of salt. Upon the discovery of coal near the springs the state was
permitted to sell not more than thirty thousand acres of the Saline River
reservation.(362)

Illinois as a landowner sometimes mingled church and state. The original
proprietors of Alton having donated one hundred lots, one-half for the
support of the gospel, and one-half for the support of a public school,
the state vested the donated lots in the trustees of the town, upon its
incorporation in 1821. A similar donation made by the proprietors of Mt.
Carmel was confirmed in the same manner.(363) The Cumberland Presbyterians
having built a church on a school section, the state provided that for
ninety-nine years the building should be used as a schoolhouse also, the
school being under the joint direction of the trustees of the township and
the church society.(364)

The receipts for public lands in 1828 and 1829, respectively, were:

                         1828              1829.
Kaskaskia          $ 4,639.82        $ 10,503.99
Shawneetown          7,250.28          16,058.79
Edwardsville        23,536.49          38,001.35
Vandalia             4,489.71          24,258.13
Palestine           25,671.62          59,026.81
Springfield         56,507.63         108,175.47
                  $122,095.55   $256,024.54(365)

The receipts for 1828 were for 96,092.91 acres; of 1829, for 196,324.92
acres.(366) From October 1, 1829, to September 30, 1830, sales, receipts,
and prices were:

                      Acres.                 Average Price
                                             per Acre.
Illinois          291,401.28   $364,369.87         $1.2504
Indiana           413,253.63    521,715.13          1.2624
Alabama           233,369.27    291,715.20            1.25
Missouri          182,929.63    228,748.12          1.2505
Michigan          106,201.28    132,751.68            1.25
Ohio              160,182.14    201,923.50          1.2606
Mississippi       103,795.61    130,475.87      1.257(367)

The northward movement of population in Illinois is well indicated by the
figures for 1828 and 1829. The Indian barrier was being pushed back, and
the Sangamon country, with its land-office at Springfield, was a favorite
place for settlement. The rapid increase in the amount of land sold is
also striking. As the third decade of the century closed Indiana was the
favorite place for frontier settlement. The sales of public lands in Ohio
were diminishing. A prophetic glance would have seen that as the
ever-shifting frontier passed westward Illinois was to overtake and then
to far surpass Indiana in number of settlers.

The period from 1818 to 1830 saw the Indian title to a great fertile tract
of land in Illinois extinguished, the price of all public lands lowered
and the land offered for sale in smaller tracts, the right of preemption
granted to squatters who had settled before 1830, considerable grants of
land made to the state for internal improvements, the great salt spring
reservations reduced. These changes did much to make Illinois a more
attractive place for settlement. When a committee of workingmen in
Wheeling, Virginia, made a report, in October, 1830, on a method of
escaping from the ills of workingmen, they presented an elaborate plan for
buying land and forming a colony in Illinois.(368) The experience of the
squatter who settled with four or five sows for breeders and in four years
or less drove forty-two fat hogs to market and sold them for $135, with
which he bought eighty acres of land and paid his debts, was not a rare
one.(369)

As 1830 closed there were still problems connected with the land to solve.
The Indian question persisted, non-resident landholders were troublesome,
and the state would still seek grants for internal improvements, but none
of these was to be long a serious impediment to settlement.




The Government and Its Representatives, 1818 to 1830.


In some respects the character of the state government of Illinois shows
the character of the settlers. The nativity of the governors and the
congressmen of the state indicates that the South was the origin of a
majority of the population. Before the end of 1830 there had been no
northern-born representative of the state in the national House of
Representatives; the first northern-born senator was chosen in the last
month of 1825, and the first northern governor in 1830.(370) Pierre
Menard, a French Canadian, the first lieutenant-governor, came to Illinois
in 1790, and can not fairly be cited as a type of the French descendants
of the first white settlers of Illinois.(371) As a matter of fact, the
French element was not a political factor of importance. Nor is it true
that all southerners were pro-slavery, for the most noted anti-slavery
governor of Illinois, and her governor during the Civil War, were from the
South, while her first northern senator was pro-slavery. The great influx
of immigrants from New England and the rest of the North did not come
until after 1830. It was retarded, after the opening of the Erie Canal
(1825), by the Winnebago and Black Hawk wars, and did not reach its height
until the latter war had closed and the Indian claims to land in northern
Illinois had been extinguished. Immigration from the northern states
increased proportionally, however, after 1820.

Illinois men in Congress give a number of indications of the feeling of
the people on questions having a more or less intimate relation to
settlement. Constant and insistent demands for more land-offices, more
post-roads, more pensions, donations of land for poor settlers, grants of
land for internal improvements, the right of preemption for squatters, and
the reduction of the price of public lands show that the frontier was in
favor of a liberal governmental expenditure.(372) Congressmen from
Illinois, without exception, favored the tariff bills of 1824 and
1828.(373) In 1828, the only senator from Illinois who voted on the
question, voted for the bill abolishing imprisonment for debt on processes
issuing from a United States court.(374) Since Illinois early abolished
such imprisonment, it is interesting to note that three hundred and
thirty-eight persons were committed to the Essex county jail in New
Jersey, for debt, in the year ending April 1, 1823, of whom one hundred
and forty-one were in close confinement. The aggregate of debt was
fifty-five thousand dollars.(375)

Within the state one of the phenomena which has characterized frontier
regions appeared about the year 1821. A desperate gang of immigrants had
robbed and plundered until, after a most notable robbery, "a public
meeting was held, and among other things, a company was formed, consisting
of ten law-abiding men of well-known courage, who bound themselves
together, under the name of the Regulators of the Valley, to rid the
country of horse thieves and robbers.... A regular constitution was drawn
up and subscribed to." After the leader of the desperadoes had been killed
the remainder fled.(376) A frontier condition is indicated also by the
fact that when Sangamon county was formed, on January 30, 1821, a special
law provided that housekeepers in the county should perform the duties and
receive the privileges of freeholders. The same provision was made for
Morgan county two years later. As land sales in the Sangamon country, in
which these counties lay, did not begin until November, 1823, these laws
probably resulted from the formation of counties whose entire population
consisted of squatters.(377) The persistence of wolf bounties bears
testimony to continued wild surroundings.(378) In 1829 alien Irish, and
presumably all other aliens, could vote at all elections. An election law
of this year provided that voting should be by the voter's approaching the
bar, in the election room, and naming in an audible voice the persons for
whom he voted, or, if the voter preferred, by delivering to the judges a
ballot which should be read aloud by them, the alternative being for the
benefit of illiterate voters. Voting had previously been by ballot.(379)

Although frontier conditions obtained, there were evidences of their
gradual amelioration. A law of 1823 provided that counterfeiting, which,
in the territorial period, had been punishable by death, should be
punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, whipping with
not fewer than one hundred nor more than two hundred lashes, imprisonment
for not more than twelve months, and being rendered forever infamous.(380)
The state established a system of common schools to be supported, in part,
by the state, in 1825; but in 1829 the sections of the act which provided
that two per cent of all money received into the state treasury, and
five-sixths of the interest of the school fund, should be for the support
of public schools, were repealed,(381) taxation for such a purpose not
being then in accord with public sentiment. A mechanic's lien law, passed
in 1825, provided that in case of a contract between a landowner and a
mechanic, the mechanic should have a lien upon the product of his labor
for three months, after which the lien lapsed unless suit had been
commenced. Three years later an unsuccessful attempt to secure such a law
was made in New York.(382)

Two accounts on the records of the state are of sufficient interest to
give at length. The first gives the amount of money received into the
treasury during the two years ending December 27, 1822:


    "The amount paid into the treasury by the different sheriffs
    within the two years ending as aforesaid, is $ 7,121.09

    The amount of a judgment obtained against the former sheriff of
    Randolph [County] for non-resident tax of 1818, is 147.14

    The amount from non-residents for the two preceding years,
    including back taxes, redemptions, interest, &c., is 38,437.75

    The amount from non-residents' bank stock, is 97.77

    The amount from the Saline on the Ohio, is 10,563.09

    The amount from the Saline on Muddy river, is 200.00

    The amount from the sale of Lots in the town of Vandalia, is
    5659.86

    Total amount of money paid at the Treasury between the 1st of
    January, 1821, and the 27th of December, 1822, $62,226.70"


The balance in the treasury was $33,661.11, but Governor Edwards, in his
message of December 2, 1828, reported a state indebtedness of $44,140.03
and taxes in Illinois as precisely eight times as high as those in
Kentucky which were payable in the same kind of currency.(383) The rage
for internal improvements was partly responsible, and for this in turn the
wide dispersion of the settlements in Illinois, caused by the fact that
all public lands were offered at the same minimum price and that the
prairies were in large measure shunned, furnishes a partial explanation.

The second account of the state, above referred to, shows that in 1822 it
cost $151.82 to make a trip from Vandalia to Shawneetown and return, and
one from Vandalia to Kaskaskia and return, to convey to the capital some
money paid by the United States on the three per cent fund due the state.
The former trip occupied fourteen days, the latter eight days.(384)

Governor Cass' protection of Galena during the Winnebago War of 1827 may
have been influenced by its uncertain governmental status. In 1828 miners
in what is now southwestern Wisconsin voted for members of Congress from
Illinois, and in 1829 Galena was enumerated among the thriving towns of
Huron or Ouisconsin Territory. November 29, 1828, one hundred and
eighty-seven inhabitants of Galena and vicinity sent a memorial to
Congress asking that a separate territory be formed, the territory to be
bounded on the south by a line drawn due west from the southern point of
Lake Michigan to the Mississippi, and by the northern boundary of
Missouri. The memorial began: "The undersigned, inhabitants of that
portion of the 'Territory Northwest of the Ohio,' lying north of a due
east and west line drawn through the southernmost end of Lake Michigan,
and west of that lake to the British possessions, comprehending the mining
district, more generally known as the Fever River Lead Mines." The
petitioners referred to the violation of the Ordinance of 1787, and also
stated that they were subject to two separate governments, each some
hundreds of miles from them, and each unacquainted with their needs. The
petition was read and tabled.(385) It is true that the situation of Galena
was peculiarly difficult. No mail could be carried along the rude trail
from Peoria to Galena during the wet season, and when the Illinois
legislature, seeking to give relief, passed a bill for laying out a road
between the "Illinois settlements and Galena," it was vetoed by the
governor and council because the road would pass through lands of the
United States and of the Indians. When the river was frozen provisions
were very high, and mail was sent forward from Fort Edwards once a month.
These conditions were more aggravating as the number of inhabitants
increased, and in 1827, notwithstanding the trouble with the Winnebago
Indians, there were about four thousand men at Galena, and they mined
about fifteen times as much lead as had been mined in 1823. In January,
1828, a congressional committee reported favorably on a proposition to
open a road to Galena.(386) In a letter written one year later by the
delegate from Michigan Territory, to the committee on territories, the
suggestion is made that a new territory, to be called Huron, should be
formed, because the region at Galena was said to have received hundreds of
settlers during the preceding summer and to have at the time of writing
ten thousand or more, and government in the lead region could not be
properly carried on from Detroit, which was eight hundred or one thousand
miles distant, by the routes commonly traveled. The legislature of
Michigan was said to be compelled to meet in the summer in order to enable
delegates to attend and that was the busy time at the mines.(387) A
congressional act of February, 1829, provided for the laying out of a
village at Galena. The plat was not to exceed one section of land, no lot
was to be larger than one-fourth of an acre, unimproved lots were to be
sold at not less than five dollars, improved lots were to be graded,
without reference to their improvements, into three grades, to sell at the
rate of twenty-five, fifteen, and ten dollars, respectively, per acre, the
occupants having the right of preemption.(388) Another mode of relief,
which the inhabitants were working out for themselves, is described in a
Galena paper of September 14, 1829: "Mr. Soulard's wagon and mule team
returned, a few days since, from Chicago, near the southernmost bend of
Lake Michigan; to which place it had been taken across the country, with a
load of lead. This is the first wagon that has ever passed from the
Mississippi River to Chicago. The route taken from the mines was, to
Ogee's ferry, on Rock River, eighty miles; thence an east course sixty
miles, to the Missionary establishment on the Fox River of the Illinois;
and thence a north-easterly course sixty miles to Chicago, as travelled,
two hundred miles. The wagon was loaded with one ton and a half of lead.
The trip out was performed in eleven, and the return trip in eight days.
The lead was taken, by water, from Chicago to Detroit. Should a road be
surveyed and marked, on the best ground, and the shortest distance, a trip
could be performed in much less time. And if salt could be obtained at
Chicago, from the New York Salt Works, it would be a profitable and
advantageous trade."(389)

As the life history of an individual recapitulates the history of the
development of a species, so does the history of Galena, in respect to the
difficulties of its early settlers, recapitulate the history of the
several parts of the United States in their early days. As Illinois had
sent petitions for relief to the governments of the Northwest Territory,
of Indiana Territory, and of the United States, so did Galena send similar
petitions to the governments of Illinois, of Michigan Territory, and of
the United States. In each case the prayers of the petitioners were but
partially granted. In each case the difficulties from Indians, lack of
facilities for commerce, distance from the seat of government, inability
to secure lands, were gradually mitigated until the steady onward sweep of
settlement engulfed the outlying region and it ceased to be the frontier,
and turned its energies to other questions--different, although probably as
difficult. Galena, even at the close of 1830, was a frontier region on the
outskirts of Illinois settlement.




Transportation.


Transportation was long a difficult problem, although it became gradually
less so. Travel by either water or land was slow and difficult. When a
party of about one hundred men, conducted by Colonel R. M. Johnson, went,
in six or eight boats, from St. Louis to the site of the present Galena,
in 1819, to make an arrangement with the Indians which would permit the
whites to mine lead, the upward voyage occupied some twenty days.(390)
Doubtless the journey of Edward Coles from Albemarle county, Virginia, to
Illinois, in 1819, was typical of that of the better class of immigrants.
At the Virginia homestead, slaves, horses and wagons were prepared for the
long journey. A trusty slave was put in charge of the caravan of emigrant
wagons and started out on the long journey over the Alleghanies to
Brownsville, Pennsylvania. Mr. Coles started a few days later, overtook
the party one day's journey from Brownsville, and upon arriving at that
place bought two flat-bottomed boats, upon which negroes, horses and
wagons, with their owner, were embarked. The drunken pilot was discharged
at Pittsburg, and Coles acted as captain and pilot on the voyage of some
six hundred miles down the Ohio to a point below Louisville, whence, the
boats being sold, the journey was continued by land to Edwardsville,
Illinois.(391)

April 5, 1823, a party of forty-three started from Cincinnati in a
keel-boat, arriving at Galena, June 1, 1823. Twenty-two days were required
to stem the flooded Mississippi from the mouth of the Ohio to St. Louis,
and twenty of these were rainy days.(392) In 1822 the English settlement
in Edwards county sent several flat-boats loaded with corn, flour, beef,
pork, sausage, etc., to New Orleans.(393) Improvement of the Wabash was
entrusted to an incorporated company in 1825, and several years earlier a
canal across the peninsula at the junction of the Ohio and the Mississippi
was contemplated.(394)

Many immigrants came overland. The following is typical: "In the year 1819
a party of six men, and families of three of them, started from Casey
County, Kentucky, for Illinois.... The first three were young unmarried
men, the last three had their wives and children with them. They came in
an old-fashioned Tennessee wagon, that resembled a flat-boat on wheels.
The younger readers of this sketch can form but a faint idea of the
curious and awkward appearance of one of these old fashioned wagons,
covered over with white sheeting, the front and rear bows set at an angle
of forty-five degrees to correspond with the ends of the body, and then
the enormous quantity of freight that could be stowed away in the hole
would astonish even a modern omnibus driver! Women, children, beds,
buckets, tubs, old fashioned chairs, including all the household furniture
usually used by our log-cabin ancestors; a chicken coop, with 'two or
three hens and a jolly rooster for a start,' tied on behind, while, under
the wagon, trotted a full-blood, long-eared hound, fastened by a short
rope to the hind axle. Without much effort on your part, you can, in
imagination, see this party on the road, one of the men in the saddle on
the near horse, driving; the other two, perhaps on horseback, slowly
plodding along in the rear of the wagon, while the boys 'walked ahead,'
with rifles on their shoulders 'at half-mast,' on the lookout for
squirrels, turkey, deer, or '_Injin_.' "(395) Muddy roads sometimes caused
emigrants to make long detours in the hope of finding better ones, and if
the roads became impassable water transportation might be resorted to when
the locality permitted.(396) The fear of breaking down was omnipresent and
danger from professional bandits(397) was not lacking. There was also
danger of being lost on the enormous prairies in Illinois.(398)

The best road from North Carolina to Indiana, for loaded wagons, was that
which crossed the Blue Ridge at Ward's Gap, in Western Virginia, led
through East Tennessee and Kentucky, and reached the Ohio River at
Cincinnati,(399) and this was a part of the route for some of the Illinois
immigrants. Illustrations of the moving instinct, the ever-present desire
to go frontierward, were constantly appearing.(400) Although the greater
proportion of immigrants came by either wagon or boat, some came on
horseback and some on foot.(401) One pioneer wrote: "My mother was a
delicate woman and in the hope of prolonging her life, my father, in 1830,
broke up his home at Windsor, Connecticut, and started overland for
Jacksonville, Illinois. Most of the household furniture was shipped by
water, _via_ New Orleans and did not reach its destination until a year
afterwards, six months after our arrival. The wagon for my mother was made
strong and wide, drawn by three horses, so that a bed could be put in it
and most of the way she lay in this bed. Most of the time the drive was
pleasant but over the mountains it was rough and over the national
corduroy road of Indiana, it was perfectly horrible."(402) A journey was
made in 1827 in about four weeks over the same route that it had taken the
same traveler seven and a half weeks to cover in 1822.(403)

Within the state changes in facilities for transportation were constant.
From Shawneetown to St. Louis, by way of Kaskaskia and Cahokia, passed the
great western road. There was also a road from Shawneetown, by way of
Carmi, to Birkbeck's settlement in Edwards county.(404) Frontier roads to
different places seem to have been designated by different numbers of
notches cut in the trees along the wayside.(405) New roads were in
constant demand. In February, 1821, the legislature authorized the
building of a turnpike road, one hundred feet wide, from the Mississippi,
opposite St. Louis, across the American Bottom to the Bluffs. Toll was to
be regulated by the county commissioners, but it must be not less than
twelve and one-half cents for a man and horse, twenty-five cents for a
one-horse wagon or carriage, six and one-fourth cents for each wheel and
each horse of other wagons and carriages, six and one-fourth cents for
each single horse or head of cattle, and two cents for each hog or sheep.
If at any time the county should pay the cost of the road, plus six per
cent, the county should become the owner.(406) A traveler writing late in
1822 says that a public road had just been opened between Vandalia and
Springfield.(407) During the same year, Gurdon Saltonstall Hubbard, one of
the most active of the agents of the American Fur Company in Illinois,
established a direct path or track from Iroquois Post to Danville. In 1824
this path, which was known as "Hubbard's Trail," was extended northward to
Chicago, and southward to a point about one hundred and fifty miles
southwest of Danville. Along this trail trading-posts were established at
intervals of forty or fifty miles. The southern extremity of the trail was
Blue Point, in Effingham county.(408) This became the regularly traveled
route between points connected by it.

Springfield was the northern terminus of the mail route early in 1823, and
the next year Sangamon county, in which the village lay, was almost
entirely without ferries, bridges, or roads.(409) In 1830 mail was carried
between Vincennes and St. Louis thrice a week; between Maysville and St.
Louis, and between Belleville and St. Charles twice a week. No point in
Illinois, not on one of these routes, received mail oftener than once a
week. There was at this time a mail route from Peoria to Galena.(410) The
legislatures of Indiana and Illinois petitioned Congress for an
appropriation to improve the mail route from Louisville, Kentucky, to St.
Louis, Missouri. The length of that part of the route which lay between
Vincennes and St. Louis was one hundred and sixty miles, but a more direct
route, recently surveyed by authority of the legislature of Illinois,
reduced the distance to one hundred and forty-five miles. The distance
between Vincennes and St. Louis was made up of about one-fourth of timber
land and three-fourths of prairies, from five to twenty miles across. "The
settlements are therefore scattered, and far between, and confined to the
vicinity of the timbered land. More than nineteen-twentieths of the land,
over which the road passes, is the property of the Federal Government. To
make the necessary causeways and bridges, and to keep the road in a proper
state of repair, is beyond the capacity of the people who reside upon it."
Another writer says of the route: "It must, for many years, be the channel
of communication, through which the Government shall transmit, and
receive, all its intelligence relative to the mines in the region of
Galena, and Prairie Du Chien, the Military Posts of the Upper Mississippi,
Missouri, and their tributary streams, and the whole northwestern Indian
frontier."(411)

Galena remained much isolated. A man who had horses and cattle, purchased
in southern Illinois and driven to Galena, by way of Springfield and
Peoria, in 1823, says that there was no settlement between Peoria and
Fever River. A year before, a traveler who went from St. Louis to Galena,
on horseback, arrived in time to assist in completing the second cabin in
the place.(412) Two travelers who walked from Upper Alton to Galena, in
January and February, 1826, had to camp out several nights, because no
residence was in reach. Much of the way no trail existed.(413) About 1827
it was common for men to go with teams of four yoke of oxen, and strong
canvas-covered wagons from southern Illinois to the lead regions. In those
regions they spent the summer in hauling from the mines to the furnaces or
from the furnaces to the place of shipment, usually Galena, and taking
back to the mines a load of supplies. In the fall the teamsters returned
to their homes, sometimes, in the early days, taking a load of lead to St.
Louis. These men lived in their wagons, and cooked their own food. The
oxen lived by browsing at night.(414)

Transportation rates can be only approximately given, because they varied
with the condition of the weather or of the roads, and were frequently
agreed upon by a special bargain. In 1817 steamboats are said to have
descended the Ohio and the Mississippi at the rate of ten miles per hour,
and to have charged passengers six cents per mile. Freight, by steamboat,
from New Orleans to Shippingport (Falls of the Ohio), and thence by boats
to Zanesville, was about $6.50 per 100 pounds.(415) It took about one
month to make the trip from New Orleans to Shawneetown--June 6 to July 10
in a specific case. Nine-tenths of the trade was still carried on in the
old style--by flat-boats, barges, pirogues, etc.(416) In December, 1817,
freight from Shawneetown to Louisville was $1.12-1/2 per hundred weight; to
New Orleans, $1.00; to Pittsburg, $3.50; to Shawneetown from Pittsburg,
$1.00; from Louisville, $0.37-1/2; from New Orleans, $4.50. The great
difference between the rates up stream and those down stream was due to
the difficulty of going against the current.(417) Cobbett estimated that
Birkbeck's settlement, fifty miles north of Shawneetown, could be reached
from the eastern seaboard for five pounds sterling per person.(418) In
1819, the passenger rate, by steamboat, from New Orleans to Shawneetown,
was $110; the freight rate $0.04-1/2 to $0.06 per pound, the high charges
being attributed to a lack of competition, which the many new boats then
building were expected to remedy.(419) A party of nine people with
somewhat more than six thousand pounds of luggage, wishing to start from
Baltimore for Illinois, in July, 1819, learned that the water was so low
that large boats could with difficulty pass from Pittsburg to Wheeling.
They accordingly went from Baltimore to Wheeling, a distance of two
hundred and eighty miles, by land. They had two wagons with six horses and
a driver to each wagon. The price for transportation was three hundred and
fifty dollars. At Wheeling a contract was made for transportation to
Louisville, six hundred miles distance. For this, fifty dollars was paid,
the passengers agreeing to help navigate the boat. At Louisville an ark
was bought for twenty-five dollars, and two men were hired for eighteen
dollars and their board, to take the party to Shawneetown, about three
hundred miles distant. At Shawneetown the master of a keel-boat was
engaged to take the luggage of six thousand pounds to a point about eleven
miles from Birkbeck's settlement, for 37-1/2 cents per hundred pounds. The
travelers proceeded on foot. The time occupied in the journey was: From
Baltimore to Wheeling, sixteen days; from Wheeling to Shawneetown,
thirty-eight days; from Shawneetown to the Birkbeck settlement, four
days.(420) A traveler in Illinois, in 1819, said that the usual price of
land carriage was fifty cents per hundred pounds for each twenty miles;
sometimes higher, never lower, and that it would not pay to have corn
transported twenty miles.(421) In 1820, the charge for carrying either
baggage or persons from Baltimore to Wheeling was reported as from five to
seven dollars per hundred weight. Persons wishing to travel cheaply had
their luggage transported while they walked.(422)

In 1823 the following passenger rates, by steamboat, were quoted: From
Cincinnati to New Orleans, $25.00; to Louisville, $4.00; to Pittsburg,
$15.00; to Wheeling, $14.00; from New Orleans to Cincinnati, $50.00; from
Louisville to Cincinnati, $6.00; from Pittsburg to Cincinnati, $12.00;
from Wheeling to Cincinnati, $10.00. The time quoted for passage up stream
was never less than twice that for passage down stream.(423) Early in 1825
the _Louisiana Gazette_ (presumably of New Orleans) reported that a
steamboat had made the 2200 miles from Pittsburg in sixteen days,(424) and
a few weeks later another steamer arrived at Shippingport, at the Falls of
the Ohio about two miles below Louisville, thirteen days from New Orleans,
this time including three days detention from the breaking of a
crank.(425) Rates quoted in 1826, per one hundred pounds, were: From
Pittsburg to St. Louis, in keel-boats, $1.62-1/2; to Nashville, $1.50; to
Louisville, $0.75; to Cincinnati, $0.62-1/2; to Maysville, $0.50; to
Marietta, $0.40; to Wheeling, $0.18-3/4; in wagons, from Pittsburg to
Philadelphia, $1.00 to $1.12-1/2; from Philadelphia to Pittsburg, $3.00;
from Philadelphia to Wheeling, $3.50.(426) A Columbus, Ohio, editor
declared that it required thirty days and cost $5.00 per hundred to
transport goods from Philadelphia to Columbus, while it required but
twenty days and $2.50 to transport from New York.(427) No explanation was
given, but the most probable one is the opening of the Erie Canal.
Illinois buyers could, of course, take advantage of the cheaper rate as
well as the inhabitants of Columbus. The freight schedule agreed upon by
the owners, masters, and agents of steamboats in July, 1830, was, per 100
pounds, as follows: Pittsburg to Cincinnati, $0.45; Pittsburg to
Louisville, $0.50; Wheeling to Cincinnati, $0.40; Wheeling to Louisville,
$0.45; Cincinnati to Louisville, $0.12-1/2; in the reverse direction rates
were the same, except that the rate from Louisville to Cincinnati was
$0.16. Freight on pork, from Cincinnati to Louisville was $0.20 per
barrel, and on flour and light (probably meaning empty) barrels, $0.15 per
barrel. The schedule rates were not, however, generally adhered to, many
boats carrying freight at from 2-1/2 to 5 cents lower than the quoted
rate.(428) At this time there were 213 steamboats in use in western
waters--an increase of about three-fold since 1820.(429) Improved
transportation caused a better market price for produce in the West. In
1819, at Cincinnati, flour sold at $1.37-1/2 per barrel, corn at from $0.10
to $0.12 per bushel, and pork at $0.10-1/2 per pound,(430) while in 1830, in
the same market, flour from wagons sold at $2.65 per barrel, or from store
at $3.00; corn at $0.18 to $0.20, and pork at $0.05 per pound ($10.00 to
$10.50 per barrel).(431) The influence of improved transportation on
emigration is obvious. In regard to steamboat navigation it should be
noted that in 1817 rates up-stream were more than three times as high as
rates down-stream, in 1823 the former were less than twice the latter, and
in 1830 the two were about equal. During the same period the time of
up-stream passage was diminished more than one-half. Steamboats had not
driven out the ruder crafts, but more and more use was being made of the
more expeditious means of transportation, and its effect on the future
economic activity of the West could already be seen.

Naturally the difference in price of the same commodity in two different
markets was dependent in large measure on the ease or difficulty of
transportation. In the latter part of 1817, corn was $0.24 to $0.30 and
wheat $0.75, in Illinois, while corn was $0.50 and wheat $0.75 at
Cincinnati.(432) In 1825 wheat was worth hardly $0.25 per bushel, while it
sold for $0.80 to $0.87-1/2 in Petersburg, Virginia, and flour was $6.00 per
barrel at Charleston, South Carolina, and was scarce even at that price in
Nashville, Tennessee. At the same time corn sold for from $0.08 to $0.10
in Illinois, and for $1.75 to $2.00 in Petersburg, Virginia.(433) In 1826
wheat sold in Illinois at $0.37-1/2, and in England at $2.00 (nine
shillings).(434) In 1829 flour was scarce at Galena. A supply from the
more southern settlements in Illinois sold at $8.00 per barrel, and the
farmers were urged to bring more.(435) This was in October. In November
flour was quoted at Galena at $9.00 to $10.00 per barrel, while it sold at
St. Louis for $4.50 to $5.50. In December, Cincinnati flour was from
$10.00 to $10.50 and Illinois flour from $8.00 to $8.50, at Galena,
whereas in the succeeding August they were $5.00 and $4.00, respectively.
In November, 1829, the one article of food that was quoted as cheaper at
Galena than at St. Louis was potatoes. They were $0.25 per bushel, at
Galena, and from $0.37-1/2 to $0.50 at St. Louis. Butter was $0.25 to
$0.37-1/2 at Galena, and $0.12-1/2 to $0.20 at St. Louis; corn, $0.50 at
Galena, and $0.25 to $0.31 at St. Louis; beef, $0.03-1/2 to $0.04-1/2 at
Galena, and $0.01-1/2 to $0.02 at St. Louis; whisky, $0.62-1/2 per gallon at
Galena, and $0.30 to $0.33 at St. Louis.(436)




Life of the People.


Of the 13,635 persons who were following some occupation in Illinois in
1820, nearly 91 per cent (12,395) were engaged in agriculture.(437) To
this pursuit the state was naturally well adapted. One of the most
observant of German travelers in America wrote that the meaning of
"fertile land" was very different in this region from its meaning in
Germany. In America fertile land of the first class required no fertilizer
for the first century and was too rich for wheat during the first decade,
while fertile land of the second class needed no fertilizer during the
first twelve to twenty years of its cultivation. Bottom-lands belonged to
the first class.(438) The prairies remained unappreciated by the
Americans, although some foreign farmers preferred to settle in Illinois,
because there they could avoid having to clear land, and could raise a
crop the first year, while coal could serve as fuel,(439) and a ditch and
bank fence, requiring little wood, could be constructed, or a hedge could
be grown.(440) A traveler of 1819 speaks of one of the largest prairies as
not well adapted to cultivation, because of the scarcity of wood, and in
the fall of 1825 there was but one house on the way from Paris to
Springfield, leading across eighty miles of a prairie ninety miles in
length.(441)

It was easy to obtain land. After 1820 it could be bought from the
government of the United States at $1.25 per acre, it could be
rented--sometimes for one peck of corn per acre per year(442)--, or the
claim of a squatter could be purchased. When Peter Cartwright moved from
Kentucky to Illinois in 1824, he gave as reasons for moving the fact that
he had six children and but one hundred and fifty acres of land, and that
Kentucky land was high and rising in value; the increase of a disposition
in the South to justify slavery; the distinction in Kentucky between young
people reared without working and those who worked; the danger that his
four daughters might marry into slave families; and the need of preachers
in the new country.(443) The land being obtained, the first cultivation
was difficult. Writers often give the idea that after a year or two the
land which had been heavily timbered was left free from trees, stumps, or
roots, but many a pioneer plowed for twenty years among the stumps. Stump
fields are today no novelty in Illinois, and farming has not retrograded.
Usually the settler's first need was a crop, and in order to hasten its
production the trees were girdled, a process which might either precede or
follow the planting, according to the time of year in which the immigrant
arrived. If prairie land was plowed six horses, or their equivalent of
power in oxen, were required for the first breaking, and a summer's fallow
usually followed in order to allow the roots to decay. In 1819 five
dollars per acre was paid for the first plowing of the prairie, and three
or four dollars for the second.(444)

Agricultural products exhibited considerable variety, although corn was
the chief article raised, because it furnished food for man and beast, it
gave a large yield, and it was more easily harvested than wheat. Wheat was
raised without any great degree of care as to its culture, being
frequently sowed upon ground that was poorly prepared, and being threshed
in a most wasteful manner. Both wheat and flour were exported.
Flour-mills, often of a rude sort, were found at inconveniently long
distances from each other. Ferdinand Ernst, traveling in 1819, found a
turbine wheel at the mill of Mr. Jarrott, a few miles from St. Louis, and
mentioned the fact as a peculiar feature.(445) Some of the settlers in
Sangamon county had to go sixty miles to mill in 1824.(446) In 1830 the
first flour mill in northern Illinois was erected on Fox River. It was
operated by the same power that ran a saw-mill, and the millstones were
boulders, laboriously dressed by hand.(447) Tobacco of excellent quality
was grown, and sometimes formed an article of export.(448) Cotton was an
important article for home consumption. In the early years of the state
hopes were entertained that cotton might become an article of export, but
it was found that the crop required so much labor as to make raising it in
large quantities unprofitable. It was after 1830, however, that it ceased
to be cultivated in the state. It was raised at least as far north as the
present Danville, about one hundred and twenty-five miles south of
Chicago.(449) A woman whose parents moved to Sangamon county in 1819 says
that when in that county they raised, picked, spun, and wove their own
cotton. The children had to seed the cotton before the fire in the long
winter evenings. The importance of cotton as a factor in inducing
immigration may have been considerable.(450) Large quantities of castor
oil were made in the state from home-grown castor beans.(451) Vegetables
were large, although not always of good flavor.(452) Peaches, apples,
pears, quinces and cherries were cultivated successfully, while grapes,
plums, crabapples, persimmons, mulberries, strawberries, raspberries and
blackberries grew wild.(453) An agricultural society was formed in 1819, a
chief purpose being to rid the state of stagnant water.(454)

It is not easy to exaggerate the simplicity of the farming of pioneer
times. When one reads that in 1817 a log cabin of two rooms could be built
for from $50.00 to $70.00; a frame house, ten by fourteen feet, for
$575.00 to $665.00; a log kitchen for $31.00 to $35.50; a log stable for
$31.00 to $40.00; a barn for $80.00 to $97.75; a fence for $0.25 per rod,
and a prairie ditch for $0.29 to $0.44 per rod; that a strong wagon cost
$160.00; that a log house, eighteen by sixteen feet, was made by contract
for $20, and ceiled and floored with sawn boards for $10 more; that a cow
and calf cost $12.00 to $16.00, and a breeding sow, $2.00 or $3.00; that
laborers received $0.75 per day without board, and a man and two horses
$1.00 per day; and that various other useful articles could be procured at
certain prices, care is needed in order to avoid the conclusion that an
immigrant must have had several dollars, if not a few hundreds of them.
This need for care is increased by the fact that the most detailed
statistical data for early Illinois is given by Birkbeck or his visitors,
and is applicable to the English settlement in Edwards county--a settlement
with enough unique features to make the data almost more of an obstacle
than a help. As a matter of fact, many immigrants before 1820 had only
enough money to make the first payment on their land ($80.00), or after
July 1, 1820, only enough to buy the minimum tract offered for sale
($100.00), while in both periods hundreds had not even as much money as
$80.00 or $100.00, and had to become squatters. A log house, and
practically all of the first houses were of logs, was usually built
without the expenditure of one cent in cash, being erected by the family
which was to occupy it, or, if neighbors were within reach, on the
"frolic" system. Ceilings and floors were both rare, and if a floor
existed it was usually made of puncheons. The number of pioneers who
actually paid as much as $31.00 for a log stable must have been small
indeed. First fences were often of brush, or brush and logs, and many
times crops were raised unfenced. Territorial laws prohibited allowing
stock to run at large during the crop season. An immigrant often brought
his cow and sow, and if not he either did without, which in the latter
case was small privation in a region almost crowded with game, or secured
the desired animals by barter or by working for a few days. Men frequently
traded work, but the payment of cash wages was rare, the cheapness of land
and the ease of securing a living leaving small inducement to anyone to
become a day laborer;(455) while for the same reason those who were
professional laborers were often of an undesirable type.(456) Foreigners
were sometimes shocked at the utter carelessness of Illinois farmers. A
soil of great fertility, a region so abundantly supplied with game and
wild products as to make it almost possible to live from the forest alone,
combined with a lack of efficient means of transportation, made such a
temptation to a life of idle ease as many pioneers did not resist. Be it
remembered, also, that although towns, retail trade, and export trade had
begun in Illinois by 1830, these changes were not simultaneous throughout
the state. As 1830 closed Illinois still had squatters many miles from a
mill, it still had Indians, it still had unbridged streams, it still had
regions far from a market--in a word, it had still persisting in some part
of its wide extent each of the ills that had at various times confronted
it in respect to personal danger and lack of inducements to farmers. The
minority of really progressive farmers overcame the difficulties
confronting them by raising cattle or hogs and driving them to distant
markets, the price received being almost clear profit, or by constructing
their own boats and shipping their produce.(457)

Although the great majority of the population of Illinois was engaged in
agriculture, there were salt works in the southeast and lead mines in the
northwest. The salt industry was important. Far the greater part of the
salt made in the state was made at the Gallatin county saline, near
Shawneetown. In 1819 the indefinite statement was made that these springs
furnished between 200,000 and 300,000 bushels of salt annually, the salt
being sold at the works at from fifty to seventy-five cents per
bushel.(458) In 1822, the price of salt in Illinois was reported to have
fallen from $1.25 to $0.50, because of the discovery of copious and strong
salt wells.(459) The next year a strong well was reported twenty miles
east of Carlyle.(460) In 1825, a visitor to the Vermilion county saline
found twenty kettles in operation, producing about one hundred bushels of
salt per week.(461) In 1828, an official report of the superintendent of
the Gallatin county saline stated that about 100,000 bushels of salt was
made annually, and sold at from $0.30 to $0.50 per bushel. The lessees
paid $2,160.50 rent during the year.(462) In 1830, the salt works in
Gallatin county had a capital of $50,000; a product of from 100,000 to
130,000 bushels, selling at from $0.40 to $0.50; and three hundred
employees. The saline in Vermilion county had a capital of $3500; a
product of 3000 to 4000 bushels, selling at $1.25 to $1.50 per bushel; and
eight employees. The works in Jackson county produced 3000 to 4000
bushels, selling at $0.75 to $1.00; and had from six to eight employees.
The difference in price is noteworthy as indicating what must have been
the difficulty of transporting salt from Gallatin county to either
Vermilion or Jackson counties. At the Gallatin county works fuel was
becoming scarce and water had to be carried some distance in pipes, thus
increasing the cost of production. At the springs in Indiana salt was
$1.25 per bushel, and in Kentucky it was $0.50 to $1.00. The states of New
York, Virginia, Massachusetts and Ohio, respectively, produced more salt
than did Illinois.(463)

The lead industry at Galena was still in its infancy, notwithstanding the
fact that the richness of the mines was early known.(464) In 1822, a
number of persons went to Galena from Sangamon county.(465) For some years
it was a common practice to go to the mines in the summer and return to
the older settlements for the winter.(466) The population of Galena was 74
in August, 1823;(467) about 100 on July 1, 1825; 151 on December 31, 1825;
194 on March 31, 1826; 406 on June 30, 1826;(468) and 1000 to 1500 in
1829.(469) In 1826 a part of Lord Selkirk's French-Swiss colony on the Red
River moved to Galena and became farmers in that region.(470) The rush to
the lead region began in 1826 and became intense in the next year.(471) In
1827, a rude log hut, sixteen by twenty feet, rented for $35.00 per month.
Galena had then about two hundred log houses,(472) and in the same year
the first framed house was raised.(473) In July, 1828, five hundred lead
miners were wanted at $17.00 to $25.00 and board per month.(474)

A pursuit that was once common and profitable is described by a lawyer who
traveled the first Illinois circuit, consisting of the counties of Greene,
Sangamon, Peoria, Fulton, Schuyler, Adams, Pike and Calhoun, in 1827, as
follows: "On this circuit we found but little business in any of the
counties--parties, jurymen and witnesses were reported in all the counties
after Peoria, as being absent bee and deer hunting--a business that was
then profitable, as well as necessary to the sustenance of families during
the winter."(475)

Not until after 1830 was a common school system with effective provision
for its support established, although subscription schools existed some
years before the close of the eighteenth century. Instruction given in the
earliest schools was slight, and in 1818 a most competent observer
declared that he believed that in Missouri "at least one-third of the
schools were really a public nuisance, and did the people more harm than
good; another third about balanced the account, by doing about as much
harm as good; and perhaps one-third were advantageous to the community in
various degrees. Not a few drunken, profane, worthless Irishmen were
perambulating the country, and getting up schools; and yet they could
neither speak, read, pronounce, spell, or write the English
language."(476) These schools closely resembled those of Illinois.
Schoolbooks were rare and children carried to school whatever book they
chanced to have, the Old Testament with its long proper names sometimes
serving in lieu of a chart or primer.(477) In some schools pupils studied
aloud. Reading, writing, spelling and arithmetic were the only branches
commonly taught, although as early as 1806 surveying was taught in a
"seminary" near the present Belleville.(478) In 1827 Rock Spring Seminary,
now Shortleff College, was opened by Baptists, and the following year
instruction was begun in what was to become McKendree College
(Methodist).(479) The teacher of the first school in McLean county (1825)
received $2.50 per pupil for the term of four months.(480) The next year a
teacher in Jacksonville was to be paid in cash or produce, or in pork,
cattle, or hogs at cash prices, and to pay board in similar commodities at
the rate of one dollar per week. This included washing, fuel and lights.
School was open ten, and often twelve, hours per day.(481)

Religious societies were early organized, but the building of churches was
not then common. In 1796 a Baptist society was organized, and previous to
this time both Baptists and Methodists, without organized societies, had
united in holding prayer-meetings in which the Bible and published sermons
were read, prayers offered, and hymns sung.(482) Before the close of the
century the Methodists organized. The Presbyterians were prominent in the
early years of statehood, but in 1818 they were just beginning their work
in Illinois.(483) Meetings were usually held in private houses until such
time as the congregation felt that a church building should be erected, or
at least until some one felt the need, for the first church was sometimes
built by a few individuals.(484) Ministers were of two types--those who
devoted all of their time to religious work and traveled over large areas,
and those who combined ministerial duties with farming, hunting, or some
other frontier occupation. Neither class received much money. Peter
Cartwright, one of the most famous pioneer preachers, received $40 one
year (1824-25) and $60 the next--and this he considered good wages.(485)
Pioneer energy was displayed in the overcoming of difficulties. For more
than ten years the Baptists held meetings on alternate months at two
places thirty-six miles apart, and several families regularly traveled
that distance to the two-days' meeting, even in unfavorable weather--and
this, too, after Illinois had become a state.(486) In 1829, the
Presbyterians, true to their missionary spirit, occupied the extreme
frontier at Galena.(487) Catholicism increased but slowly.(488) Divisions
such as were found in the East or South reached Illinois, and at one time
the Baptists were divided into three factions, which had about the same
kind of fraternal relations as the Jews and the Samaritans. The chief
questions for contention were whether or not missionaries should be sent
out by the church and whether fellowship with slaveholders should be
maintained.(489) An association of anti-slavery Baptists was formed, as
also Bible societies and temperance societies.(490) Camp-meetings, with
their well-known phenomena, were common in the early years of statehood,
and it is no reflection upon their value to say that they were one of the
chief diversions for the pioneers.





CHAPTER VI. SLAVERY IN ILLINOIS AS AFFECTING SETTLEMENT.


Slavery, as well as indentured servitude, existed in Illinois as late as
1845,(491) and the "Black Laws" of the state were repealed on February 7,
1865.(492) From 1787 until years after 1830 the slavery question was an
unsettled one. In addition to the arguments for or against the institution
that were used everywhere, the pro-slavery party in Illinois asserted that
as the Ordinance of 1787 guaranteed to the French inhabitants their
property, the French could hold slaves, and that as all citizens of a
state had equal rights other persons in Illinois could hold slaves. The
reply was that the Ordinance plainly forbade slavery.(493)

Whatever the merits of the argument, slavery did exist in Illinois. The
fear of the French that they might lose their slaves, and the desire to
attract slaveholders to Illinois, led to determined and repeated efforts
to legalize slavery. Early in 1796 a petition was sent from Kaskaskia to
Congress, praying that the anti-slavery article in the Ordinance of 1787
might be either repealed or so altered as to permit the introduction of
slaves from the original states or elsewhere into the country of Illinois,
that a law might be enacted permitting the introduction of such slaves as
servants for life, and that it might be declared for what period the
children of such servants should serve the masters of their parents. This
petition was signed by four men, including some of the largest landowners
in Illinois, but as the petition, while purporting to come from Illinois
alone, concerned the entire Northwest Territory, as there was no
indication that the four petitioners represented Illinois sentiment, and
as the congressional committee was informed that many of the inhabitants
of the territory did not desire the proposed change, the prayer of the
petition was denied.(494)

In 1800, two hundred and sixty-eight inhabitants of Illinois, chiefly
French, petitioned Congress to repeal the anti-slavery provision of the
Ordinance, stating that many of the inhabitants were crossing the
Mississippi with their slaves. The petition was not considered.(495) A
similar request, presented late in 1802, was twice reported upon by
committees, one report (Randolph's) declaring that the growth of Ohio
proved that a lack of slavery would not seriously retard settlement, while
the other was in favor of suspending the anti-slavery article for ten
years, the male descendants of immigrating slaves to be free at the age of
twenty-five years, and the females at twenty-one.(496) In 1805 a majority
of the members of the respective houses of the Indiana legislature
petitioned for the repeal of the anti-slavery article, and this petition
was closely followed by a memorial from Illinois expressing the hope that
the general government would not pass unnoticed the act of the last
legislature authorizing the importation of slaves into the territory. It
violated the Ordinance, the memorialists declared, and although they
desired slavery they professed themselves to be law-abiding.(497) A
committee report on the petition and memorial recommended that permission
to import slaves into Indiana (then including Illinois) for ten years be
granted, in order that the evil effects of slavery might be mitigated by
its dispersion, but no legislation resulted from the report,(498) and the
next year petitioning was resumed. The legislature sent resolutions asking
for the suspension of the anti-slavery article, and elaborating the
argument for such suspension. A committee of which the territorial
delegate from Indiana was chairman, presented a favorable report.(499)

In September, 1807, a petition for the suspension of the anti-slavery
article was sent to Congress from the Indiana legislature. It was signed
by Jesse B. Thomas, later author of the Missouri Compromise, but then
Speaker of the territorial House of Representatives, and resident in what
was to become the State of Indiana, and by the president _pro tem._ of the
Legislative Council. Action in committee was adverse,(500) Congress being
then busied with the question of the abolition of the slave trade.

During the territorial period in Illinois (1809-1818), the slavery
question was not much agitated. The Constitution of 1818 provided that
slaves could not be thereafter brought into the State, except such as
should be brought under contract to labor at the Saline Creek salt works,
said contract to be limited to one year, although renewable, and the
proviso to be void after 1825, but existing slavery was not abolished, and
existing indentures--and some were for ninety-nine years(501)--should be
carried out. Male children of slaves or indentured servants should be free
at the age of twenty-one and females at eighteen.(502) In Congress, as has
been seen, Tallmadge, of New York, objected to admitting Illinois before
she abolished slavery, but his objection was ineffectual.

In March, 1819, a slave code was enacted. Any black or mulatto coming into
the State was required to file with the clerk of a circuit court a
certificate of freedom. Slaves should not be brought into the state for
the purpose of emancipation. Resident negroes, other than slaves and
indentured servants, must file certificates of freedom. Slaves were to be
whipped instead of fined, thirty-nine stripes being the maximum number
that might be inflicted. Contracts with slaves were void. Not more than
two slaves should meet together without written permission from their
masters. Any master emancipating his slaves must give a bond of $1000 per
head that such emancipated slaves should not become public charges,
failure to give such a bond being punishable by a fine of $200 per head.
Colored people must present passes when traveling.(503)

Stringent as was the code of 1819, it was of a type that was common in the
slave states. Its passage may have kept some negroes, both free and slave,
from coming into the state upon their own initiative without certificates
of freedom. From 1810 to 1820 the number of slaves in Illinois increased
from 168 to 917, Illinois being the only state north of Mason and Dixon's
line having an increase in the number of slaves during the decade,
although in the Territory of Missouri, during this time, the number
increased from about 3000 to over 10,200. At the same time the number of
free blacks in Illinois decreased from about 600 to some 450, while they
increased in Indiana from nearly 400 to over 1200. Of the slaves in
Illinois in 1820 precisely 500 were in the counties of Gallatin and
Randolph, the former being the center of the salt-making industry, and the
latter the seat of the early French settlement at Kaskaskia.(504)

Whether the anti-slavery clause of the Ordinance of 1787 freed the slaves
of the old French settlers was long a disputed question, and it is certain
that a strict construction of the Illinois Constitution of 1818 made
further importation of slaves illegal. Many slave-owners passed through
southern Illinois to Missouri, because the main road for emigration by
land to that territory crossed the Ohio River at Shawneetown. Many of the
slaves who produced the large increase in the number of slaves in Missouri
from 1810 to 1820 must have gone over this route. In 1820 more than
one-seventh of the population of Missouri was slave.(505) The people of
Illinois could not fail to see that they were losing a certain class of
emigrants--the prosperous slaveholders. The loss became greater as the
likelihood of Missouri's admittance as a slave state increased. As early
as 1820 there was a rumor of the formation of a party in Illinois to
introduce slavery into the state in a legal manner.(506) The next year an
editorial in a leading newspaper of Illinois said: "Will the admission of
slavery in a new state tend to increase its population?--is a question
which has been of late much discussed both within and without this state.
It has been contended that its admission would induce the emigration of
citizens of states as well where slavery was, as where it was not
tolerated--that while it would attract the attention of the wealthy
southern planter, it would not deter the industrious northern farmer." The
editor cites Ohio and Kentucky as proof against the above argument. In
1810 Ohio had a population, in round numbers, of 230,700 and Kentucky one
of 406,500; in 1820 Ohio had 581,400, while Kentucky had 563,300, giving a
difference in favor of Ohio of over 18,000; and an excess of gain during
the decade, in favor of Ohio, of 93,847. "We are willing to take into
consideration the unsettled titles of land in the last-mentioned state
[Kentucky], and admit that in this respect Ohio had a decided advantage--we
will therefore deduct the fraction of 93,847, believing it equivalent to
the loss of population from this cause--there is still a difference of
100,000."(507) The editor's figures for 1810 were correct and those for
1820 were approximately so. It is also true, and in line with his
argument, that during the same decade Indiana showed an increase from
24,500 to 147,200, while Missouri's increase was from 20,800 to 66,500;
the increase in Illinois being between the two in proportion of
increase--from 12,282 to 55,162.(508) The passing of the slaveholders to
Missouri continued and the discussion of the slavery question became
animated.

In the gubernatorial election of 1822 there were four candidates for
governor, two being anti-slavery and two pro-slavery in belief. Edward
Coles, from Virginia, an anti-slavery man, was elected by a plurality of
but a few votes. His election was due to a division in the ranks of the
opposite party, as is shown by the fact that the pro-slavery party polled
over 5300 votes, while the anti-slavery party polled only some 3300.(509)
In his message of December 5, 1822, Governor Coles strongly urged the
passage of a law to prevent kidnapping(510)--then a regular trade. This was
referred to a select committee which reported as follows: "Your committee
have carefully examined the laws upon the subject, and with deep regret
announce their incapability of devising a more effectual plan than the one
already prescribed by law for the suppression of such infamous crimes. It
is believed that the benevolent views of the executive and the benign
purposes of the statutes can only be realized by the redoubled diligence
of our grand juries and our magistrates, aided by the well-directed
support of all just and good men."(511) The legislature was politically
opposed to the governor, and the committee's report sounds like the
baldest irony. With the report was presented a scheme for introducing
slavery into the state,(512) a scheme which eventually led to the vote of
1824.(513)

The Constitution of Illinois provided that upon the vote of two-thirds of
the members of each house of the legislature, the question of calling a
convention for the revision of the Constitution should be submitted to the
people. For calling a convention only a majority vote from the people was
necessary. This method of procedure the pro-slavery party determined upon.
The two-thirds in favor of the project could be secured without difficulty
in the senate, but in the house the desperate expedient of reconsidering
the right of a member to a contested seat and seating his opponent was
resorted to.(514) This being done the resolution to submit the question of
a constitutional convention to the people was passed by a bare two-thirds
vote in each house.(515) Of the eighteen men who voted against the
resolution, eleven were natives of southern states, two of New York, two
of Connecticut, one of Massachusetts, one of Vermont, and one of Sweden.
There were some northern men who voted in favor of the resolution.(516)

The campaign resulting from the passage of the convention resolution was
waged for eighteen months with great vigor. Press and pulpit were actively
employed.(517) A large anti-slavery society was formed in Morgan
county,(518) and it was in all probability one of many such organizations.
In August, 1824, came the final vote, and the official count of the votes
showed a majority of 1668 against calling a constitutional
convention.(519)

It is noteworthy that in this struggle the governor of the state was an
anti-slavery southerner; eleven of the eighteen anti-slavery men in the
legislature were southern; the pro-slavery party, which polled 1971 more
votes than its opponents in 1822, was defeated by 1668 votes in 1824. It
is also true that of the leaders in the campaign some of the most noted
were southern anti-slavery or northern pro-slavery men.

                    [Illustration: Election Results.]

The history of settlement suggests several explanations for the votes of
1822 and 1824. The legislature which passed the convention resolution had
not been chosen with the avowed purpose of doing so. Some designing
politicians had such an object in view and secured the election of
pro-slavery men by anti-slavery constituents. The number of such cases was
not large, but as the resolution passed by the minimum vote they are
important.(520) In 1822, however, there was almost without doubt a
pro-slavery majority in the state, but it is improbable that there was a
two-thirds majority. In the election of 1822, there were 8635 votes cast,
while in that of 1824 there were 11,612 votes cast. This great increase
indicates a large immigration. Immigration at this time was largely to the
northern counties of the state, and it is a point of prime significance
that each of the seven northern counties gave large majorities against the
calling of the convention, and that without the vote of these seven
counties the vote would have been 4523 for a convention and 4408 against a
convention, thus changing the decision of the state. This vote of the
northern counties can not be explained by an increased immigration from
the north, because no such increase to any significant degree is
discoverable. The admission of Missouri as a slave state would naturally
lead pro-slavery emigrants to go to that state instead of to Illinois.
Another event which tended to influence the vote in Illinois was the
decision of Indiana against slavery, in the summer of 1823, in the midst
of the campaign in Illinois.(521) The unjust action of the Illinois House
of Representatives in unseating an anti-convention member was a powerful
argument against the pro-slavery party.

In his message to the legislature, on November 16, 1824, Governor Coles
said: "In the observations I had the honor to make to the last
Legislature, I recommended that provision should be made for the abolition
of the remnant of African slavery which still existed in this state. The
full discussion of the principles and policy of personal slavery, which
has taken place since that period, resulting in its rejection by the
decided voice of the people, still more imperiously makes it my duty to
call your attention in an especial manner to this subject, and earnestly
to entreat you to make just and equitable provision for as speedy an
abolition of this remnant of slavery, as may be deemed consistent with the
rights and claims of the parties concerned.

"In close connection with this subject, is my former recommendation, to
which I again solicit your attention, that the law as it respects those
held in service should be rendered less severe, and more accordant with
our political institutions and local situation; and that more severe
penalties should be enacted against the unnatural crime of kidnapping,
which then prevailed to a great extent and has since considerably
increased, in consequence of the defects of the present law. Regarding the
former, our laws in general are a mere transcript of those of the more
southern states, where the great number of slaves makes it necessary for
the safety of the whites, that the laws for their government, and
concerning free blacks, should be very strict.--But, there being no such
motive here, the necessity of such laws ceases, and consequently their
injustice and cruelty are the more apparent. The latter are found every
day more and more defective and inefficient; and kidnapping has now become
a regular trade, which is carried on to a vast extent to the country
bordering on the lower Mississippi, up the Red River, and to the West
Indies. To put an immediate and effectual stop to this nefarious traffic,
is the imperious duty of the Legislature."(522)

The house of representatives referred the governor's remarks concerning
kidnapping to a select committee. A bill was reported, but after being
weakened by amendments it was tabled.(523) In his message in 1826 the
governor renewed his recommendations,(524) and a section of the criminal
code of January, 1827, provided that kidnapping should be punishable by
confinement in the penitentiary for not less than one nor more than seven
years.(525) An act of January, 1825, provided that anyone who had failed
to give the bond required by the black code of 1819 from those who
emancipated slaves, should be released from any verdict or judgment
arising from such failure, upon indemnifying the county for any money
expended for the relief of the freedmen.(526) By an act of 1829 relating
to slaves, whites were not to marry blacks, slaves were not to come to the
state in order to be free, and runaway slaves should be advertised in the
newspapers of the state.(527) The number of slaves in Illinois decreased
after 1820. In 1820 there were 917 slaves in the state; in 1830, 747; in
1840, 331,(528) and before the next census slavery in the state was
abolished.

The vote of 1824 against calling a constitutional convention marked the
end of the slavery question as an obstacle to the immigration of an
anti-slavery population. Slaveholders, never a large proportion of the
immigrants, practically ceased to come to the state, while the immigration
of anti-slavery southerners continued, and the aggregate immigration
greatly increased. The population of the state was 55,162 in 1820; 72,817,
in 1825; and 157,445 in 1830. Missouri, more populous than Illinois by
more than 11,000 in 1820, was less so by 17,000 in 1830.(529) Governor
Coles, in his message of January 3, 1826, said: "The tide of emigration,
which had been for several years checked by various causes, both general
and local, has again set in, and has afforded a greater accession of
population during the past, than it had for the three preceding years.
This addition to our population and wealth has given a new impulse to the
industry and enterprise of our citizens, and has sensibly animated the
face of our country. And as the causes which have impeded the prosperity
of the state are daily diminishing, and the inducements to emigration are
increasing, we may confidently anticipate a more steady and rapid
augmentation of its population and resources."(530)

From 1820 to 1825 the increase of population in Illinois was 17,655, while
from 1825 to 1830 it was 84,628. Contemporaries have left some interesting
records of immigration during the latter five years--a period in which the
population of the state increased more than 116 per cent. Immigration had
begun to be brisk by the fall of 1824. At the general election in August,
1820, there were 1132 votes cast in Madison county, while at a similar
election in August, 1824, there were 3223 votes cast in the same
territory, Madison county having been divided into Madison, Pike, Fulton,
Sangamon, Morgan and Greene counties. A Madison county newspaper said:
"That country bordering on the Illinois River is populating at this time
more rapidly than at any former period. Family wagons with emigrants are
daily passing this place [Edwardsville], on their way thither."(531)
During the five weeks ending October 28, 1825, about two hundred and fifty
wagons, with an average of five persons to each, passed through Vandalia,
bound chiefly for the Sangamo country.(532) The unsettled condition of the
slavery question from 1820 to August, 1824, is given as the cause of the
slight increase in population during that period, and the settlement of
the question is thought to have been a chief cause for the increase after
1824.(533) It must not be supposed, however, that any one cause excludes
all others. The country as a whole had scarcely recovered from the great
financial depression of 1819; Kentucky was in turmoil over her bank, land
titles and old and new courts;(534) early in 1825 over 65,000 acres in a
single county in Tennessee were advertised for sale for the delinquent
taxes of 1824;(535) and in 1826 a great drought in North Carolina caused a
marked emigration from that state.(536)

In 1829 emigration was great. Some forty English families from Yorkshire
came by way of Canada and settled near Jacksonville, Illinois. They
brought agricultural implements and some money.(537) The _Kentucky
Gazette_ lamented the fact that a large number of the best families of
Lexington were removing to Illinois.(538) An Illinois newspaper reported:
"The number of emigrants passing through our Town [Vandalia] this fall, is
unusually great. During the last week the waggons and teams going to the
north amounted to several hundred. At no previous period has our State
encreased so rapidly, as it is now encreasing."(539) Another editor
estimated the annual increase in population from 1826 to 1829 at not less
than 12,000(540)--a figure which was almost certainly too low. In 1830 a
meeting of gentlemen from the counties of Hampshire and Hampden
(Massachusetts) was held at Northampton to consider the expediency of
forming a colony to remove to Illinois. After a discussion it was voted to
adjourn to meet on the 10th of October at Warner's Coffee House in
Southampton. Similar meetings were held at Pawtucket and Worcester.(541)

The immigration to Illinois was but part of a general westward movement.
From Charleston, Virginia, we hear: "The tide of emigration through this
place is rapid, and we believe, unprecedented. It is believed that not
less than eight thousand individuals, since the 1st September last
[written on November 6, 1829], have passed on this route. They are
principally from the lower part of this state and South Carolina, bound
for Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan.--They jog on, careless of the varying
climate, and apparently without regret for the friends and the country
they leave behind, seeking forests to fell, and a new country to settle."
The editor attributes this movement to the fact that slavery had rendered
white labor disreputable.(542) Three thousand persons bound for the West
arrived at Buffalo in one week and six thousand per week were reported as
passing through Indianapolis, bound for the Wabash country alone.(543) The
great northern tide was chiefly bound to Ohio and Michigan,(544) northern
Illinois not being open to settlement. Five years after Detroit received
three hundred arrivals per week, Chicago had about a dozen houses, besides
Fort Dearborn. This was the Chicago of 1830.(545)





CHAPTER VII. SUCCESSFUL FRONTIERSMEN.


The character of the men who succeed in gaining the favor of those among
whom they live indicates the character of those whose favor has been
gained. Preachers, land dealers, lawyers, town builders, and politicians
can not thrive in a hostile community. It is worth while in studying
Illinois in its frontier stage to notice some of the chief traits of its
leaders.

No better type of the pioneer preacher need be sought than the Rev. Dr.
Peter Cartwright. He preached in the West for nearly seventy years, during
which time he delivered some eighteen thousand sermons, baptized some
fifteen thousand persons, received into the church nearly twelve thousand
members, and licensed preachers enough to make a whole conference. He was
for fifty years a presiding elder in the Methodist Episcopal church. His
home was in Illinois from 1824 until his death in 1872. Aside from his
ministerial duties he twice represented Sangamon county in the Illinois
House of Representatives; was a candidate for congressman against Abraham
Lincoln in 1846; and was a member of an historical society founded as
early as 1827.

Cartwright had a number of traits that attracted frontiersmen. In person
he was about five feet ten inches high, and of square build, having a
powerful physical frame and weighing nearly two hundred pounds. "The
roughs and bruisers at camp-meetings and elsewhere stood in awe of his
brawny arm, and many anecdotes are told of his courage and daring that
sent terror to their ranks. He felt that he was one of the Lord's breaking
plows, and that he had to drive his way through all kinds of roots and
stubborn soil.... His gesticulation, his manner of listening, his walk,
and his laugh were peculiar, and would command attention in a crowd of a
thousand. There was something undefinable about the whole man that was
attractive to the majority of the people, and made them linger in his
presence and want to see him again." He had a remarkable power to read
men, his first impressions being quickly made and almost always correct.
He was often gay, but never frivolous; often eccentric, but never silly. A
Cumberland Presbyterian, after attending a communion service administered
by Cartwright and at which the Baptist, Rev. John M. Peck, was present,
wrote: "After meeting, I invited these two men to spend the night with me,
which they did; and such a night!--of all Western anecdotes and manners,
flow of soul and out-spoken brotherhood--we had never seen, and never
expect to enjoy again. These were, then [1824 c.], the two strongest men
of mark in the ministry, in this State [Illinois]." Cartwright's vitality
was remarkable. In the sixty-sixth year of his ministry, and the
eighty-sixth of his life, he dedicated eight churches, preached at
seventy-seven funerals, addressed eight schools, baptized twenty adults
and fifty children, married five couples, received fifteen into the church
on probation and twenty-five into full connection, raised twenty-five
dollars missionary money, donated twenty dollars for new churches, wrote
one hundred and twelve letters, delivered many lectures, and sold two
hundred dollars worth of books. Many frontier preachers of the time were
lacking in common sense, but they were not popular. This is the testimony
of a contemporary (1828) writer whose analysis of western character has
rarely been excelled.(546)

John Edgar, a native of Ireland, was one of the largest landholders who
ever lived in Illinois. At the outbreak of the American Revolution he was
a British officer living at Detroit, but becoming implicated in the
efforts of his American wife to aid British soldiers in deserting, he was
imprisoned. He escaped, and in 1784 settled in Kaskaskia, where his wife
joined him two years later, having saved from confiscation some twelve
thousand dollars. This made Edgar the rich man of the community. "In very
early times, he erected, at great expense, a fine flouring mill on the
same site where M. Paget had built one sixty years before. This mill was a
great benefit to the public and also profitable to the proprietor. Before
the year 1800, this mill manufactured great quantities of flour for the
New Orleans market which would compare well with the Atlantic flour."
Edgar built a splendid mansion in Kaskaskia and entertained royally. At a
time when hospitality was common he improved upon it. His home was the
fashionable resort for almost half a century. It was here that Lafayette
was entertained. In addition to his flour mill, which attracted settlers
to its vicinity near Kaskaskia and which for many years did most of the
merchant business in flour in the country, Edgar owned and operated salt
works near the Mississippi, northwest of Kaskaskia, and also invested
largely in land. Before the commissioners appointed to settle land claims
he claimed thirty-six thousand acres in one claim as the assignee of
ninety donation-rights, while he and John Murry St. Clair claimed 13,986
acres which proved upon survey to cover almost thirty thousand acres. In
territorial times Edgar paid more taxes than any one else in the
territory. In 1790 Edgar was appointed chief justice of the Kaskaskia
district of St. Clair county; in 1800 he was "Lieutenant-Colonel
Commandant of the First Regiment of Militia of the County of Randolph"; in
1802 he was commissioned an associate judge of the Criminal Court of
Randolph county, by Governor Harrison. He had never studied law "but
common sense, a good education, and experience in business with perfect
honesty made him a very respectable officer." Edgar's correspondence with
Clark and Hamtramck show him to have been a leader in Illinois during its
period of anarchy preceding the establishment of government in 1790. He
offered to board a garrison on the credit of the United States, if a
garrison should be sent to protect Illinois. At a time when slaveholding
was regarded as eminently respectable by the people of Illinois, Edgar
held slaves, and in 1796 he was one of four who petitioned Congress to
introduce slavery into the territory. He was a member of the legislature
of the Northwest Territory, was worshipful master of the first Lodge of
Ancient Free and Accepted Masons in Illinois, constituted at Kaskaskia in
1806, and was major-general of militia, in which capacity he presided at
reviews with much dignity. In person Gen. Edgar was large and portly. He
was definitely charged with forgery by the commissioners to settle land
titles at Kaskaskia. In one case a letter signed in a fair hand by one who
had made his mark to a deed was produced by Edgar. The letter was an offer
of the illiterate owner to sell his land to Edgar. There is no indication
that this conduct of the hospitable and popular man changed the esteem in
which he was held by his contemporaries.(547)

John Rice Jones, the first lawyer in Illinois, was eminently successful.
He was born in Wales in 1759, received a collegiate education at Oxford,
England, and afterward took regular courses in both medicine and law. In
1783 he was a lawyer in London and owned property in Wales. The next year
he came to Philadelphia where he practiced law and became acquainted with
Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin, Myers Fisher, and other distinguished
men. In 1786 he came to Kentucky and joined Clark's troops against the
Wabash Indians. A garrison was irregularly established at Vincennes and
Jones was made commissary-general. He sold seized Spanish goods to
partially indemnify those whose goods had been seized by the Spanish. In
1790 Jones removed to Kaskaskia, bringing to his residence on the frontier
a mind well trained by education and experience. He early became a large
landowner, in 1808 paying taxes on 16,400 acres in Monroe county alone.
The list of offices held by Jones shows him to have been prominent
wherever he went. He was attorney-general of the Northwest Territory, a
member and president of the legislative council of the same, joint-revisor
with John Johnson, of the laws of Indiana Territory, one of the first
trustees, as well as a chief promoter, of Vincennes University, official
interpreter and translator of French for the commissioners appointed to
settle land claims at Kaskaskia, and after his removal to Missouri, about
1810, a member of the Missouri Constitutional Convention of 1820, and,
upon the admission of the state, justice of its Supreme Court until his
death in February, 1824. In Missouri he engaged in lead mining and
smelting with Moses Austin and later with Austin's sons. He made an
exhaustive report on the lead mines of Missouri in 1816. Jones was well
versed in English, French and Spanish law, especially in regard to land
titles. He was an excellent mathematician, and had also a thorough
acquaintance with the Greek, Latin, French, Spanish, English, and Welsh
languages. The pioneers recognized his peculiar fitness for a legal career
on the frontier. Governor Reynolds, a fellow-townsman of Jones, says:
"Judge Jones lived a life of great activity and was conspicuous and
prominent in all the important transactions of the country ... His
integrity, honor, and honesty were always above doubt or suspicion. He was
exemplary in his moral habits, and lived a temperate and orderly man in
all things."(548)

The founding of the towns of Mt. Carmel, Alton and Springfield illustrates
the work of successful town building on the frontier. Mt. Carmel was laid
out in 1817, Alton in 1818, and the land where Springfield now stands was
entered in 1823.

The town of Mt. Carmel was founded by three ministers, Thomas S. Hinde,
William McDowell and William Beauchamp, the first two being proprietors
and the last agent and surveyor. McDowell probably never settled in
Illinois. Hinde and Beauchamp were men of more than ordinary ability. The
former was a son of the well-known Dr. Hinde, of Virginia, who was a
surgeon in the British navy during the French and Indian war. Dr. Hinde
moved to Kentucky and there the boy Thomas grew up. At one time he was a
neighbor of Daniel Boone, and later of Simon Kenton. He was in the office
of the Superior Court of Kentucky for some time, during which he became
well acquainted with Governor Madison and his nephew, John Madison,
kinsmen of President James Madison. He was well informed as to some of the
obscure movements of Aaron Burr. This led him to send copies of the
_Fredonian_, which he published in order to oppose Burr, to Henry Clay,
then secretary of state, although the copies later unaccountably
disappeared; and, in 1829, to write to James Madison, who was reported as
contemplating the writing of a political history, offering to furnish
information which he possessed at first hand concerning the conspiracy.
Madison denied any intention of writing a history, but asked Hinde to
furnish an account of Burr's transactions to be filed with Madison's
papers. This was done. In 1806, Hinde moved to Ohio to get away from
slavery.

William Beauchamp was born in Kent county, Delaware, in 1772. He became a
minister in the Methodist Episcopal Church in 1794, but located in 1801 on
account of ill health. His ministry had been markedly successful and he
had been stationed in New York and Boston. In 1807 he settled on the
Little Kanawha River in Virginia, and in 1815 moved to Chillicothe, Ohio,
where he acted as editor of the _Western Christian Monitor_, Hinde being a
contributor. Beauchamp knew Latin, Greek and Hebrew, was a writer of
considerable ability, and was well fitted to be editor. In 1816, however,
the General Conference decided to establish a magazine, and in the
following year Beauchamp retired from the editorship of the _Monitor_,
having successfully established the first Methodist magazine in America.
Beauchamp, Hinde and McDowell were now fellow-townsmen. They resolved to
establish a town where their ideas of rectitude might be applied.

The site chosen for the town was a point on the west bank of the Wabash
opposite the mouth of the White River, and twenty-four miles southwest of
Vincennes. This point was selected because of the available water power
and of the likelihood that main roads from east to west would pass here.
The town became a railroad and manufacturing center and justified the
wisdom of its founders. An elaborate circular, called the "Articles of
Association, for the City of Mount Carmel," was issued at Chillicothe in
1817. The purpose of the association was announced to be "to build a city
on liberal and advantageous principles, and to constitute funds for the
establishment of seminaries of learning and for religious purposes." The
proprietors reserved for themselves one-fourth of the lots, these being
called "proprietors' lots;" one-fourth were called "public donation lots;"
and one-half were called "private donation lots." The plan of survey and
sale was described as follows: "The front street is 132 feet wide; the
others 99. The in-lots are six poles in front, and eleven and a half back;
containing each sixty-eight perches, nearly half an acre. The most of the
out-lots contain four acres and eight square poles; some of them more,
(five and six acres on the back range); and a few of them less. There are
748 in-lots, and 331 out-lots--1079 in the whole.


    "The lots are offered at private sale, at the following prices:

    In-Lots On Front Street.

    Corners, $150 each
    Not corners,  100

    The Rest Of The In-Lots.

    Corners, $120 each
    Not corners, 80
    The out-lots, $100 each

    "The payments are to be made in four annual instalments; the first
    at the time of sale.

    "A bank is to be constituted by the sale of the lots.

    "One-fourth of the lots are appropriated to the use of schools and
    religious purposes.

    "One-half of the lots are to be given away to those who will
    improve them according to the articles of association. A person
    may have as many gift, or private donation out-lots, as he has
    such in-lots; the out-lots not required to be improved. The gift
    lots are to be disposed of on the following terms: the persons
    receiving them pay the prices above stated, and receive for the
    money thus paid, stock in the aforesaid bank. They are to improve
    the in-lots thus given to them, by building one dwelling-house for
    every such in-lot; one-half of the houses to be built within five
    years, and the other half within ten years, from the sale of said
    lots. The houses to be framed, brick, or stone, and to contain two
    rooms, and two fire-places each."


The bank referred to was "The Bank of Mount Carmel." Its shares were ten
dollars each. The proprietors might put into the stock one-half of the
money received from the sale of proprietors' lots; all the money received
for public donation lots was to be divided into three equal parts, one
part to be funded in the bank in the name of the trustees (to be
appointed) of the Methodist Episcopal Church, the proceeds to be applied
to the building of "Methodist Episcopal meeting houses in the city of
Mount Carmel, and to other religious purposes," not including ministers'
salary; the second part to be funded in the name of the trustees (to be
appointed) of a male academy; the third part to be similarly funded for a
female academy; the money from private donation lots to be funded in the
name of the purchasers, after deducting ten per cent for expenses, which
ten per cent should remain in the bank as permanent stock. The articles of
association were elaborate. The 18th article became known as the "Blue
Laws." It read as follows: "ART. 18. No theatre or play-house shall ever
be built within the bounds of this city. No person who shall be guilty of
drunkenness, profane swearing or cursing, Sabbath breaking, or who shall
keep a disorderly house, shall gamble, or suffer gambling in his house, or
raise a riot, or break the peace within the city, or be guilty of any
other crime of greater magnitude in guilt than those here mentioned, and
shall be convicted thereof before the mayor, council, or any other court
having cognizance of such crime or crimes, shall be eligible to any office
of the city of Mount Carmel or its bank, or be entitled to vote for any
such officer, within three years after such conviction, notwithstanding
anything in these articles to the contrary."

The plan for a town was successful. Beauchamp was surveyor, pastor,
teacher, and lawyer in the beginning of settlement. By 1819 a school was
established; four or five years later a school-house was built; by 1820
Mt. Carmel circuit of the M. E. church had been formed; in 1825 a brick
church was erected; the same year the town was incorporated by the state
on the plan laid down in the articles of association; in 1827 the annual
conference of the Illinois Conference was held at Mt. Carmel.

Beauchamp's health having improved he reentered the ministry in 1822, and
at the General Conference two years later he lacked but two votes of being
chosen bishop. He died in 1824.

Hinde, in 1825, was a member of the Wabash Navigation Company, consisting
of seventeen prominent Indiana and Illinois men, and having a capital
stock of one million dollars. He was one of the nine directors for the
first year. He continued to be a contributor to periodical literature and
became the biographer of his friend Beauchamp. In a letter from Mt.
Carmel, of May 6, 1842, Hinde says: "I have just returned from the East,
having visited the Atlantic cities generally for the first time, after
forty-five years pioneering in the wilderness of the West. I have been
three times a citizen of Kentucky, twice of Ohio, and twice of Illinois."
Hinde died in 1846 and was buried at Mt. Carmel. Among his writings is
found one of the most acute analyses of frontier character that has
appeared. The writer points out that eastern ministers have often been
unsuccessful and eastern immigrants unpopular, because they have
underrated the people of the West, among whom there are many people of
culture. They prefer "the _useful_ to the shining or showy talent." In the
West the best work has been done by westerners. The English spoken in the
West is the purest to be found, because the various provincialisms of the
immigrants are mutually corrective. The Virginian, who retained his
unbounded hospitality, was the most prominent character in the West. "If
we expect to find on crossing the mountains a people either illiterate or
ignorant as a body, we will assuredly, in many instances, be happily
disappointed. It too often happens, that one puffed up with self
importance, and possessing a conceited and heated imagination, will form
wild conjectures as to men and things. We have been amused at the
bewildered minds of such, with the 'whys' and 'wherefores'; and one of the
most ridiculous whims of some, is to endeavour to press every thing into
their own _mould_; and shape it, be it what it may, if possible, after
their own manner, custom, or operation, forgetting that 'we have to take
the world as it is, and not as we would have it to be.' The fact is, an
emigrant should come forth as an inquirer, and set himself down to learn
at the threshold of experience. On this rock thousands have been injured,
and none have suffered more than the English emigrants. Oh! with what
poignant grief have I heard the English emigrant exclaim with the
bitterest invectives on his own course and conduct, as to this particular.
Conceiving that he knew every thing, when he came here to test his
experience, he soon found that he 'knew nothing.' This circumstance I have
found too to have its bearings upon American emigrants from different
states; upon families, upon individuals, and upon preachers also. How
often have I heard the old settler complaining, (who having himself
learned by _experience_) of the impertinent conduct of an emigrant, who
sometimes carries his local policy through all the ramifications of his
life, and often into the religious society, as well as elsewhere; he
wishing every thing done, as he saw it done in Boston, New-York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, and very often 'Old England' and 'Ireland!' as if
men who have to act, and reflect upon the circumstances of the case,
different from any ever before presented except among themselves, are to
be governed by acts and doings of people in the moon!"(549) A man who thus
knew the frontier was fitted to be the founder of a western town.

Rufus Easton was the founder of the town of Alton. Like Hinde, he brought
to his work a fund of experience gained on the frontier and in public
affairs. Easton was born at Washington, Litchfield county, Connecticut, in
1774. He descended from pioneers, being a direct descendant of Joseph
Easton, who came from England to Newtowne, now Cambridge, Massachusetts,
about 1633, and was later one of Rev. Thos. Hooker's colony which founded
Hartford, Connecticut, of which Easton was an original proprietor. In 1792
Rufus Easton's father, a Tory, obtained a large grant of land near
Wolford, now Easton Corners, Ontario. Rufus received a good education
before studying law. In 1798 he was practicing law in Rome, New York, then
a frontier town. November, 1801, Easton, with thirteen other prominent
men, held a banquet to celebrate the election of Thos. Jefferson as
President. The prominence of the young lawyer at this time is shown by the
fact that he was consulted in regard to federal appointments, and that he
was in 1803 a confidential correspondent of De Witt Clinton. The winter of
1803-4 Easton spent in Washington, where he became a friend of Aaron Burr,
Postmaster-General Granger, and others. In the spring of 1804 he started
for New Orleans. Aaron Burr gave him a letter of introduction to Abm. R.
Ellery, Esq., of New Orleans, in which he said: "You will certainly be
greatly amused to converse with a man who has passed the whole winter in
this city--who has had free intercourse with the officers of Govt. &
members of Congress--who has discernment to see beyond the surface, and
frankness and independence enough to speak his own sentiments." Easton did
not, however, go to New Orleans. He stopped for a short time at Vincennes
and then located at St. Louis. He was appointed by Jefferson judge of the
Territory of Louisiana and first postmaster of St. Louis. In September,
1805, Burr, Wilkinson and Easton had a conference at St. Louis. Easton
turned a deaf ear to Burr's questionable proposals and from this time
Wilkinson was hostile to Easton. Easton corresponded with Jefferson and
Granger concerning the Burr conspiracy. Jefferson appointed him United
States attorney, 1814-18 he was delegate to Congress from Missouri,
1821-26 he was attorney-general of Missouri. Easton was very prominent,
entertaining almost all visitors of note. Edward Bates, Lincoln's
attorney-general, read law in Easton's office.

Soon after coming to St. Louis, Easton began to buy up claims to land in
Missouri and Illinois. When seeking to find a suitable place for a town in
Illinois, he selected a point on the east bank of the Mississippi,
twenty-five miles north of St. Louis and twenty miles south of the mouth
of the Illinois. There was here a good landing place for boats, and also
extensive beds of coal and limestone. The town was named Alton in honor of
the founder's son. One hundred lots in the new town were donated to the
support of the gospel and public schools, one-half of the proceeds to be
devoted to each. This provision was confirmed by the act of incorporation
of January 30, 1821, and the trustees were given the right to tax
undonated lots for the support of schools. This latter provision was in
advance of public sentiment and two years later it was repealed. Alton,
like Mt. Carmel and to a much greater extent, proved the wisdom of its
location. It has long been noted for its manufactures and is a thriving
modern city.(550)

The town of Springfield, since 1839 the capital of Illinois, was laid out
in 1822, before the land upon which it stood was offered for sale. When
the land was sold in November, 1823, the section upon which the town stood
was bought by Elijah Iles, Pascal Paoli Enos, Thomas Cox, and Daniel P.
Cook, each purchasing one quarter, but the title being vested by agreement
in Iles and Enos. Cook, like McDowell in the founding of Mt. Carmel, seems
to have been a non-resident proprietor.

Elijah Iles was a child of the wilderness. He was born in Kentucky in
1796, and died at Springfield, Illinois, in 1883, leaving valuable
reminiscences of his long experience on the frontier. His mother was
Elizabeth Crockett Iles, a relative of David Crockett. Elijah attended
school two winters and taught two winters. In 1812, although but sixteen
years of age, he acted as deputy for his father, who was sheriff of Bath
county, Kentucky. Some three years later his father gave him three hundred
dollars, with which he bought one hundred head of yearling cattle. For
three years he herded these cattle among the mountains of Kentucky, about
twenty miles from civilization, having as his only companions his horse,
dog, gun, milk cow, and the cattle. His meals usually consisted of a stew
made of bear meat, venison, or turkey, and a piece of fat bacon. At the
end of the three years the cattle were sold for about ten dollars a head,
and the youthful dealer having attained his majority went to Missouri and
became a land agent for eastern speculators, and soon began to speculate
for himself. In 1821, concluding that Missouri was too far from a market,
he sold some of his land and resolved to move to Illinois. At that time
the site upon which Springfield was to stand had been chosen as the
temporary county seat of Sangamon county, because eight men, some of whom
had families, lived within a radius of two miles from the site, and at no
other place in the county could the lawyers and judge secure board and
lodging. Iles quickly discerned the advantages of the Sangamon country as
a place of settlement, and straightway built a log store sixteen feet
square, went to St. Louis and bought fifteen hundred dollars worth of
goods, which he loaded on a keel-boat and had towed up the Mississippi and
the Illinois by six men, whom he paid seventy-five dollars for their
services. When the land was offered for sale, in 1823, Iles bought a
quarter-section.

Another quarter-section of the town site was bought by Pascal Paoli Enos.
The fact that the frontier is a great social leveler is well illustrated
by the combination of Enos and Iles as joint owners of a town site. The
Enos family had come from England in 1648, and Pascal Paoli Enos, son of
Major-General Roger Enos, was born in Windsor, Connecticut, in 1770. He
was graduated from Dartmouth College in 1794, studied law, was a member of
the Vermont legislature in 1804, married in Vermont and moved to
Cincinnati in 1815, later to St. Charles, Missouri, then to St. Louis,
then to Madison county, Illinois, and in 1823 was appointed by President
Monroe receiver of public moneys for the land-office in the District of
Sangamo. Thus the elderly scholar joined the shrewd but youthful
frontiersman.

Col. Thomas Cox was the third of the trio of the resident proprietors of
Springfield. He had signed a petition for the division of Randolph county
in 1812, represented Union county as a senator in the first general
assembly of Illinois, and in 1820 was appointed register of the
land-office at Vandalia. In 1823 he came to Springfield as register of the
land-office at that place. Col. Cox was six feet tall, weighed two hundred
and forty pounds, and was a drunkard within a short time after the
founding of Springfield.

The most important thing about the founding of the town is the
heterogeneous character of its founders. A few incidents in their
subsequent history will emphasize this, and also show how well they worked
together when surrounded by the same conditions. When the commissioners
came to locate a permanent county seat Springfield, then called Calhoun,
had a formidable rival for the honor. Iles and Enos managed to have a
mutual friend engaged as guide to the commissioners. The guide conducted
them to the rival settlement by a long and rough route and upon being
requested to take them back over a shorter route he took a course more
difficult still. The commissioners decided that the rival settlement was
inaccessible. Iles was twice state senator, major in the Winnebago war,
and captain in the Black Hawk war, in which he served with Zachary Taylor,
Jefferson Davis, Abraham Lincoln, John T. Stuart, Robt. Anderson, of Fort
Sumter fame, and others. Iles was also a large stock dealer, selling hogs
and cattle in St. Louis and mules in Kentucky, until 1838, in which year
he lost ten thousand dollars on hogs packed at Alton. In 1838-9 he built
the American House in Springfield. This was then the largest hotel in the
state and its erection created a great sensation. He was four times state
senator, and was an officer of the Bank of Edwardsville. Enos held his
position as receiver until removed for political reasons by Jackson in
1829. Cox had an eventful career. He was removed from his position of
register, under charges of misconduct, early in 1827; the next year he was
keeping a hotel in Springfield; later he removed to Iowa, then Wisconsin,
having secured a contract for the survey of public lands. He was three
times a member of the Iowa territorial House of Representatives and twice
a member of the territorial Council. A band of murderers, horsethieves,
counterfeiters, and blacklegs, having gained possession of the town of
Bellevue, on the Mississippi, in Jackson county, Iowa, Col. Cox led the
citizens in a successful attack in which seven men were killed outright
and some ten or fifteen wounded. At this time Cox was recognized as a
pronounced drunkard, but his undoubted courage, ability to command, and
strong physique secured him a following.(551)

Shadrach Bond, the first governor of Illinois, and Pierre Menard, the
first lieutenant-governor, were both poorly educated, but they had a good
knowledge of men and a large fund of information concerning practical
affairs.(552) Edward Coles, the second governor of the state, is a good
example of the polished, well-educated gentleman succeeding with a rude
constituency. Coles was born in 1786, in Albemarle county, Virginia,
fitted for college by private tutors, educated at Hampden Sidney and later
at William and Mary College. His father's home was visited by Patrick
Henry, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, the Randolphs, Tazwell, Wirt, and
others. For six years Coles was the private secretary of President
Madison, and during this time he became an intimate friend of Nicholas
Biddle. In 1815 he visited Illinois in what must have seemed at that time
great state, for he traveled not only with a horse and buggy, but with a
servant and a saddle-horse as well. In 1816-17 he was sent as a special
messenger to Russia, stopping at Paris on his return, meeting Louis XVIII.
of France and becoming a friend of Lafayette. In 1819 he came to
Edwardsville, Illinois, emancipated his slaves, and assumed his duties as
register of the land-office. The rough pioneers were very anxious to get a
title to their lands. "When the settler reached Edwardsville, dressed in
jeans and wearing moccasins, with his money in his belt, having traveled
on foot or on horseback long distances, and first presented himself to the
Register of the Land Office, there he found Edward Coles, who had recently
emigrated into the State from Virginia. It was known to some of them that
he had been the private secretary for President Madison, and had been on
an important mission to Europe.

"They found him a young man of handsome, but somewhat awkward personal
appearance, genteelly dressed, and of kind and agreeable manners. The
anxious settler was at once put at ease by the suavity of his address, the
interest he appeared to feel in aiding him, and the thoroughly intelligent
manner in which he discharged his duty. No man went away who was not
delighted with his intercourse with the 'Register.' And herein is
illustrated the great mistake so often made by politicians and candidates
for popular favor. Too many candidates for the suffrage of the people in
our early political contests thought it necessary, in order to make
themselves popular, to affect slovenly and unclean dress and vulgar
manners in their campaigns. There was never a greater mistake. However
rough, ill-clothed and unintelligent the voter might be, he always
preferred to vote for the man who was dressed and acted like a gentleman
to the one who dressed like and acted like himself."(553) Coles was always
dignified, always gentlemanly, and always respected. His brief residence
in Illinois affected its history for all time to come. Like Coles in
several respects was his successor as governor, Ninian Edwards. Born in
Maryland in 1775, educated by the celebrated William Wirt, and later
graduating from Dickinson College, Pennsylvania, at nineteen years of age
he came to Kentucky. Here he served two terms in the Kentucky legislature,
was presiding judge of the general court, circuit judge, and chief-justice
of the court of appeals. Henry Clay gave as Edwards' marked
characteristics, good understanding, weight of character, and conciliatory
manners. In his campaign for governor of Illinois, Edwards presented
himself as the highest type of a polished and well-dressed gentleman,
always riding in his own carriage and driven by his negro servant, and
dressing in all the style of an old-fashioned gentleman with broad-cloth
coat, ruffled shirt, and high-topped boots. The people were not repelled
by such a display, but considered it an honor to vote for such a man. The
egotistical Adolphus Frederick Hubbard, who was one of the two opponents
of Edwards, intermingled bad grammar and poor attempts at wit in his
electioneering speeches, and received less than one-tenth of the number of
votes cast for either of the two other candidates.(554)





WORKS CONSULTED.




I. Sources.


_American Historical Association, Annual Report of the. Washington:
Government Printing Office._

Report for 1893, pp. 199-227, see Turner, Frederick Jackson; Report of
1896, Vol. I., pp. 930-1107, has "Selections from the Draper Collection in
the possession of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, to elucidate
the proposed French expedition under George Rogers Clark against
Louisiana, in the years 1793-94."

_American monthly Magazine and critical Review. New York: H. Biglow,
editor._

Volumes I.-III. (1817-18) give information of much value concerning
European conditions inducing emigration. A few of the notices concern
emigration from east to west in the United States.

_American Register; or, Summary Review of History, Politics, and
Literature. Philadelphia._

Volume II., 202, 203, 216 (1817), tells of improvements in steamboat
navigation.

_Americans as they are; described in a Tour through the Valley of the
Mississippi. London: Hurst, Chance & Co.,_ 1828. vi. + 218 pp.

Observations on Illinois are more suggestive than accurate.

ATWATER, CALEB. _Remarks made on a Tour to Prairie du Chien. Columbus,
Ohio: Isaac N. Whiting_, 1831. 296 pp.

The tour was from Circleville, Ohio, to Prairie du Chien, in 1829, and
thence to Washington. The writer's remarks give valuable material for the
history of the time.

---- _Writings. Columbus, Ohio: Caleb Atwater_, 1833. 408 pp.

The author was one of a commission to treat with the Indians at Prairie du
Chien for the cession of the lead region. In 1829 he went from St. Louis
to Prairie du Chien. He gives good descriptions of Quincy, Galena, and a
few other places. The part of the Writings describing this journey was
separately printed in 1831. The edition of 1833 is somewhat better than
the previous one.

BALESTIER, JOSEPH N. _Annals of Chicago: a Lecture delivered before the
Chicago Lyceum, Jan. 21, 1840. Republished from the original Edition of
1840, with an Introduction, written by the Author in 1876. Chicago: Fergus
Printing Co._, 1876. In _Fergus historical Series_, I., No. 1. 48 pp.

Contains a copy of Capt. Heald's letter of 1812, describing the massacre
at Fort Dearborn.

BIGGS, WILLIAM. _Narrative of William Biggs, while he was a Prisoner with
the Kickepoo Indians ... on the west Bank of the Wabash River ... Printed
for the author, June, 1826._ 22 pp.

Biggs was captured on March 28, 1788, and remained a captive for several
weeks. This very rare book gives valuable insight into the revolting
customs of the Indians.

BIRKBECK, MORRIS. _Extracts from a supplementary Letter from the Illinois:
an Address to British Emigrants, and a Reply to the Remarks of William
Cobbett, Esq. 2d ed. London: James Ridgeway_, 1819. 36 pp.

Birkbeck had issued an address to British emigrants, advertising the
virtues of his English settlement in Illinois. William Cobbett declared
that Birkbeck's account of the fertility and salubrity of Illinois was not
true. Birkbeck issued a somewhat scathing reply, showing Cobbett's
ignorance.

---- _Letters from Illinois. Philadelphia: M. Carey & Son_, 1818. 12mo. vii.
+ 154 pp.

Twenty-two letters written from November, 1817, to March, 1818, by Morris
Birkbeck, from the English settlement in Edwards county, Ill., of which
settlement he was the founder. Very valuable for notes concerning
transportation and the manner of life of the early settlers of Illinois.

---- _Notes on a Journey in America from the Coast of Virginia to the
Territory of Illinois. Philadelphia: Richardson_, 1817.

Passed through several editions in England.

A graphic account of the journey of Birkbeck from 500 miles east of Cape
Henry, Va. (April 26, 1817), to Shawneetown, Ill., where on August 2,
1817, he bought 1440 acres of land as a site for his English settlement.
Very valuable for information concerning transportation and western
conditions.

BLANEY, Capt. _An Excursion through the United States and __ Canada during
the years 1822-23. By an English Gentleman. London: Baldwin, Cradock, and
Joy_, 1824. 16mo. 511 pp.

Pages 156-92 tell of the author's trip across Illinois. He visited Albion
and then went to St. Louis overland. The descriptions of Birkbeck's
settlement, the difficulties of prairie travel, and of the frontier life
encountered are much above the average of travelers' reports.

BONNER, T. D. _Life and Adventures of James P. Beckwourth, Mountaineer,
Scout, and Pioneer, and Chief of the Crow Nation of Indians. Written from
his own Dictation. New York: Harper & Bros._, 1858. 16mo. 535 pp.

The book deals almost entirely with the region west of the Mississippi,
but in 1820 Beckwourth visited Galena. He went from St. Louis with a party
led by Col. R. M. Johnson, the object of the party being to gain a mining
concession from the Sauk Indians.

BRANNAN, JOHN (_Editor_). _Official Letters of the military and naval
Officers of the United States, during the War with Great Britain in the
Years 1812, 13, 14, & 15. Washington: Way & Gideon, 1823._ 510 pp.

A valuable collection. Printed without comment. Pages 84-5 give Capt.
Heald's official report of the massacre at Fort Dearborn, August 15, 1812.
The report is in a letter to Thos. H. Cushing, Adjutant General, written
from Pittsburg, October 23, 1812.

BRODHEAD, Col. DANIEL. _A Letter from Brodhead to Gen. Washington
referring to La Balme's Expedition._

In _The olden Time_, II., 390-91.

BUTRICKE, GEORGE. _Affairs at Fort Chartres, 1768-1781. Albany: J.
Munsell_, 1864. 10 pp.

Reprinted from _Historical Magazine_, VIII., No, 8. Valuable. Several
letters written by Geo. Butricke, then stationed at Fort Chartres.
Contains interesting notes on Indians, Spaniards, and British. Tells of
epidemic.

_Calendar of Virginia State Papers and other Manuscripts. Richmond, Va._,
1875-1900. 9 vols.

The early volumes have documents of great value concerning the period when
Illinois was a part of Virginia.

CARTWRIGHT, PETER, _Autobiography of Peter Cartwright, the __ backwoods
Preacher. Ed. by W. P. Strickland. New York: Carlton & Porter_, 1857,
16mo. 525 pp.

The author was from 1803 to the time of writing his book (1856) one of the
most famous circuit riders. His first work was in Kentucky. He came to
Illinois in 1823. His views on slavery, which caused his removal, are
interesting. A valuable work, especially for giving an insight into the
social life of the time.

CHETLAIN, Gen. AUGUSTUS LOUIS. _Recollections of seventy Years. Galena:
The Gazette Pub. Co._, 1899. 304 pp.

The author was one of the first settlers in Galena, and gives valuable
information concerning that important region--1821 ff.

_Chicago Historical Society's Collections. Chicago_, 1882-90:--


    I. History of the English Settlement in Edwards County, Illinois,
    by George Flower, 1882. 408 pp.

    II. Sketch of Enoch Long, by Harvey Reid, 1884. 112 pp.

    III. The Edwards Papers, edited by E. B. Washburne, 1884. 632 pp.

    IV. Early Chicago and Illinois, 1889. 400 pp. Of great value.


CHILDS, Col. EBENEZER. _Recollections of Wisconsin since 1820. In Wis.
Hist. Coll._, IV., 1859, 153-95.

The writer describes Chicago as it was in 1821, at which time he visited
it.

_Christian Spectator_, V., 1823, 20-26. _Remarks on the States of Illinois
and Missouri_, by Edward Hollister.

The author had recently completed a missionary tour in these states, and
his remarks give an insight into the social conditions of the time.

COBBETT, WILLIAM. _A Years Residence, in the United States of America, 3d
ed. London: William Cobbett_, 1828. 370 pp.

Cobbett was in the United States in 1817-18. He declared that Birkbeck and
Fearon had deceived the people of England by portraying America as better
than it was. His book is unfair.

COFFIN, LEVI. _Reminiscences of Levi Coffin, the reputed President of the
Underground Railroad.... Cincinnati: Western Tract Society_ [c. 1876]. _2d
ed. with appendix. Cincinnati: Robert Clarke & Co._, 1880. 732 pp.

Pages 89-99 describe the author's visit to a Quaker settlement in Sangamon
county, Ill., in 1823. Lost on the prairies.

COLLOT, VICTOR. _A Journey in North America, containing a Survey of the
Countries watered by the Mississippi, Ohio, Missouri, and other affluing
Rivers ... Illustrated by 36 Maps, Plans, Views, and divers Cuts. Paris:
Arthus Bertrand_, 1826. 2 vols. and atlas in one. iv. + 310; v. + 272 pp.

The author traveled through Illinois in 1796. His observations were acute
and are more helpful than would be expected from a soldier of fortune. The
New Orleans _Picayune_ of March 18, 1901, has a valuable article on the
journey of Collot and its purpose. See his _Map of the Country of the
Illinois_, in pocket.

_Columbian Centinel. Boston, June-December_, 1790; 1791-1801; 1802-1829.

The issue for June 16, 1790, has a note on the current experiments with
steamboats. In Library of Wisconsin State Historical Society.

CROGHAN, GEORGE. _Journal_, 1765. In Thwaites, _Early western Travels, I.,
126-73. Cleveland, Ohio: Arthur H. Clark Company_, 1904.

The Journal is of a trip to the West, and characterizes the early French
settlers.

CUMING, FORTESCUE. _Sketches of a Tour to the western Country,...
commenced at Philadelphia in the Winter of 1807 and concluded in 1809.
Pittsburg: Cramer, Spear & Eichbaum_, 1810. 12mo. 504 pp.

Describes Shawneetown and gives some information in regard to routes. Very
slight, however, in respect to Illinois. Criticism: _The Inter Ocean,
August 3, 1904._

CUTLER, JULIA PERKINS. _Life and Times of Ephraim Cutler. Prepared from
his Journals and Correspondence. Cincinnati: Robert Clarke & Co._, 1890.
353 pp.

Cutler early settled in Ohio. This work gives good examples of the
difficulties of travel, between 1795 and 1809, on some of the Alleghany
routes frequented by emigrants to Illinois. The driving of western cattle
to market is also described.

CUTLER, WILLIAM PARKER, and CUTLER, JULIA PERKINS. _Life, Journals and
Correspondence of Rev. Manasseh Cutler_, LL. D. Cincinnati: Robert Clarke
& Co., 1888. 2 vols. 9 + 524; 495 PP.

Considerable information concerning early eastern opposition to western
settlement is given. Dr. Cutler kept a diary from 1765 to 1823, of which
nine years are missing.

DE PEYSTER, J. WATTS, LL. D. _Miscellanies, by an Officer_ [Colonel Arent
Schuyler de Peyster, B. A.], 1774-1813. _New York: A. E. Chasmar & Co._,
1888. 80 pp., and an appendix of cci. pp.

Pages xxvi.-xxvii. contain a letter from Arent De Peyster to Capt. McKee
describing an Illinois expedition against St. Josephs in 1780 or 1781.
Letter dated Detroit, Feb. 1, 1781.

_Draper Collection of Manuscripts._

This collection, made by Lyman C. Draper, is the property of the State
Historical Society of Wisconsin. It has been of more value to the writer
than any other single source, being especially helpful for the hitherto
obscure period immediately succeeding the expedition of George Rogers
Clark, 1779-1790. Most important of all are the Harmar Papers, although
the Illinois MSS., the Clark MSS., and Draper's Notes were much used. The
Hinde MSS. have little historical value, consisting as they do, largely of
religious musings of the writer's old age.

DUDEN, GOTTFRIED. _Bericht ueber eine Reise nach den westlichen Staaten
Nordamerika's and einen mehrjaehrigen Aufenthalt am Missouri (in den Jahren
1824-1827) in Bezug auf Auswanderung und Uebervoelkerung. 1st ed. of 1500
copies. 2d ed. Bonn, In Commission bei Eduard Weber_, 1834. lviii. + 404
pp.

Contains a prediction of Illinois future greatness. Gives valuable
information concerning the cost and manner of transportation, and
concerning social life. Comparison of American and European conditions.

DUNN, JACOB PIATT, _Compiler. Slavery Petitions and Papers. In Indiana
Hist. Soc. Pub., II., 443-529. Indianapolis: The Bowen-Merrill Company_,
1894.

"The following papers are the petitions to Congress from Northwest and
Indiana Territories for the suspension of the sixth article of compact of
the Ordinance of 1787, and the admission of slavery to the Territory,
together with the counter-petitions, the reports on them, and the
accompanying documents,"--Compiler's introduction.

_Edwardsville Spectator. Edwardsville, Ill.: Hooper Warren, pub., Apr. 18,
1820-Feb. 8, 1825, and 1820-22._

Material has been gleaned from the issues of Nov. 7, 1820; August 31,
1822; Nov. 30, 1822; Nov. 29, 1823; Jan. 27, 1824; and Oct 5, 1824. In
Library of Chicago Historical Society.

ERNST, FERDINAND. _Travels in Illinois in 1819. Translation from the
German Original._ In _Pub. No. 8 of the Ill. Hist. Lib._ pp. 150-65.
_Springfield, Ill.: Phillips Bros._, 1904.

Ernst was the leader of a party of German immigrants who settled at
Vandalia soon after his journey to Illinois. He gives a vivid picture of
the rapidly settling Illinois with its squatters and its fertile and
inviting land. He visited the Sangamo country and the Kickapoo United
States treaty conference.

FAUX, W. _Memorable Days in America: being a Journal of a Tour to the
United States, principally undertaken to ascertain, by positive Evidence,
the Condition and probable Prospects of British Emigrants; including
Accounts of Mr. Birkbeck's Settlement in the Illinois ... London: W.
Simpkin & R. Marshall_, 1823. 488 pp.

Sufficiently pessimistic to require cautious use. The journey was
performed in 1819-20.

FAY, H. A. _Collection of the official Accounts, in Detail, of all the
Battles fought by Sea and Land, between the Navy and Army of the United
States, and the Navy and Army of Great Britain, during the Years_ 1812,
13, 14, & 15. _New York: E. Conrad_, 1817. 295 pp.

Contains Capt. Heald's official report of the massacre at Fort Dearborn,
August 15, 1812, and Col. Russell's official report of Gov. Edwards'
attack on the Indians near Peoria in 1812.

FEARON, HENRY BRADSHAW. _Sketches of America. A Narrative of a Journey of
five thousand Miles through the eastern and western States of America ...
With Remarks on Mr. Birkbeck's __"__Notes__"__ and __"__Letters.__"__ 3d
ed. London: Strahan and Spottiswoode_, 1819. xv. + 454 pp.

The work gives a glimpse of Illinois through a foreigner's eye. Fearon
paints in sober colors, but his values are fairly true. Of considerable
value as a work on society in the U. S. in 1817-18.

FLINT, JAMES. _Letters from America, containing Observations on the
Climate and Agriculture of the western States, the Manners of the People,
and the Prospects of Emigrants, &c., &c. Edinburgh: W. & C. Tait, 1822._
16mo. 330 pp.

The author probably did not reach Illinois, but his letters from Ohio,
Indiana and Kentucky give interesting bits of information in regard to the
manner and cost of travel--1818 to 1820.

FLOWER, GEORGE. _History of the English Settlement in Edwards County,
Illinois, founded in 1817 and 1818, by Morris Birkbeck and George Flower.
Chicago: Fergus Printing Co., 1882._ 16mo. 401 pp.

The work is volume I. of the Chicago Historical Society's Collections. The
best book on this important episode in immigration to Illinois.

FLOWER, RICHARD. _Letters from Lexington and the Illinois, containing a
brief Account of the English Settlement in the latter Territory, and a
Refutation of the Misrepresentations of Mr. Cobbett. London: J. Rigdway,
1819._ iv. + 32 pp.

Two letters--one from Lexington and the other from New Albion, Ill. Highly
colored.

FORSYTH, Maj. THOMAS, _Indian Agent_. _Journal of a Voyage from St. Louis
to the Falls of St. Anthony, in 1819._ In _Wis. Hist. Coll._, VI.,
188-215. _Madison, Wis.: Atwood & Culver, State Printers, 1872._

Incidentally the writer gives an account of the atrocities committed in
1812 by Capt. Thomas E. Craig upon the inhabitants of Peoria. Forsyth was
an eye-witness of the barbarities described.

_Galena Advertiser. Galena, Ill. Pub. by H. Newhall, Philleo and Co., July
20, 1829-May 24, 1830, and July 20, 1829-May 10, 1830._

July 20, July 27, August 10, Sept. 14, Sept. 21, 1829, have been used. In
Library of Chicago Historical Society.

_Galena (Ill.) Weekly Gazette._

The issue for May 2, 1879, contains reminiscences of Mrs. Adile B.
Gratiot, whose husband settled in Galena, Ill., in 1825. This account
furnishes a valuable bit of reliable history. It describes Galena,
northern Illinois, a Fourth of July celebration (1826), the coming of Lord
Selkirk's colonists, and the trouble with the Sauk Indians (1827).

GILLESPIE, Hon. JOSEPH. _Recollections of early Illinois and her noted
Men. Fergus hist. Series_, No. 13. 51 pp. _Chicago: Fergus Printing Co.,
1880._

Valuable because of the author's direct knowledge of persons and events.

GOODRICH, SAMUEL GRISWOLD. _Recollections of a Life Time; or, Men and
Things I have seen: in a Series of Letters to a Friend, historical,
biographical, anecdotal, and descriptive. New York: Miller, Orton & Co.,
1857._ 2 vols. 542, 563 pp.

Letter XXXIII. describes the emigration from East to West in 1816-17.

GRATIOT, Mrs. ADILE. _In early Illinois (Towns)._

A volume of newspaper clippings in the Library of the Chicago Historical
Society. Mrs. Gratiot, who early lived in Galena, gives reminiscences of
her life there. Describes the trouble with the Winnebago Indians.

HALL, JAMES. _Letters from the West; containing Sketches of Scenery,
Manners, and Customs; and Anecdotes connected with the first Settlements
of the western Sections of the United States. London: Henry Colburn,
1828._ 16mo. 385 pp.

Verbose, but not without value. One of the twenty-two letters is from
Shawneetown and describes the vicinity. Illinois is defended from her
foreign detractors. Routes and manner of travel receive much attention.

HAMILTON, HENRY EDWARD. _Incidents and Events in the Life of Gurdon
Saltonstall Hubbard, collected from personal Narrations and other Sources,
and arranged by his Nephew, Henry E. Hamilton. Chicago: Rand, McNally &
Co., 1888._ 189 pp.

Very valuable for the history of northern and eastern Illinois from 1818
to the close of the Black Hawk war. Most of the work is autobiographical.
Mr. Hubbard was an employee of the American Fur Company. Later he was in
business in Danville and Chicago.

HARDING, BENJAMIN. _A Tour through the Western Country, A. D. 1818 & 1819.
New London: Samuel Green, 1819._ 8vo. 17 pp.

The inducements which Illinois offered to emigrants are described with a
degree of sense rarely displayed in the period to which the work belongs
by writers of advice to emigrants. The American Bottom and the prairies
are described.

HARRIS, WILLIAM TELL. _Remarks made during a Tour through the United
States of America, in the Years 1817, 1818, and 1819._

Describes Shawneetown (1818), and speaks of the great number of wagons,
horses, and passengers which crossed the ferry there.

HECKE, J. VAL. _Reise durch die Vereinigten Staaten von Nord-Amerika in
den Jahren 1818 und 1819. Nebst einer kurzen Uebersicht der neuesten
Ereignisse auf dem Kriegs-Schauplatz in Sud-Amerika und West-Indien.
Berlin: H. Ph. Petri_, 1820-21. 2 vols. 16mo. I., 228; II., xvi. + 326.
pp.

Interesting and incorrect. The author tells well both of what he knows and
what he does not know. Tells foreigners how to reach Illinois.

HENRY, WILLIAM WIRT. _Patrick Henry. Life, Correspondence, and Speeches.
New York: Charles Scribners Sons_, 1891. 3 vols. I., 20 + 622; II., 652;
III., 672 pp.

The third volume contains instructions issued by Gov. Henry to officers of
the County of Illinois, and some correspondence of those officers.

_Historical Register of the United States. Philadelphia: G. Palmer_,
1814-1816.

II., 60-62 (second pagination) gives Capt. Heald's official report of the
massacre at Fort Dearborn on August 15, 1812.

HODGSON, ADAM. _Remarks during a Journey through North America in the
Years 1819-21, in a Series of Letters: with an Appendix, containing an
Account of several of the Indian Tribes, and the principal missionary
Stations, &c. New York: Samuel Whiting, 1823._ 8vo. iv. + 335 pp.

The author did not visit Illinois, but he gives an interesting criticism
of Mr. Birkbeck's venture in Illinois. He conversed with persons who had
visited Birkbeck's settlement. Criticism rather unfavorable.

HOLMES, ISAAC. _An Account of the United States of America_, [1823]
_derived from actual Observation, during a Residence of four Years in that
Republic: including original Communications. London: Caxton Press_, 1823.
16mo. viii. + 476 pp.

Most of the author's remarks are general. He, however, mentions Birkbeck
and advises emigrants to settle in the East rather than to go West as
Birkbeck advised.

HULME, THOMAS. _Journal._ In Cobbett, "A Year's Residence in the United
States of America," 259-309. 3d ed. _Andover: B. Bensley_, 1828.

The Journal was of a journey through the West in 1817. Birkbeck's
settlement and the manner of traveling were described. Some information in
regard to prices was given.

HUTCHINS, Capt. THOMAS. _A topographical Description of Virginia,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, and North Carolina, comprehending the Rivers Ohio,
Kenhawa, Sioto, Cherokee, Wabash, Illinois, Mississippi, etc.... With a
Plan of the Rapids of the Ohio, a Plan of the several Villages in the
Illinois Country ... and an Appendix containing Mr. Patrick Kennedy's
Journal up the Illinois River. London: T. Hutchins_, 1778. 8vo. 67 pp.

Valuable for its map of the Illinois country and a description of the
settlements.

ILLINOIS AND WABASH LAND COMPANIES:--

_An Account of the Proceedings of the Illinois and Ouabache Land
Companies, in Pursuance of their Purchases made of the independent
Natives, July 5th, 1773, and 18th October, 1775. Philadelphia: William
Young_, 1796. 55 pp.

_Memorial of the Illinois and Wabash Land Company, 13th January, 1797.
Referred to Mr. Jeremiah Smith, Mr. Kittera, and Mr. Baldwin. Published by
Order of the House of Representatives. Philadelphia: Richard Folwell_, [c.
1797.] 26 pp.

_An Account of the Proceedings of the Illinois and Ouabache Land
Companies, in Pursuance of their Purchases made of the independent
Natives, July 5th, 1773, and 18th October, 1775. Philadelphia: William
Duane_, 1803. 74 pp.

_Memorial of the Illinois and Ouabache Land Companies to the honorable
Congress of the United States. Intended as a full Recapitulation and clear
Statement of the former Addresses, Petitions, __ Memorials, &c., of the
Company; and their short and final Prayer for Redress, without Delay:
presented at the Sessions_, 1802. 20 pp.

_Memorial of the United Illinois and Wabash Land Companies, to the Senate
and House of Representatives of the United States. Baltimore: Joseph
Robinson_, 1816. 48 pp.

_Illinois, House Journal, 1824-25. Vandalia, Ill.: Robert Blackwell &
Co._, 1824. 305 pp.

Contains items on slavery (pp. 13, 151-2), and tells of the election of a
U. S. senator to succeed Ninian Edwards (pp. 38-9).

_Illinois Intelligencer. Edwardsville, Ill.: Hooper Warren, ed._, 1826-30.

In St. Louis Mercantile Library.

_Illinois Laws_, 1824-25. 190 pp.

Pages 50-51 give the text of an act to amend an act entitled "An act
respecting free Negroes, Mulattoes, Servants, and Slaves," approved 30th
March, 1819.

_Illinois monthly Magazine. Vandalia, Ill.: conducted by James Hall._

Notes on Illinois in Volumes I. and II. (1830-1832) and the History of St.
Louis in Volume II. are of some service. The articles are, however,
unsigned, and are of too popular a type to be wholly relied upon.

_Illinois Revised Laws of 1833. Vandalia, Ill.: Greiner & Sherman_, 1833.
677 pp. and index.

Contains the negro codes of 1819 and 1829, respectively.

IMLAY, GILBERT. _A topographical Description of the Western Territory of
North America, containing a succinct Account of its Climate, natural
History, Population, Agriculture, Manners and Customs. London: J.
Debrett_, 1792. 8vo. xv. + 247 pp. _3d ed._, 1797, enlarged. More
valuable.

The best early authority on the subject treated. Not very full in regard
to Illinois. Predicts western state-making.

KEATING, WILLIAM H. _Narrative of an Expedition to the Source of St.
Peter's River, Lake Winnepeek, Lake of the Woods, __ &c., &c., performed
in the Year 1823 ... compiled from the Notes of Major Long, Messrs. Say,
Keating, and Colhoun. Philadelphia: Carey & Lea_, 1824. 2 vols. 8vo. I.,
xii. + 439; II., 459 pp. Same, _London: Whittaker_, 1825.

Contains an extremely interesting and important description of Chicago and
its vicinity, and in less detail, of northern Illinois.

KINZIE, Mrs. JOHN H. (Juliette A. McGill Kinzie). _Wau-Bun, the __"__Early
Day__"__ in the North-West._ New edition with an introduction and notes by
Reuben Gold Thwaites. _Chicago: The Caxton Club_, 1901. xxvii. + 451 pp.

This work, which first appeared in 1856, has the best account, not by an
eye-witness, of the massacre at Fort Dearborn in 1812. Mrs. Helm gives
this account.

----_Narrative of the Massacre at Chicago, August 15, 1812, and of some
preceding Events. Chicago: Ellis & Fergus_, 1844. 34 pp.

A valuable account, written by Mrs. Kinzie from the dictation of her
mother-in-law, who was an eye-witness of the massacre. Incorporated almost
verbatim in Mrs. Kinzie's "Wau-Bun." The edition of 1844 was the first,
not the second, as stated in the Chicago Magazine, I., 103, and repeated
by Dr. Thwaites.

LAUSSAT, Count. _The military Title of Louisiana and the Territory of
Illinois, dated New Orleans, Jan. 12, 1804, and signed by Count Laussat,
Napoleon's Ambassador. It is also the order to Gen. De Lassus to deliver
the Territory over to Capt. Amos Stoddard, of the U. S. Artillery._

Original manuscript letter, in French, in the Illinois State Historical
Library, Springfield, Ill.

LOOMIS, CHESTER A. _The Notes of a Journey to the Great West in 1825._ 28
unnumbered pages, six chapters. Printed without place, name of publisher,
or date.

The writer entered Illinois in the present Vermilion county, went south to
the Wabash, west to Vandalia, then to Kaskaskia. His observations are
acute and readable. Describes Vermilion county salines, Illinois farm
products, pioneer homes, and the inconvenience attendant upon traveling on
horseback. Bound with other pamphlets in the Champaign (Illinois) Public
Library.

----_A Journey on Horseback through the Great West, in 1825. Visiting
Alleghany Towns, Olean, Warren, Franklin, Pittsburg, New Lisbon, Elyria,
Norfolk, Columbus, Zanesville, Vermilion, Kaskaskia, Vandalia, Sandusky,
and many other places. Bath, N. Y.; Plaindealer Press._ 27 unnumbered
pages.

The writer was from Rushville, Ontario county, N. Y. Same as the
preceding. In library of State Historical Society of Wisconsin.

_McLean County Historical Society, Transactions of the._ Vol. II.
_Bloomington, Ill.: Pantagraph Printing and Stationery Co._, 1903. 695
pages.

Some facts of interest concerning the first school in the county, and the
early settlers and their manner of living, are given by those old settlers
who were chief actors.

_Mandements des Eveques de Quebec. Quebec: Imprimerie Generale A. Cote et
Cie._, 1887-88. I., (1659-1740), 588; II., (1741-1806), 566; III.,
(1806-1850), 635; IV., (1850-1870), 794 pp.

A valuable collection of manuscripts. They tell of a monopoly on sending
missionaries to Illinois, and one letter (II., 205) gives a good idea of
the worldliness of the Kaskaskians of 1767. The first two volumes alone
concern us.

MASON, EDWARD G. (_Editor_). _Early Chicago and Illinois. Chicago: Fergus
Printing Co._, 1890. 521 pp.

This volume is the fourth of the collections of the Chicago Historical
Society. It is one of the most valuable collections for the study of early
Illinois history. Contains, among other things, Pierre Menard Papers, John
Todd Papers, John Todd's Record-Book, Lists of Early Illinois Citizens,
and Rocheblave Papers.

MEEKER, Dr. MOSES. _Early History of the Lead Region of Wisconsin. In Wis.
Hist. Coll._, VI., 271-96. _Madison, Wis.: Atwood & Culver, State
Printers_, 1872.

Very valuable. Dr. Meeker came to Galena in 1822 and settled there in
1823. The article gives the history of the settlement of the lead region
to 1825.

_Michigan pioneer and historical Collections. Lansing, Mich._, 1877-1900.
29 vols.

Valuable for the French and British periods of Illinois history.

_Mount Carmel, Articles of Association, for the City of. Chillicothe: John
Bailhache_, 1817. 4to. 22 pp.

Mt. Carmel was to be, and now is, on the west bank of the Wabash in what
is now Wabash county, Illinois. The articles drawn up by the proprietors
and their agent contain curious provisions in regard to the support of
church and school. Some Puritanic rules are given. (In _Ill. Local Hist.
Pam._, VII., in Library of Wisconsin State Historical Society.)

_Niles' weekly Register, Baltimore._

Of great value for the period 1811-1830. Its notices of foreign
immigration are extensive.

OGDEN, GEORGE W. _Letters from the West. New-Bedford: Melcher & Rogers_,
1823. 126 pp.

Describes several of the Illinois towns, and characterizes their
inhabitants. A part of the work is plagiarized from Harding, _Tour through
the western Country_. Reprinted in Thwaites, _Early western Travels_, XIX.

_Olden Time_, I., 1846, 403-15. _George Croghan's Journal of his Route._

Interesting sketches of the French.

OWEN, A. R. _Ums Jahr 1819 und 1829._ In _Deutsch-Amerikanische
Geschichtsblaetter_, Jahrgang 2, Heft 2, pp. 41-43. _Chicago: April_, 1902.

Not sufficiently definite, reliable, or extensive to be of much value.

PALMER, JOHN. _Journal of Travels in the United States of North America
and in Lower Canada, performed in the year 1817. London: Sherwood, Neely,
and Jones_, 1818. vii. 456 pp.

Pages 411-20 are on Illinois. Too inaccurate to be of great value,
although some information in regard to roads may be used. Tells of routes,
methods, and cost of travel.

PALMER, JOHN MCCAULEY. _Personal Recollections of John M. Palmer.
Cincinnati: The Robert Clarke Co._, 1901. 631 pp.

The writer came to Illinois in 1831, but he had previously lived in
Kentucky, and he gives some facts concerning slavery that are of value.

PARKISON, Col. DANIEL M. _Pioneer Life in Wisconsin._ In _Wis. Hist.
Coll._, II., 326-64. _Madison, Wis.: Calkins & Proudfit_, 1856.

The author came from Tennessee to Madison county, Illinois, in 1817; in
1819, to Sangamon county, Illinois; in 1827, to Galena, Illinois. Gives a
valuable statement concerning the feeling of Yankees toward Southerners,
tells of the first sermon in Sangamon county, and of the Winnebago war of
1827.

PECK, Rev. JOHN MASON. _A Guide for Emigrants_ (1831), _containing
Sketches of Illinois, Missouri, and the adjacent Parts. Boston: Lincoln &
Edmands_, 1831. 336 pp.

Contains a great amount of fairly accurate information. Its description of
cities is especially useful. Page 184 gives an amusing and instructive
illustration of the need of energy and work in even a frontier settlement
(1829).

----_Memoir of John Mason Peck, D. D., edited from his Journals and
Correspondence. By Rufus Babcock. Philadelphia: Am. Baptist Pub. Soc._,
1864. 12mo. 360 pp.

Not in good literary form. Throws much light upon the moral and religious
life in Illinois and Missouri from 1817 to 1857.

----_The Religion and Morals of Illinois prior to 1818. In Reynolds, Pioneer
History of Illinois_. Pp. 253-275.

The writer came to Illinois before 1818, and knew many of the persons of
whom he wrote.

_Pennsylvania Packet and daily Advertiser. Philadelphia_, 1785-89; _Apr._,
1789; _Mar._, 1790; _Apr.-Dec._, 1790. In Library of Wisconsin State
Historical Society.

August 23, 1790, the expression of apprehension of the depopulation of the
East by emigration to the West is said not to be well founded.

_Peoria County, Illinois, Marriage Licences, 1825-1855._ On file in the
court house in Peoria, Ill.

The early names show the French origin of the inhabitants. The absence of
clergymen is noticeable.

PIKE, Lieut. ZEBULON MONTGOMERY. _An Account of a Voyage up the
Mississippi River, from St. Louis to its Source; made under the Orders of
the War Department, by Lieut. Pike, of the U. S. Army, in the Years 1805
and 1806. Compiled from Mr. Pike's Journal._ A 68 page pamphlet without
place, publisher, or date.

Locates the largest Sauk village. These reports are of extreme importance.
An edition including the trip of 1807 was issued in 1895 by Harper, F. P.,
New York. 3 vols. $10.00.

_Pioneer of the Valley of the Mississippi, The. Rock Spring, Ill.: Rev. J.
M. Peck, editor._

Issue of April 24, 1829, in St. Louis Mercantile Library.

PITTMAN, Capt. PHILIP. _The present State of the European Settlements on
the Mississippi, with a geographical Description of that River;
illustrated by Plans and Draughts. London: J. Nourse_, 1770. viii. +99 pp.
8 maps.

Describes the settlements in Illinois and gives a map of the region. Of
great value.

Criticism in _Narrative and Critical History of America_, VI., 702.

_Regulators of the Valley._

Charles M. Eames, in his _Historic Morgan and Classic Jacksonville_
(1885), says that a vigilance committee with the above title was formed in
1821, or thereabouts, to rid the country of horse-thieves and robbers. "A
regular constitution was drawn up and subscribed to, and this paper is
still in existence." C. M. Eames, son of the now deceased author, in a
letter of Oct. 7, 1903, said that he had made an unsuccessful search for
the manuscript.

REYNOLDS, JOHN, _My own Times, embracing also, the History of my Life.
Belleville, Ill._, 1855. Reprinted, _Chicago: Fergus Printing Co._, 1879.
iv.+395 pp. $7.50.

Verbose, but has much wheat among the chaff. Covers the period from 1800
to 1853. The first edition is now very rare.

ROSS, HARVEY LEE. _The early Pioneers and pioneer Events of the State of
Illinois. Chicago_, 1899.

A medley of facts, written by a pioneer of 1820. The author was acquainted
with both Cartwright and Lincoln, and speaks of them and of pioneer events
with authority. Tells of a trip from New Jersey by wagons.

SCHOOLCRAFT, HENRY ROWE. _Summary Narrative of an exploratory Expedition
to the Sources of the Mississippi River, in 1820; resumed and completed,
by the Discovery of its Origin in Itasca Lake, in 1832. By authority of
the United States. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Grambo, & Co._, 1855. 596 pp.

The book is chiefly of interest to us because of its description of
Chicago.

----_Travels in the central Portions of the Mississippi Valley: comprising
Observations on its mineral Geography, internal Resources, and aboriginal
Population. Performed under the Sanction of Government, in the Year 1821.
New York: Collins & Hannay_, 1825. 459 pp.

The writer descended the Wabash, the Ohio, and then ascended the
Mississippi and the Illinois to Chicago. His descriptions of places,
peoples and things are well written and are a chief historical source.

SCHULTZ, CHRISTIAN. _Travels on an inland Voyage through the States of
New-York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee, and
through the Territories of Indiana, Louisiana, Mississippi and
New-Orleans; performed in the Years 1807 and 1808. New York: Isaac Riley_,
1810. 2 vols. I., xviii.+206; II., 224 pp.

Has an interesting description of Illinois settlements.

SMITH, WILLIAM HENRY, _Editor. The St. Clair Papers. The Life and public
Services of Arthur St. Clair ... with his Correspondence and other Papers.
Cincinnati: Robert Clarke & Co._, 1882. 2 vols. I., viii.+609; II., 649
pp.

Much information concerning Illinois under the Ordinance of 1787.
Criticisms: _Nation_, XXXIV., 383; _New York Tribune, June_ 16, 1882.

_Stories of the pioneer Mothers of Illinois. A collection of Manuscript
Letters from the pioneer Women of the State, giving their early
Experiences. Collected for the World's Columbian Exposition and afterward
deposited in the Illinois State Historical Library._

Especially valuable for information on reasons for immigration and on
methods of traveling.

STORROW, SAMUEL A. _The North-West in 1817._ In _Wis. Hist. Coll._, VI.,
pp. 154-87. _Madison, Wis.: Atwood & Culver, State Printers_, 1872.

The narrative, which is in the form of a letter to Maj.-Gen. Brown, was
first published in pamphlet form. The letter is dated Dec. 1, 1817. It
deals chiefly with the country to the north of Illinois, but the author
visited Chicago, was entertained at Fort Dearborn, and wrote of the
desirability of an Illinois-Michigan canal.

TENNEY, H. A. _Early Times in Wisconsin_. In _Wis. Hist. Coll._, I., pp.
94-102. _Madison, Wis.: Beriah Brown_, 1855.

Written in 1849. Gives considerable information concerning the Galena
region. Tells of the size of Galena and of Springfield, Ill., in 1822.
Criticism: _Draper MSS., Z_ 24.

THOMAS, Judge WILLIAM. _Reminiscences._ Printed in the _Jacksonville,
Ill., Weekly Journal, Apr._ 18, 1877. Clipping bound in _Ill. Local Hist.
Pamphlets_, V., in Library of Wisconsin State Historical Society.

The article is of extreme interest to a student of early society in
Illinois. The author settled in Jacksonville, Ill., in 1826. His
observations were unusually acute. He was a lawyer and a teacher. He tells
of Yankees vs. Southerners, of early lawlessness, and of early Galena.

----_Winnebago Outbreak of 1827._ In _Chicago Tribune, Apr._ 7, 1877.
Reprinted from the _Jacksonville (Ill.) Journal_ of Aug. 17, 1871.

The article is important because the writer was a volunteer in the
campaign against the Winnebagoes.

THWAITES, REUBEN GOLD. _Narrative of Morgan L. Martin. In an Interview
with the Editor_ [Thwaites]. In _Wis. Hist. Coll._, XI., pp. 385-415.
_Madison, Wis.: Democrat Printing Co., State Printers_, 1888.

Page 398 gives an estimate of the population of Galena, which Martin
visited in 1829.

TILLSON, CHRISTIANA HOLMES. _Reminiscences of early Life in Illinois._
Privately printed--as late as 1870. iv.+138 pp.

A very rare book. Copy in the Chicago Historical Society Library. The best
book I know of from which to secure a knowledge of life in Illinois from
1822 to 1827. The writer was observant, and her command of English is far
superior to that of many old persons who write reminiscences. Of great
value.

VAN ZANDT, NICHOLAS BIDDLE. _A full Description of the Soil, Water,
Timber, and Prairies of each Lot, or quarter Section of the Military Lands
between the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers. Washington City: P. Force_,
1818. 8vo. 127 pp.

Rare and valuable. Pages 109-25 contain a venomous account of Birkbeck's
settlement in Illinois. In Library of Wisconsin State Historical Society.

_Vermont. Records of the Council of Safety and Governor and Council of the
State of Vermont, to which are prefixed the Records of the general
Conventions from July, 1775, to December, 1777. Montpelier: J. & J. M.
Poland, 1873-80._ 8 vols.

Vol. VI., 431-2 contains remarks of Governor Galusha on the scarcity of
food in 1816.

_Virginia Patriot and Richmond mercantile Advertiser. Richmond, Va.,
Apr.-Dec., 1816._ In Library of Wisconsin State Historical Society.

Sept. 7, 11, 21, 1816, tell of the cold in New England and the drought in
the South.

VOLNEY, CONSTANTIN FRANCOIS CHASSE-BOEUF. _A View of the Soil and Climate
of the United States of America: with supplementary Remarks upon Florida;
on the French Colonies on the Mississippi and Ohio, and in Canada; and on
the aboriginal Tribes of America. Philadelphia, 1804. London, 1804._ xxv.
+ 446 pp.

Translated by C. B. Brown. The author gives a moderately full description
of the Illinois of the close of the 18th century. Valuable for
characterization of the inhabitants.

WASHBURNE, ELIHU BENJAMIN. _Sketch of Edward Coles, second Governor of
Illinois, and of the slavery Struggle of 1823-4. Prepared for the Chicago
Historical Society. Chicago: Jansen, McClurg & Co., 1882._ 253 pp.

Indispensable for a specialist in this period of Illinois history. Well
written. Quotes many letters.

---- _Editor_. _The Edwards Papers. (Volume II. of the Chicago Historical
Society's Collections.) Chicago: Fergus Printing Co., 1884._ 8 + xxviii. +
633 pp.

Pages 86-90 give Capt. Thos. E. Craig's official report to Governor
Edwards of the attack on Peoria in 1812. The volume has a description of
Peoria in 1827, and considerable information concerning the Indian
troubles of that year.

WELBY, ADLARD, Esq. _A Visit to North America and the English Settlements
in Illinois, with a winter Residence at Philadelphia; __ solely to
ascertain the actual Prospects of the emigrating Agriculturist, Mechanic,
and Commercial Speculator. London: J. Drury,_ 1821. 16mo. xii.+224 pp.

_Wheeling, Va. Report of a Meeting of Workingmen in the City of Wheeling,
Virginia, on forming a Settlement in the State of Illinois._ 12 pp.

The report is dated Oct. 4, 1830. Printed without place and publisher's
name. In Library of Chicago Historical Society. Rare. It set forth a
scheme for purchasing and settling a county in Illinois.

WILLIAMS, SAMUEL. _Sketches of the War, between the United States and the
British Isles: intended as a faithful History of all the material Events
from the Time of the Declaration in 1812 to and including the Treaty of
Peace in 1815. Rutland, Vt.: Fay & Davison_, 1815. 496 pp.

Contains Capt. Heald's official account of the massacre at Fort Dearborn,
August 15, 1812.

WOODS, JOHN. _Two Years' Residence in the Settlement on the English
Prairie, in the Illinois Country, U. S. With an Account of its animal and
vegetable Productions, Agriculture, &c. &c. A Description of the principal
Towns, Villages, &c. &c. With the Habits and Customs of the Back-woodsmen.
London: Longman & others_, 1822. 310 pp.

Of great value. Unusually conservative as to Illinois advantages, but
apparently truthful.

WRIGHT, JOHN S. _Letters from the West; or, A Caution to Emigrants. Salem,
N. Y.: Dodd & Stevenson,_ 1819. 72 pp.

A series of letters from one who traveled through the West in 1818-19. In
a fair manner the discouragements which emigrants may expect to meet are
portrayed. In Library of Chicago Historical Society.




II. Secondary Works.


ABBOTT, JOHN STEVENS CABOT. _History of Maine from the earliest Discovery
of the Region by the Northmen until the present Time. Boston: B. B.
Russell_, 1875. 556 pp.

Tells of the "Ohio fever," which raged about the close of the war of 1812,
and which furnished some settlers to Illinois.

AGNEW, Hon. DANIEL, LL. D. _History of the Region of Pennsylvania north of
the Ohio and west of the Allegheny River ... also, an Account of the
Division of the Territory for public Purposes, and of the Lands, Laws,
Titles, Settlements, Controversies, and Litigation within this Region.
Philadelphia: Kay & Brother,_ 1887. 4+246 pp.

The work shows the price at which Pennsylvania public lands sold at the
time Illinois was being settled.

ALLEN, J. A. _American Bisons, living and extinct. Cambridge, Mass.:
Welch, Bigelow, & Co._, 1876. ix.+246 pp. and 12 plates.

Carefully done. Tells of the great herds of buffalo early found in
Illinois and of their extermination in that region.

ALLEN, WILLIAM FRANCIS. _The Place of the North-West in general History._
Pages 92-111 of the author's _Essays and Monographs. Boston: Geo. H.
Ellis_, 1890. 392 pp. Found also in _Papers of the Am. Hist. Ass'n_.,
III., pp. 329-48.

Good for a view of our subject as connected with larger portions of the
world's history.

_Alton city Directory_, 1858. _Alton, Ill.: McEvoy & Bowron_, 1858. 156
pp.

A short historical sketch of Alton is given. Its authority is on a par
with that of county histories.

_American historical Review._ New York. Vol. IV., 623-35. See Boyd, Carl
Evans, below.

ANDREAS, A. T. _History of Chicago from the earliest Period to the present
Time. Chicago: A. T. Andreas_, 1884. I., 648; II., 780; III., 876 pp.

Only pages 31-111 of Volume I. concern the period before 1830. The
narrative is written with considerable care, and the work is especially
rich in copies of old maps, having not fewer than two dozen before 1830.

ASBURY, HENRY. _Reminiscences of Quincy, Illinois, containing historical
Events, Anecdotes, Matters concerning old Settlers and old Times, etc.
Quincy, Ill.: D. Wilcox & Sons_, 1882. 224 pp.

Tells of the first settlement of Adams county, under the congressional act
of Jan. 13, 1825. The large number of New Englanders is suggestive of the
increase of northern over southern immigration.

_Atlantic Monthly. Boston and London._ Vol. II., 579-95. (May, 1861.) See
Clarke, S. C.

BARBER, JOHN WARNER, and HOWE, HENRY. _All the Western States and
Territories, from the Alleghanies to the Pacific, and from the Lakes to
the Gulf. Cincinnati: Howe's Subscription Book Concern_, 1867. 16mo. 733
pp.

Pages 195-250 are on Illinois. Early settlement, Clark's campaign, and the
Chicago Massacre of 1812 are described. The work is popular in character,
yet its citation of sources makes it of some value.

BARRY, Hon. P. T. _The first Irish in Illinois. Reminiscent of Old
Kaskaskia Days._ In _Trans. of the Ill. State Hist. Soc._, 1902.
_Springfield, Ill.: Phillips Bros., State Printers_, 1902. pp. 63-70.

Almost exclusively concerned with the period before 1830. Tells of the
work of Chevalier Makarty, George Croghan, John Reynolds, and of the Irish
soldiers under George Rogers Clark.

BARSTOW, GEORGE. _The History of New Hampshire, from its Discovery, in
1614, to the Passage of the Toleration Act in 1819. 2d ed. New York: G. P.
Putnam & Co._, 1853. 8vo. iv. +456 pp.

Gives a short account of the unusual cold of 1816-17, which affected
western immigration. There is nothing to indicate that the second edition
is not an exact reprint of the first. Copyright, 1842.

BECK, LEWIS C. _A Gazetteer of the States of Illinois and Missouri;
containing a general View of each State, a general View of their Counties,
and a particular Description of their Towns, Villages, Rivers, &c., &c.
Albany: Charles R. and George Webster,_ 1823. 352 pp.

165 pages are devoted to Illinois. Much interesting material is given, but
the nature of the publication makes caution in its use necessary.

BECKLEY, HOSEA, A. M. _The History of Vermont; with Descriptions, physical
and topographical. Brattleboro: George H. Salisbury_, 1846. 16mo. 396 pp.

Describes the effects of the unusual cold of 1816-17, which greatly
affected western emigration.

BECKWITH, HIRAM WILLIAMS. _Historic Notes on the North-west, gleaned from
early Authors, old Maps and Manuscripts, private and official
Correspondence, and other authentic, though, for the most part,
out-of-the-way Sources._ (In _Hist. of Vermilion County, Ill. Chicago: H.
H. Hill & Co._, 1879. 11-304 pp).

Deals with the period before Illinois became a state (1818). "The
authorities consulted show a large range of acquaintance with the very
best sources of information extant"--Lyman C. Draper. Strong on French and
Indians.

----_A brief History of Danville, Illinois, with a concise Statement of its
mining, manufacturing, and commercial Advantages. Danville, Ill.: Danville
Printing Co._, 1874. 11 pp. (unnumbered).

Slight, but tells of the beginnings of the city in the third decade of the
19th century.

BECKWITH, PAUL. _Creoles of St. Louis. St. Louis: Nixon-Jones Printing
Co._, 1893. 169 pp.

The genealogy of the five branches of the Chouteau family is given. As
many of this family were prominent in early Illinois the work is of some
interest, although not wholly reliable.

BEGGS, Rev. STEPHEN R. _Pages from the early History of the West and
North-West: embracing Reminiscences and Incidents of Settlement and
Growth, and Sketches of the material and religious Progress of the States
of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri, with especial Reference to the
History of Methodism. Cincinnati: Methodist Book Concern_, 1868. 325 pp.

Good upon the beginnings of northern Illinois. Tells of the Chicago
massacre (1812), of the work of Rev. Jesse Walker, and of early pioneer
life. No clerical bias, in the bad sense.

BERNHEIM, G. D. _History of the German Settlements and of __ the Lutheran
Church in North and South Carolina, from the earliest Period of the
Colonization of the Dutch, German and Swiss Settlers to the Close of the
first Half of the present Century. Philadelphia: The Lutheran Book Store_,
1872. ix.+557 pp.

Pages 471-3 tell of the North Carolina Synod sending a missionary to
Illinois in 1827.

BIRNEY, WILLIAM. _James G. Birney and his Times. The Genesis of the
Republican Party with some Account of abolition Movements in the South
before 1828. New York: D. Appleton & Co._, 1890. 24mo. x.+443 pp.

Chapter 12 is on abolition in the South before 1828. The work is helpful
in learning the conditions from which southern emigrants moved.

BLANCHARD, RUFUS. _Discovery and Conquest of the Northwest, with the
History of Chicago. Wheaton: R. Blanchard & Co., 1879. Chicago: Cushing_,
1880. 768 pp. 8vo.

A well-written and valuable book for discovery and conquest, but of little
value for a study of mere immigration before 1831. What it has of
immigration is almost exclusively confined to immigration to the region of
the present Chicago.

----_History of Illinois, to accompany an historical Map of the State.
Chicago: National School Furnishing Company_, 1883. 128 pp.

The text is a disconnected symposium, and has in some cases been
superseded by later research. The map is the most valuable part of the
work. It is 27-1/2x42-1/2 inches in size, mounted on heavy cloth, and shows,
with dates, Indian trails, routes of exploring and military expeditions,
early stage and mail routes, historic sites, dates of settlement of the
principal towns.

BONHAM, JERIAH. _Fifty Years' Recollections with Observations and
Reflections on historical Events, giving Sketches of eminent
Citizens--their Lives and public Services. Peoria: J. W. Franks & Sons_,
1883. 536 pp.

The "fifty years" seem to have begun shortly after 1830. The biographical
sketches, however, give several facts in regard to the origin and
immigration of such early leaders as Coles, Edwards, Reynolds, Carlin, and
others.

BOYD, CARL EVANS. _County of Illinois, The. Am. Hist. Rev._, IV., 623-35.
July, 1899.

A scholarly history of Virginia's ephemeral County of Illinois, although
in error as to the dates of its beginning and ending, respectively.

BRACKENRIDGE, HENRY MARIE, Esq. _History of the late War between the
United States and Great Britain. Containing a minute Account of the
various military and naval Operations. Baltimore: Cushing, 1817. 4th ed.
Baltimore: Cushing & Jewett_, 1818. xxiv.+348 pp. _6th ed. Philadelphia:
James Kay_, 1839. 298 pp.

Valuable. Several times translated. Impartial. Gives a short account of
the massacre at Fort Dearborn, August 15, 1812.

BROWN, CHARLES R. _The Old Northwest Territory: its Missions, Forts, and
trading Posts. Kalamazoo, Mich.: Brown, Moore & Quale_, 1875. 32 pp.

The work consists of an historical and chronological map (14-1/2 x 15
inches), and notes upon the 94 sites located upon it. Eleven of the sites
are in Illinois. Valuable and suggestive, although deficient in citation
of authorities.

BROWN, HENRY. _The History of Illinois from its first Discovery and
Settlement to the present Time. New York: J. Winchester_, 1844. vi.+492
pp.

The author confesses to having written in haste and to having borrowed
stories from other states simply to amuse his readers. Worthless except to
furnish a few topics which one may wish to verify. Criticism: _Draper
MSS_., Z No. 2.

BROWN, SAMUEL R. _The Western Gazetteer; or, Emigrant's Directory, (1817)
containing a geographical Description of the western States and
Territories, viz., the States of Ky., Ind., La., O., Tenn., and Miss., and
the Territories of Ill., Mo., Ala., Mich., and N. Western, with an
Appendix containing Sketches of some of the western Counties of N. Y., Pa.
and Va.; a description of the Gt. Northern Lakes; Indian Annuities, and
Directions to Emigrants. Auburn, N. Y.: H. C. Southwick_, 1817. 360 pp.

Pages 17-35 give an inaccurate description of Illinois' population and
resources.

BROWN, WILLIAM HUBBARD. _An historical Sketch of the early Movement in
Illinois for the Legalization of Slavery, read at the annual Meeting of
the Chicago Historical Society, Dec. 5, 1864._

_Chicago: Fergus Printing Co._, 1876. 31 pp. _Fergus hist. Series_, No. 4.
8vo. 25 cents.

Especially valuable for the great struggle over slavery in Illinois in
1822-24. First printed in 1865, under the auspices of the Chicago
Historical Society.

BUCKLEY, JAMES MONROE. _A History of Methodists in the United States._
(Volume V. of _American Church History_.) _New York: The Christian
Literature Co._, 1896. xix.+714 pp.

Tells of the founding of Lebanon Seminary, later McKendree College, at
Lebanon, Ill., in 1828.

_Chicago City Directory, for the Year 1855-56, and Northern Illinois
Gazetteer. Chicago: Robert Fergus_, 1855. 150+xxxii.+208+128 pp.

Of slight value for our purpose, although the historical introductions to
the directories of the various cities and towns have a few usable
statements.

_Chicago daily Democratic Press. Railroads, History and Commerce of
Chicago, three Articles. 2d ed. Chicago: Democratic Press Job and Book
Steam Print_, 1854. 80 pp.

Of considerable interest, although many statements are of too late a date
to be used.

_Chicago Magazine. Chicago, Ill._

I., 103-16 (1857), gives an account of the massacre at Fort Dearborn,
August 15, 1812, largely taken from the Kinzie narrative.

_Chicago Sunday Tribune, Nov._ 28, 1897.

New light thrown on Old Fort Dearborn. An account of the finding of
important records in the archives of the U. S. government. The archives
contained the original order for building a fort where Fort Dearborn later
stood (order of 1803), and sketches of Fort Dearborn as early as January,
1808. The sketches are reproduced.

CLARKE, S. C. _Prairie State, The._ (_Atlantic Monthly_, VII., 579-595,
_May_, 1861.)

Well written and treats a large number of subjects.

COPELAND, LOUIS ALBERT, B. L. _The Cornish in southwest Wisconsin._ Pages
301-334 of _Wis. Hist. Coll._, XIV. _Madison, Wis.: Democrat Printing Co.,
State Printer_, 1898.

Gives several facts concerning the early history of the Galena region.
Most of the Cornish, however, came after 1830.

DANA, E. _Geographical Sketches on the Western Country: designed for
Emigrants and Settlers: being the Result of extensive Researches and
Remarks. To which is added a Summary of all the most interesting Matters
on the Subject, including a particular Description of the unsold public
Lands, ... also, a List of the principal Roads. Cincinnati: Looker,
Reynolds & Co._, 1819. 312 pp.

Pages 133-156 are devoted to Illinois. A suggestion of the fraudulent
count in the census of 1818 is given.

----_A Description of the bounty Lands in the State of Illinois: also, the
principal Roads and Routes, by Land and Water, through the Territory of
the United States. Cincinnati: Looker, Reynolds & Co._, 1819. 12mo. 108
pp.

Gives very few references to settlement and few descriptions of historic
sites.

DAVIDSON, ALEXANDER, _and_ STUVE, BERNARD. _A complete History of Illinois
from 1673 to 1873; embracing the physical Features of the Country; its
early Explorations, aboriginal Inhabitants; French and British Occupation;
Conquest by Virginia; territorial Condition and the subsequent civil,
military and political Events of the State. Springfield, Ill.: Ill.
Journal Co._, 1874. 944 pp.

Crude, but no specialist in Illinois history should be without it. Not
minute in treatment of immigration.

_Decatur, Macon County, Illinois, History of. Decatur, Ill.: Compiled and
published by Wiggins & Co., Cleveland, O._, 1871. 51 pp.

A symposium without historical merit. Almost exclusively of a later period
than 1830, but tells of the first settlement of the county in 1820.

DRAKE, SAMUEL ADAMS. _The Making of the Ohio Valley States, 1660-1837. New
York: Charles Scribner's Sons_, 1894. 16mo. 269 pp.

A very few pages are devoted to Illinois, and naturally the larger events
alone are noted.

DREW, BENJAMIN. _The Refugee; or, The Narratives of fugitive Slaves in
Canada. Related by themselves, with an Account of the History and
Condition of the colored Population of Upper Canada. Boston: John P.
Jewett & Co._, 1856. 12mo. 387 pp.

A few of the refugees whose escapes are narrated passed through Illinois
on the Underground Railroad.

EAMES, CHARLES M. _Historic Morgan and Classic Jacksonville. Jacksonville,
Ill.: Daily Journal Steam Job Printing Office_, 1885. 336 pp. In Library
of Chicago Historical Society.

Of great interest because of its details concerning early methods of
travel and concerning the beginnings in Morgan county. Deals with pioneer
and slavery history.

EDWARDS, NINIAN WIRT. _History of Illinois, from 1778 to 1833; and Life
and Times of Ninian Edwards. Springfield, Ill.: Ill. State Journal Co._,
1870. 549 + iii. pp.

Written by the son of Gov. Ninian Edwards. Not in good form, but has much
authentic material.

_Family Magazine: or, Monthly Abstract of general Knowledge. New York,
Boston, Cincinnati._

Volumes IV. (1837) and V. (1839) have short articles on Illinois, which
are too light to be taken seriously.

FARMER, SILAS. _The History of Detroit and Michigan, or the Metropolis
illustrated. A chronological Cyclopedia of the Past end Present, including
a full Record of territorial Days in Michigan and the Annals of Wayne
County. Detroit: Silas Farmer & Co._, 1884. Revised and enlarged, 1890. 2
vols.

Valuable for information concerning Clark, Hamilton, Vigo, and La Balme.

FLAGLER, Major D. W. _A History of the Rock Island Arsenal from its
establishment in 1863 to December, 1876: and of the Island of Rock Island,
the Site of the Arsenal, from 1804 to 1863. Washington: Government
Printing Office_, 1877. 483 pp. 13 plates, 2 pictures.

The first chapter of the book refers to the first white settlement in the
region of Rock Island, about 1828.

FORD, GOV. THOMAS. _A History of Illinois, from its Commencement __ as a
State in 1818 to 1847. Containing a full Account of the Black Hawk War,
the Rise, Progress, and Fall of Mormonism, the Alton and Lovejoy Riots,
and other important and interesting Events. Chicago: S. C. Griggs & Co._,
1854. 447 pp.

As the title indicates, the book is chiefly valuable for a period later
than 1830. It is also largely political. The first one hundred and ten
pages will be found useful and deal to some extent with the social life
when the state was young. Criticism: _Draper MSS._, Z 13.

GERHARD, FRED. _Illinois as it is; its History, Geography, Statistics,
Constitution, Laws, Government, Finances, Climate, Soil, Plants, Animals,
State of Health, Prairies, Agriculture, Cattle-breeding, Orcharding,
Cultivation of the Grape, Timber-growing, Market-prices, Lands and
Land-prices ... etc. Philadelphia: Charles Desilver_, 1857. 451 pp.

Pages 13-137 are devoted to the history of Illinois. The author is
conspicuously accurate and treats a large number of topics. A valuable
secondary work.

_Glimpses of the Monastery. Scenes from the History of the Ursulines of
Quebec during two hundred Years, 1639-1839. By a Member of the Community.
Second edition, completed by Reminiscences of the last fifty Years,
1839-1889. Quebec: L. J. Domers & Frere_, 1897. ix.+418+184 pp.

Pages 84-93 of the first pagination give a suggestive discussion of the
capability of the Indian for civilization.

GREEN, THOMAS MARSHALL. _Historic Families of Kentucky. (First Series.)
Cincinnati: Robert Clarke & Co._, 1889. 304 pp.

Gives a few facts concerning John Todd and John Todd Stuart, who were
active in Illinois. The latter was a cousin of Mary Todd Lincoln and had
much early influence upon Lincoln. The volume deals with McDowells,
Logans, and Allens. Well written and valuable.

HAIGHT, WALTER C., _B. L. The Ordinance of 1787._ (pp. 343-402 of _Pub. of
the Mich. Pol. Sci. Ass'n._ II.), 1896, 1897.

A discussion of the binding effect of the Ordinance of 1787. The question
has a close connection with slavery in Illinois.

HALL, B. F. _The early History of the North Western States, __ embracing
New York, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Iowa and Wisconsin, with
their land Laws, etc., and an Appendix containing the Constitutions of
those States. Buffalo: Geo. H. Derby & Co., 1849._ Duodecimo. 477 pp.

Statements made in this book must be carefully verified. The rise of
conflicting land titles is fairly well treated.

HARRIS, N. DWIGHT, Ph. D. _The History of Negro Servitude in Illinois and
of the slavery Agitation in that State 1719-1864. Chicago: A. C. McClurg &
Co., 1904._ 276 pp.

An erudite work, compiled from many sources previously unused.

HAYES, A. A., Jr. _The Metropolis of the Prairies. (Harper's New Monthly
Mag._, LXI., 711-730, Oct. 1880).

A readable popular article. Chiefly concerned with events later than 1830.

HEATON, JOHN L. _The Story of Vermont. Boston: D. Lothrop Co., 1889._ 319
pp.

Has an interesting chapter of twenty pages on The Great West. More
reliable than so popular a book usually is.

HENDERSON, JOHN G. _Early History of the __"__Sangamon Country,__"__ being
Notes on the first Settlements in the Territory now comprised within the
Limits of Morgan, Scott and Cass Counties. Davenport, Iowa: Day, Egbert &
Fidlar, 1873._ 33 pp.

Of great interest for a study of early troubles with the Indians. Treats
of East _vs._ South in Illinois and of Regulators. Deals almost
exclusively with the period before 1830. Compiled largely from interviews
with old settlers, hence not wholly reliable.

HINSDALE, BURKE AARON. _The Old Northwest with a View of the thirteen
Colonies as constituted by the royal Charters. New York: Townsend MacCoun,
1888._ 8vo. 440 pp. _2d ed., rev. New York: Silver, Burdett & Co., 1899._
$2.50.

In general only the boldest outlines of immigration to Illinois are
sketched. The slavery struggle in Illinois (1822-24) is treated with
comparative fullness. Criticism: _Boston Herald, July 2, 1888_.

HOSKINS, NATHAN. _A History of the State of Vermont, from its Discovery
and Settlement to the Close of the Year 1830. Vergennes: J. Shedd, 1831._
12 mo. 316 pp.

Tells of the unusually cold summer of 1816.

HOWE, HENRY. _Historical Collections of the great West: containing
Narratives of the most important and interesting Events in western
History--remarkable individual Adventures--Sketches of frontier
Life--Descriptions of natural Curiosities: to which is appended historical
and descriptive Sketches of Oregon, New Mexico, Texas, Minnesota, Utah and
California. Cincinnati: Henry Howe, 1853._ 8vo. 440 pp.

Compiled from a large number of sources, largely secondary.

HUBBARD, GEORGE D. _A Case of geographic Influence upon human Affairs._
Pages 145-157 of _Bulletin of the American Geographical Society_, XXXVI.,
No. 3, _March_, 1904. _Pub. by the Society, New York._

A scientific discussion of the effect of glaciation upon the character of
the people of different portions of Illinois.

HULBERT, ARCHER BUTLER. _Red-Men's Roads. The Indian Thoroughfares of the
central West. Columbus, Ohio: Fred J. Heer & Co., 1900._ 37 pp.

The book has many maps and is a help toward an understanding of the ways
by which early settlers reached Illinois.

HYNES, Rev. THOMAS W. _History of a Century. An Address delivered at
Greenville, Bond Co., Ill., on July 4, 1876._

A newspaper clipping, bound, without the name of the paper from which it
was taken, in _Illinois Local History Pamphlets_, V., in Library of the
Wisconsin State Historical Society. It contains a valuable historical
letter from Mrs. Almira Morse, a resident as early as 1820.

_Illinois. Historical Encyclopedia of Illinois. Chicago and New York:
Munsell Pub. Co., 1900._ 608 pp.

Edited by Newton Bateman, LL. D., and Paul Selby, A. M. Much more reliable
than many books of the same literary type.

_International Monthly. Burlington, Vt._, IV., 794-820. See Turner,
Frederick Jackson.

JAMES, EDMUND JANES, and LOVELESS, MILO J. _A Bibliography of Newspapers
published in Illinois prior to 1860. Springfield, Ill., Phillips Bros.,
State Printers, 1899._ 94 pp.

A very valuable work. An appendix gives a list of the Illinois and
Missouri papers (1808-1897) in the St. Louis Mercantile Library, while a
second appendix enumerates the county histories of Illinois and tells
where they may be found.

JOHNSON, ERIC and PETERSON, C. F. _Svenskarne i Illinois. Chicago: W.
Williamson, 1880._ 471 pp.

Chiefly valuable for a later period. The salient points of early Illinois
history are canvassed.

KINGDOM, WILLIAM, Jr. _America and the British Colonies, an abstract of
all the most useful Information relative to the United States of America,
and the British Colonies of Canada, the Cape of Good Hope, New South
Wales, and Van Diemen's Island. London: G. and W. B. Whittaker, 1820._
16mo. 359 pp.

Pages 61-73 describe Illinois and give some judicious advice to emigrants.
Conservative, but not cynical. Entire pages are reprinted from other
authors, notably Fearon, without the use of quotation marks.

KINGSTON, Hon. JOHN T. _Early Western Days._ (In _Wis. Hist. Coll._, VII.,
297-344). _Madison, Wis.: E. B. Bolens, 1876._

Gives a short account of the slavery struggle in Illinois in 1822-24.

---- _Slavery in Illinois. Necedah, Wis.: Necedah Republican._ 6 pp.
Reprinted, without date, in pamphlet form. In Library of State Historical
Society of Wisconsin.

A very short sketch of slavery in Illinois from its introduction in
1719-20.

KIRKLAND, JOSEPH. _The Story of Chicago. Chicago: Dibble Pub. Co., 1892._
470 pp.

The book makes large reference to authorities and is in consequence
valuable for reference.

KOeRNER, GUSTAV. _Das deutsche Element in den Vereinigten Staaten von
Nordamerika, 1818-1848. Cincinnati: A. E. Wilde & Co., 1880._ 16mo. 461
pp.

The 12th chapter (pp. 244-81) treats of German settlement in Illinois.
Tells of the first German and Swiss settlements in the state. Naturally
this chapter and the work as a whole is largely concerned with a period
later than 1830.

LAW, Judge JOHN. _Address delivered before the Vincennes Historical and
Antiquarian Society, February 22, 1839. Louisville, __ Ky.: Prentice &
Weissinger_, 1839. 48 pp. Enlarged and reprinted as _The colonial History
of Vincennes. Vincennes: Harvey, Mason & Co_., 1858. 156 pp.

Of great value on account of its description of Clark's campaign, and its
notes on Mermet, Gibault, Hamilton, Tecumseh, La Balme, and on the public
lands.

LAWRENCE, JOHN. _The History of the Church of the United Brethren in
Christ. Dayton, Ohio: W. J. Shuey_, 1868. 2 vols. I., vi.+416; II.,
vii.+431 pp.

The book contains many facts concerning early emigration and settlement.
Its bearing on early Illinois history is, however, slight.

LEATON, Rev. JAMES. _History of Methodism in Illinois, from 1793 to 1832.
Cincinnati: Walden & Stowe_, 1883. 410 pp.

Very interesting notes on Peter Cartwright, Jesse Walker, and other
pioneers.

LEE, FRANCIS BAGLEY. _New Jersey as a Colony and as a State. New York: The
Publishing Soc. of New Jersey_, 1902. 4 vols. I., 422; II., 456; III.,
400; IV., 402 pp.

The work is superbly printed and illustrated and contains a vast amount of
information, but is totally lacking in bibliography or references, except
a few indications in the index to the illustrations.

LOeHER, FRANZ. _Geschichte und Zustaende der Deutschen in Amerika.
Cincinnati: Eggers & Wulkop_, 1847. v.+544 pp.

The chapters of especial interest to us are "Ausstroemen der Yankees," pp.
237-41; "Einwanderung von 1815 bis 1830," pp. 253-58; "Die Wohnsitze"
(Illinois and Missouri), pp. 337-40. The author cites many authorities,
and his book is of very great value in the study of the assimilation of an
expatriated people.

LOTHROP, J. S. _J. S. Lothrop's Champaign County (Ill.) Directory for
1870-1, with History of the same, and of each Township therein. Chicago:
J. S. Lothrop_, 1871.

Tells a great many things--several of which are false--concerning the early
period of Illinois history.

LUSK, D. W. _Eighty Years of Illinois Politics and Politicians, Anecdotes
and Incidents. A succinct History of the State, 1809-1889. 3d ed. Revised
and enlarged. Springfield, Ill.: H. W. Rokker_, 1889. 609+109 pp.

The 609 pages are political. The 109 pages have a great interest, dealing
as they do with the beginnings of Illinois. Secondary sources are largely
quoted. Not exact enough for critical work, yet very suggestive.

M'AFEE, ROBERT B. _History of the late War in the Western Country,
comprising a full Account of all the Transactions in that Quarter, from
the Commencement of Hostilities at Tippecanoe, to the Termination of the
Contest at New Orleans on the Return of Peace. Lexington, Ky.: Worsley &
Smith, 1816._ 8vo. 534 pp.

Very rare. In the Chicago Historical Society Library. A valuable book.
Describes the attack on Fort Dearborn in 1812.

MACKENZIE, E. _An historical, topographical, and descriptive View of the
United States of America, and of Upper and Lower Canada ... the present
State of Mexico and South America, and also of the native Tribes of the
New World. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Mackenzie & Dent, 1819._ viii. + 432 pp.

The four pages devoted to Illinois are interesting and fairly reliable,
though scarcely up to date. The author mentions eighteen works used in
compiling his book.

MCLAUGHLIN, ANDREW C. _Lewis Cass. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1891._
363 pp. $1.25.

Describes the expedition of General Cass to northern Illinois during the
Sauk outbreak of 1827. Criticism: _Nation_, LIII., 204.

MARIETTA, O. _Report of the Commissioners of the National Centennial
Celebration of the Early Settlement of the Territory North West of the
Ohio River, ... held at Marietta, O., July 15-19, inclusive, 1888.
Columbus, O.: The Westbote Company, State Printers, 1889._ 292 pp.

Contains many speeches of varying historical accuracy and importance.

MASON, EDWARD GAY. _Chapters from Illinois History. Chicago: Herbert S.
Stone, 1901._ 322 pp.

Scholarly and accurate, and rich in citation of sources. Tells of Old Fort
Chartres, John Todd's Record-Book, the march of the Spaniards across
Illinois, and the Chicago massacre.

---- _March of the Spaniards across Illinois._ (In his _Chapters of Illinois
History, Chicago, 1901_; also in _Mag. of Am. Hist._ N. Y., XV., 457-469,
1886.)

Refers to a number of sources. The march is that of 1781 against St.
Joseph.

MATHER, IRWIN F. _The Making of Illinois. Chicago: A. Flanagan, 1900._ 292
pp.

The work is strong in the number of subjects which it treats. The Illinois
of our period is well covered. The bibliography cites many valuable
sources, but no references are given in the body of the work. The date of
the founding of the village of Kaskaskia is given as 1695--a confusion of
the mission on the Illinois River with the later village of the same name.

MAYO, A. D. _Western Emigration and Western Character._ (_Christian
Examiner_, N. Y., LXXXII., 265-82, 1867.)

The subject is well treated, but the value of the article for our purpose
is not so great as it would have been if confined to the early period.

MEIGS, WILLIAM M. _The Life of Thomas Hart Benton. Philadelphia and
London: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1904._ 535 pp.

The work throws much light upon the policy of the United States in regard
to the sale of public lands, and the attitude of the West towards that
policy.

MELISH, JOHN. _A geographical Description of the United States, with the
contiguous British and Spanish Possessions. Philadelphia: John Melish,
1816._ 182 pp.

A trifle over one page is devoted to Illinois. Of interest only as showing
what was presented to the East at the time concerning Illinois. Melish was
a professional map and gazetteer maker. His work typifies that of the
geographers of the time, who described the world with marvelous audacity.

---- _A geographical Description of the United States, with the contiguous
Countries, including Mexico and the West Indies. Philadelphia: John
Melish, 1822._ v.+491 pp.

Seven pages are devoted to Illinois. The description of several Illinois
towns is useful. This was a second and much improved edition of the
author's similar work of 1816.

---- _Information and Advice to Emigrants to the United States: and from the
Eastern to the Western States: illustrated by a Map of the United States
and a Chart of the Atlantic Ocean. Philadelphia: John Melish, 1819._ 12mo.
v.+144 pp.

An entire chapter of twenty six pages is devoted to Birkbeck's settlement
in Illinois. The map shows several routes in Illinois, but it must have
been old. The book is a good type of its class.

MOORE, CHARLES. _The Northwest under three Flags, 1635-1796. New York:
Harper & Bros., 1900._ xxiii. + 402 pp.

Many facts concerning the Illinois of the period are given. This work is
of considerable historical value. References to sources, although not
abundant, are helpful.

MOSES, JOHN. _Illinois, historical and statistical. Comprising the
essential Facts of its Planting and Growth as a Province, County,
Territory, and State. Derived from the most authentic Sources, including
original Documents and Papers. Together with carefully prepared
statistical Tables.... Chicago: Fergus Printing Co., 1889-93._ 2 vols.
1316 pp.

The author was secretary and librarian of the Chicago Historical Society.
His work is perhaps the best that has appeared.

MOWRY, WILLIAM AUGUSTUS. _The territorial Growth of the United States. New
York: Silver, Burdett & Co., 1902._ 225 pp.

The chapter on the Northwest Territory tells of various cessions of land
comprised in the present Illinois.

MURAT, ACHILLE. _America and the Americans. New York: William H. Graham,
1849._ Duodecimo. vii. + 260 pp.

Too late in date to be of much service, although some valuable suggestions
as to the social and political development of the frontier can be
obtained. The writer was an acute observer. He treats politics, slavery,
society, religion, justice, etc. The book was written about 1829.
Describes customs and extra legal proceedings in the West.

_Nashville, Tennessee, History of, with full Outline of the natural
Advantages.... Nashville, Tenn.: Pub. House of the M. E. Church, South,
1890._ 656 pp.

Tells of passage of emigrants from North Carolina to Illinois in 1780, of
French traders from Illinois to Tennessee in 1779, of Tennesseeans getting
head rights from George Rogers Clark.

_North American Review, Boston._

Volume LI., 92-140 (July, 1840) has an exhaustive review of Peck's
Gazetteer of Illinois. The review is probably of much more historical
interest than the Gazetteer.

PALMER, B. M. _Slavery in Illinois. (Dubuque semi-weekly Telegraph, Tues.,
Sept. 19, 1899.)_

Gives the bill of sale, taken from the county records of Jo Daviess
County, Ill., and executed in that county in 1830, of a negro mother and
child.

PATTERSON, ROBERT WILSON. _Early Society in southern Illinois. Chicago:
Fergus Printing Co._, 1879. Pp. 103-131 of _Fergus historical Series_ No.
14.

A characterization, in general terms, of early Illinois society, its
manners and its origin. This was a lecture read before the Chicago
Historical Society, Oct. 19, 1880.

PECK, Rev. JOHN MASON, _Editor. __"__Father Clark__"__ or the Pioneer
Preacher. Sketches and Incidents of Rev. John Clark, by An Old Pioneer.
New York: Sheldon, Lamport & Blakeman_, 1855. 287 pp.

Gives considerable religious and Indian material for Illinois history from
1790 to 1833, but chiefly on the earlier part of that period.

---- _An historical Sketch of the early American Settlements in Illinois,
from 1780-1800. Read before the Ill. State Lyceum, at its anniversary_,
Aug. 16, 1832. (_Western monthly Mag._, I., 73-83. Feb. 1833.)

Popular, but of some value.

POST, Rev. T. M. [Author of pp. 93-102.] _Contributions to the
ecclesiastical History of Connecticut; prepared under the Direction of the
General Association, to commemorate the Completion of one hundred and
fifty Years since its first annual Assembly. New Haven: Wm. L. Kingsley_,
1861. xiv. + 562 pp.

A symposium. The article by Rev. Mr. Post is on "The Mission of
Congregationalism at the West." It is suggestive on the moral effects of
frontier life.

POWELL, J. W., Director. _Eighteenth annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution,
1896-97. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1899. Part 2. Indian land
Cessions in the United States compiled by Charles C. Royce, with an
Introduction by Cyrus Thomas_. 521-997 pp. and 67 plates.

Valuable. The work was used in preparing the outline maps of Indian
cessions contained in this work.

REID, HARVEY. _Biographical Sketch of Enoch Long, an Illinois Pioneer.
Chicago: Fergus Printing Co., 1884._ 134 pp. This is Volume II. of the
_Chicago Historical Society's Collections_.

Mr. Long visited St. Louis and resided at Alton and Galena before 1827.
The book is of great interest on account of its notes on the methods of
travel and the extent of Illinois settlements at that date.

REYNOLDS, JOHN. _Belleville in January, 1854._ A 12-page pamphlet, printed
without place, publisher, or date. In Library of Wisconsin State
Historical Society.

Tells of the laying out of the city in the cornfield of George Blair, in
1814.

---- _A biographical Sketch._ (_Western Journal and Civilian_, XV.,
100-114).

Gives glimpses of early travel and of pioneer life.

---- _The pioneer History of Illinois, containing the Discovery, in 1673,
and the History of the Country to the Year 1818. Belleville, Ill.: N. A.
Randall, 1852. 2d ed., with portrait, notes and index, Chicago: Fergus
Printing Co., 1887._ 459 pp.

Contains much valuable biographical material, and describes the life of
the early settlers in a clear way. Criticism: _Draper MSS._, Z 13, 14.

ROOSEVELT, THEODORE. _The Winning of the West. New York: G. W. Putnam's
Sons, 1889-96._ Vols. I.-IV.. I., xiv. + 352: II., 427; III., 339: IV.,
363 pp.

Valuable, although bearing marks of haste in preparation. Criticism: _Am.
Hist. Rev._, II., 171.

SANBORN, EDWIN DAVID. _History of New Hampshire, from its Discovery to the
Year 1830. Manchester, N. H.: John B. Clarke, 1875._ 422 pp.

Describes the unusually cold summer of 1816 and its effect upon western
migration. The book is written in an extremely disconnected style, and is
without index, references, or bibliography.

SERGEANT, THOMAS, Esq. _View of the land Laws of Pennsylvania. With
Notices of its early History and Legislation. Philadelphia: James Kay,
Jr., and Brother. Pittsburgh: John I. Kay & Co., 1838._ 13 + 203 pp.

Valuable for ascertaining the price at which Pennsylvania public lands,
which competed with government lands in the West, were sold.

SHALER, NATHANIEL SOUTHGATE. _Kentucky. A pioneer Commonwealth. Boston:
Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1885._ viii. + 433 pp.

Useful as giving an insight into the character of a neighboring state from
which many of the early settlers of Illinois came. One of the best of the
American Commonwealths series.

SHEA, JOHN GILMARY. _History of the Catholic Church in the United States,
1808-1843. New York: John G. Shea, 1890._ vii. + 731 pp.

References to Illinois are very few, but are important. The volume is the
third in the author's four-volumed History of the Catholic Church in the
United States.

SIEBERT, WILBUR HENRY. _The Underground Rail Road from Slavery to Freedom;
with an Introduction by Albert Bushnell Hart. New York; The Macmillan Co.,
1898._ viii. + iii. + 478 pp.

Has notes of great interest on the U. G. R. R. in Illinois before 1830.
Criticism: _Am. Hist. Rev._, IV., 557.

SMITH, THEODORE CLARKE. _The Liberty and Free Soil Parties in the
Northwest. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1897._ vii. + 351 pp.
(_Harvard Hist. Studies_, VI.)

A well-written book, but only the first chapter concerns the period before
1830. This chapter is, however, well worth attention.

STEINHARD, S. _Deutschland und sein Volk. Gotha: Hugo Scheube, 1856-7._ 2
vols. I., x. + 658; II., 826 pp.

Pages 28-46 of volume II. are on the Germans in the United States and
contain a few important facts, including statistics, for our period. The
Vandalia (Ill.) settlement of 1820 is mentioned.

STEVENS, ABEL, LL. D. _History of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the
United States of America. New York: Phillips & Hunt, 1884._ 4 vols. I.,
423; II., 511; III., 510; IV., 522 pp.

The fourth volume of this history has interesting notes on Benjamin Young
and Jesse Walker, respectively. These men came to Illinois as pioneer
ministers; the former in 1804, the latter in 1806.

STRONG, MOSES M., A. M. _History of the Territory of Wisconsin, from 1836
to 1848. Preceded by an Account of some Events __ during the Period in
which it was under the Dominion of Kings, States or other Territories,
previous to the Year 1836. Madison, Wis.: Democrat Printing Co., State
Printers_, 1885. 16mo. 637 pp.

A valuable book. Its chief interest for us is its sketches of early
settlement in the Galena lead region.

SULTE, BENJAMIN. _Histoire des Canadiens-Francais, 1608-1880. Montreal:
Wilson & Cie._, 1882-4. 8 vols. 8vo. About 160 pp. per vol. _Montreal:
Granger Freres._ 40 parts, paper, $10; 4 vols, cloth.

Gives only slight attention to the French of Illinois. A popular work, but
quite useful for a study of social institutions.

SUMMERS, THOMAS O. _Biographical Sketches of eminent itinerant Ministers
distinguished, for the most Part, as Pioneers of Methodism within the
Bounds of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South. Nashville, Tenn.:
Southern Methodist Publishing House_, 1859. 374 pp.

Pages 48-56 give a character sketch of Jesse Walker and an idea of the
character of the men to whom he preached in Illinois in 1807.

SWAYNE, WAGER. _The Ordinance of 1787; and the War of 1861. An Address
delivered before the N. Y. Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal
Legion. New York: C. G. Burgoyne_, [c. 1893]. 90 pp.

Contains interesting notes on George Rogers Clark and on slavery in
Illinois.

THOMSON, JOHN LEWIS. _Historical Sketches of the late War between the
United States and Great Britain. Philadelphia: Thos. Desilver_, 1816. 359
pp. _5th ed._, 1818.

Contains one of the earliest accounts of the massacre at Fort Dearborn,
August 15, 1812. The account is short, but tolerably correct. The work was
reprinted in 1887 [Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co.], with a short
account of the war with Mexico added. 656 pp.

THOMPSON, ZADOCK. _History of the State of Vermont, from its earliest
Settlement to the Close of the Year 1832. Burlington: Edward Smith_, 1833.
12mo. 252 pp. _Reprinted with natural Hist. of Vt. and Gazetteer of Vt.
Burlington: Zadock Thompson_, 1853. 8vo. 224+224+200+63 pp.

Describes the cold season of 1816-17.

THWAITES, REUBEN GOLD. _Early Lead-mining in Illinois and Wisconsin._
Pages 191-196 of _Am. Hist. Ass'n. Rep't._, 1893. _Washington: Government
Printing Office_, 1894.

Contains several interesting statements concerning the early history of
the Galena region.

TUCKER, GEORGE. _Progress of the United States in Population and Wealth in
fifty Years, as exhibited by the decennial Census. Boston: Little & Brown,
1843._ 12mo. 211 pp.

The fifty years were 1790-1840. Very useful for material concerning the
relative growth of different sections of the country.

TURNER, FREDERICK JACKSON. _Middle West, The._ _International Monthly_,
IV., 794-820 (1901).

The article has a few suggestions that are of value for our period.

---- _The Significance of the Frontier in American History._ Pages 199-227
of _Rep't. of Am. Hist. Ass'n., 1893_.

Contains a valuable characterization of the French as colonizers.

VARNEY, GEORGE JONES. _A brief History of Maine. Portland, Me.: McLellan,
Mosher & Co., 1888._ 336 pp.

Tells of the intense cold of 1816-17 and of the great Western exodus. A
"Young People's History." Popular. Without references.

WALKER, EDWIN SAWYER. _History of the Springfield (Illinois) Baptist
Association. Springfield, Ill.: H. W. Rokker, 1881._ 140 pp.

Tells of the organization of the United Baptist Church, of Springfield, on
July 17, 1830, with eight members.

WALLACE, JOSEPH. _The History of Illinois and Louisiana under the French
Rule, embracing a general View of the French Dominion in North America,
with some Account of the English Occupation of Illinois. Cincinnati:
Robert Clarke & Co., 1893._ vi. + 433 pp.

Contains a great deal of material. Usually, though not always, correct.

WARDEN, DAVID BAILLIE. _A statistical, political and historical Account of
the U. S. of N. A.; from the period of their first Colonization to the
present Day. Edinburgh: Archibald Constable & Co., 1819._ 3 vols. 16mo.
I., lxiv. + 552; II., 571; III., 588 pp.

Pages 43-65 of Volume III. deal with Illinois exclusively. At the close of
the chapter the author gives a bibliography for Illinois--five titles and
two maps. A useful book.

WENTWORTH, Hon. JOHN. _Early Chicago. Two Lectures delivered April 11,
1875, and May 7, 1876, respectively._ 48 and 56 pp. Nos. 8 and 7 of
_Fergus historical Series. Chicago: Fergus Printing Co., 1876._

The critical supplemental notes are of especial interest.

WEST, MARY ALLEN. _A MS. Letter in the Illinois State Historical Library._

Tells the story of the coming of James Moore and his party from Virginia
in 1781.

_Western monthly Magazine. Conducted by James Hall. Cincinnati_, I.,
73-83. _See_ Peck, Rev. John Mason.

WHITE, EMMA SIGGINS. _Genealogy of the Descendants of John Walker of
Wigton, Scotland, with Records and some fragmentary Notes pertaining to
the History of Virginia, 1600-1902. Tiernan-Dart Printing Co., 1902._ xxx.
+ 722 pp.

Valuable. Has original letters from Western emigrants. Suggests the great
influx of people into Illinois in the third decade of the 19th century.
Gives a good idea of the westward drift of population in the United
States.

WHITON, JOHN MILTON. _Sketches of the History of New-Hampshire, from its
Settlement in 1623 to 1833. Concord: Marsh, Capen & Lyon, 1834._ 222 pp.

Describes the great cold of 1816 and the great emigration to the West. An
unimportant work, confessedly popular, and without references.

WILBUR, LA FAYETTE. _Early History of Vermont. Jericho, Vt.: Roscoe
Printing House, 1899-1903._ 4 vols. I., 362; II., 419; III., 397; IV., 463
pp.

Pages 162-3 of Volume III. tell of the unusual cold of 1816-17 and quote
Governor Galusha's reference to the impending famine. No references are
given.

WILLIAMS, GEORGE WASHINGTON. _History of the Negro Race in America from
1619-1880. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1882._ 2 vols. I., X. + 481;
II., 611 pp. The two volumes are also issued as one.

Gives some statistics concerning slaves in Illinois and notes on Illinois
slavery legislation. The author was a negro.

WILLIAMSON, WILLIAM DURKEE. _The History of the State of Maine: from its
first Discovery, A. D. 1602, to the Separation, A. D. 1820. inclusive.
Hallowell: Glazier, Masters & Co._, 1832. 2 vols. I., iv. + 696; II., 729
pp.

Tells of the unusual cold of 1816-17 and of the great movement toward the
West. Strong in citation of authorities. Much above the average of State
histories of its time.

WILSON, HENRY. _History of the Rise and Fall of the slave Power in
America. Boston: James R. Osgood & Co._, 1872-7. 3 vols. I., vii. + 670;
II., 720: III., 774 pp. _Houghton._ 3 vols.

Valuable material on slavery in Illinois. A strong work.

WINSOR, JUSTIN. _The westward Movement: the Colonies and the Republic west
of the Alleghanies, 1673-98; with full cartographical Illustrations from
contemporary Sources. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co._, 1897. 595 pp.

Criticism: _Am. Hist. Rev._, III., 556.

WITHERS, ALEXANDER SCOTT. _Chronicles of border Warfare, or A History of
the Settlement by the Whites, of North-western Virginia: and of the Indian
Wars and Massacres, in that Section of the State. Clarksburg, Va.: Joseph
Israel_, 1831. 319+iv. pp. Very rare. _Same. New ed., edited and annotated
by Reuben Gold Thwaites. Cincinnati: Clarke_, 1895.

A few references are to events in Illinois. Criticism: _Am. Hist. Rev._,
I., 170.

YOUNG, WILLIAM T. _Life and public Services of General Lewis Cass. 2d ed.
Detroit: Markham & Elwood_, 1852. 420 pp.

Tells of Gen. Cass' expedition to Illinois during the trouble with the
Sauk Indians in 1827.





INDEX.


A

Aboite river, 35.

Act creating Illinois county, 9, 15.

Act enabling Illinois to form a state government, 115.

Agricultural Society, formed, 168.

Agriculture, 130, 165. _See also_ Farming, Fruits, etc.

Albemarle county, _Va._, 153, 154.

Alton, founding of, 196, 204;
  land donations for church and school, 142.

Alvord, Clarence W., 5.

American Bottom, 130, 134, 157; map, _in pocket_.

American Fur Company, 157, 158.

American House, Springfield, 207.

Anarchy in Illinois, 40 _et seq._;
  ended, 69.

Ancient Free and Accepted Masons, founded, 194.

Anderson, Robert, mention, 207.

Antanya, Michael, 67.

Anti slavery agitation. _See under_ Slavery.

Anti slavery Society, Morgan Co., 183.

Arkansas Post, 63.

Arks, 125, 126;
  price of, 161.
  _See also_ Flat-boats.

Assenisipia, mention, 46.

Augusta county, _Va._, 15.

Austin, Moses, 196.

B

Bagargon, _Mr._, elected magistrate, 61.

Baker, David J., 145.

Baltimore, 123, 160, 161.

Bandits, 155.

Bank of Cairo, 114.

Bank of Edwardsville, 207.

Bank of Mt. Carmel, 199.

Baptists, organized, 172;
  found Shurtleff college, 174;
  divided on slavery, 175.

Barbour, Philip, mention, 40.

Barges, 94, 129, 160.

Barter, 130. _See also under_ Money.

Bates, Edward, 204.

Batteaux, 94.

Baynton, Wharton and Morgan, trading firm, 10.

Bears, 14, 173.

Beauchamp, William, 197, 198.

Beef, cost of, 164.

Bellefontaine, 51.

Bellevue, Iowa, terrorized by mob, 208.

Bentley, _Capt._, 26.

Biddle, Nicholas, mention, 209.

Biggs, William, leg. coun., 113.

Birds, 14.

Birkbeck, Morris, founds English settlement, 124;
  method of fencing, 165.

Birkbeck's Settlement. _See_ English Settlement, The.

Black Hawk, 81.

Black Hawk War, 146;
  mention, 207.

"Black Laws," 176, 186.

"Blue Laws," of Mt. Carmel, 200.

Blue Point, 157.

Bond, Shadrach, delegate to Congress, 113;
  governor of Illinois, 145, 208.

Books, 132.

Bosseron, _Maj._ F., 18, 24.

Bountylands. _See_ Military bounty lands.

Brady, ----, 38.

Brandy, price of, 97.

Brashears, _Capt._, mention, 26.

Brick houses, 131.

Bridges, 114.

British at Michilimackinac attempt to divert Indian trade, 69;
  expeditions against Illinois settlers, 31-39, 107.

British Michilimackinac Company, 49.

Buffalo, 14.

Building, cost of, 168.

Burr, Aaron, mention, 203.

Butter, price of, 164.

C

Cahokia, attacked by British and Indians, 33;
  bounty lands, 57;
  commons, 72;
  court, 17;
  distress at, 25;
  population, 12.

Cahokia Indians, 53.

Cairo, Bank of, 114;
  dykes at, 114.

Calhoun, original name of Springfield, 207.

Calico, price of, 130.

Calve, ----, trader, 33.

Canadian French settlers, 19.

Canal route ceded, 110.

Carbonneaux, Francis, 42-46.

Carlyle, eastern limit of frontier, 107;
  salt discovered, 18, 23, 171.

Carolinas, The, settlers from, 91.

Carondelet, _Baron_ de, orders expulsion of Americans from Ft. Massac, 73.

Cartwright, Peter, journey to Baltimore, 1816, 123;
  personal traits, 191, 192;
  purchases land, 139;
  reasons for moving to Illinois, 166;
  representative from Sangamon Co., 191.

Cass, _Gov._ Lewis, averts Indian war, 135;
  protects Galena, 150.

Catholicism, slow increase of, 175.

Cattle, allowed to run at large, 20;
  raising of, 130.
  _See also_ Live-stock.

Census of 1801, 88.

Cessions of land, by Indians, 44, 79-81, maps, 72, 104, 136;
  by individuals, 10, 24, 71, 196;
  by Virginia to United States, 45, 46;
  congressional, 57, 70, 72, 79.

Charleston, _Va._, emigration from to Illinois, 190.

Chicago, in 1830, 190;
  massacre at, 109;
  platted, 142;
  post-office, 151;
  route to, 152;
  valuable port, 116.

Chicago Historical Society, 5, 11.

Chicago river, Indians cede tract six miles square at, 79.

Chickasaws, allies of Spain, 73.

Chippewa Indians, 134.

Cincinnati, trip from to Illinois, 1823, 154.

Clark, George Rogers, 14, 40, 45 _et seq._;
  land granted to, 46;
  seizes Spanish goods, 54.

Clay, Henry, mention, 210.

Clergy, 174, 175, 196.

Climate, 95.

Clinton, De Witt, mention, 203.

Coal, in Illinois, 14, 131, 142, 165.

Cobbett, William, 160.

Coffee, price of, 130.

Coles, _Gov._ Edward, character, 210;
  emancipates slaves, 209;
  governor, 145, 208;
  message against slavery, 183;
  special envoy to Russia, 209;
  urges law to prevent kidnapping, 182.

College township, reserved by Ordinance of 1787, 101, 102.

Colleges, McKendree, 174;
  Shurtleff, 174.

Collot, _Gen._ [George Henry] Victor, "Journey in N. A.," 14, etc.;
  Map of the Country of the Illinois, _in pocket_.

Commerce in territorial period, 95, 96, 129.

Committee of Workingmen of Wheeling, _Va._, 144.

Commodities, prices of, 49, 59, 130, 164.

Commons, Cahokia, 72.

Congress, delegate of N. W. Territory in, 76. 77;
  donates land, 142;
  early Illinoisians in, 146;
  memorialized:--by Galena, 150;
  by Illinois, 87, 100, 101, 138;
  petitioned, 53, 74, 75, 77, 78, 81, 86, 88.

Constitution of Illinois, provisions of, 117.

Constitutional Convention, 1824, 182, 183;
  votes for and against, chart of, 184.

Cook, Daniel P., non-resident proprietor of Springfield, 205;
  representative in Congress, 145.

Corn, price of, 96, 164.

Cotton, production of, in United States 122, 129;
  raised in Illinois, 167, 168.

Counterfeiting, penalty for, 148.

Counties in Illinois, 1824, list of, 183.

Courts, 15, 17, 60, 62.
  _See also_ under Illinois, Kaskaskia, Vincennes.

Cox, _Col._ Thomas, joint owner of Springfield, 206-208.

Crawford, William Henry, _Secretary of __ War_, announces land policy,
            109.

Crockett, David, mention, 205.

Croghan, George, description of Vincennes, 13.

Cruzat, _Spanish Commandant at St. Louis_, 39.

Cumberland Presbyterians, 143.

D

Dalton, _Capt._, 34;
  elected magistrate, 61.

Dartmouth College, mention, 206.

Davis, Jefferson, mention, 207.

Deane, Silas, mention, 34.

Debtors, imprisonment of, 147.

Deer, 14.

Demoulin, Dumoulin, _or_ De Moulin, John, 74.

Demunbrunt, Demunbrun, _or_ De Munbrun, Thimothe, 22, 41.

Detroit, land office at, 80;
  mention, 190;
  threatened by de la Balme, 35, 36.

Dickinson College, mention, 210.

Dixon's ferry. _See_ Ogee's ferry.

Dodge, _Capt._ John, 22-23, 26-27, 67.

Ducharme, _trader_, 33.

Ducoigne, ----, 68.

Duncan, Joseph, 145.

E

Easton, Joseph, emigrant from England, 1633, 203.

Easton, Rufus, founder of Alton, 203;
  political career, 204.

Edgar, John, career of, 174, 193, 194;
  correspondence concerning anarchy in Illinois, 67;
  land holdings of, 10, 101;
  letter to St. Clair, 85.

Edwards, Ninian, appointed governor of Illinois Territory, 111, 113, 145;
  in War of 1812, 107, 108;
  message of 1828, 149;
  on prices of public lands, 138;
  political career of, 210;
  wages offered by, 130.

Edwards county, Birkbeck's settlement in. _See_ English Settlement.

Edwardsville, Bank of, 207;
  public lands at, 105, 137.

Ellery, Abm. R., mention, 203.

Emancipation. _See under_ Slavery.

Emigration and immigration, 127, 176 _et seq_.;
  causes of:--from New England, 120,
  from the South, 121, 189;
  cost of, 124;
  food supply for emigrants, 119, 133;
  increase, 180;
  opposition to immigration, 91.

English Settlement, The, 124, 157, 161, 169;
  cost of transportation to, 100;
  ships produce to New Orleans 154.
  _See also_ Birkbeck, Morris; _also_ Flower, George.

Enos, Pascal Paoli, joint proprietor of Springfield, 205, 206.

Enos, _Maj.-Gen._ Roger, 206.

Ernst, Ferdinand, mention, 167.

Extinguishment of Indian land titles, 77, 79, 81, 109, 144, 146.

F

Falls of Ohio, 30, 64, 65, 160, 162.
  _See also_ Ft. Harmar;
  _also_ Shipping-port.

Farming methods 168.

Federal Government owns land, 158.

Fencing, 165 n., 169.

Ferguson, Thomas, leg. coun., 13.

Ferries, 83, 114, 152.

Fever, 95.
  _See also under_ Health.

Fever river, 134;
  lead mines at, 150.

Financial panic, 1819, 188-189.

Fisher, _Dr._ George, rep., 113.

Fisher, Myers, mention, 195.

Flat-boats, 94, 124, 125, 129, 154, 160.
  _See also_ Arks.

Flax, 129.

Florida, Province of, 71.

Flour, price of, 49, 50, 94, 163, 164.

Flour-mills, 167;
  built by John Edgar, 193.

Flower, George, 124.
  _See also_ English Settlement.

Food, scarcity, 21-23, 25, 28, 30;
  supply of, 133.
  _See also under_ names of food products.

Fort Chartres, cannon from, 108;
  inhabitants, 12.

Fort Dearborn, massacre at, 109;
  mention, 190.

Fort Edwards, terminus of mail route, 151.

Fort Harmar, 64.

Fort Jefferson, 24, 25, 30.

Fort La Motte, mention, 107.

Fort Massac, 73, 79, 95, 107.

Fort Nelson, mention, 32.

Fort Russell, established, 108.

Fort Stanwix, mention, 56.

Fort Wayne, Treaty of, 79.

Fox Indians, 33, 81.

Fox river, first flour-mill on, 167.

Franklin, Benjamin, mention, 34, 195.

_Fredonian_, mention, 197.

Free masons, organized, 194

Freehold qualifications, 77, 112, 113.

Freeholders, housekeepers privileged as, 147.

Freight charges, 94, 124, 160 _et seq._

French, Augustus C., 145.

French settlers, attitude toward Americans, 47-49;
  land holdings 13, 18, 99;
  misled by La Balme, 34;
  offered free land by Spanish, 55;
  priests, emigrate from Illinois co., 68;
  towns, character of, 11.

French-Swiss from Lord Selkirk's colony reach Galena, 172.

Frontier, The, 48, 91, 100, 147, 206;
  Carlyle eastern limit of, 107.

Frontiersman, analysis of character of, 191, 201, 202.

Fruit, 129, 133, 168.

Fuel, scarcity of, 131.

Fulton county separated from Madison, 188.

Fur trade, 96.
  _See also_ American Fur Company.

Furs, 130.

G

Gage, _Gen._ Thomas, 10.

Galena, 150-53; lead-mining, 172.

Gallatin county, saline, 170;
  slaves in, 180.

Game, 14, 51, 132.

Gamelin, Antoine, clerk of District Court, Post Vincennes, 60.

George, _Capt._ Robert, mention, 40.

Germain, _Lord_ George, mention, 32.

Gibault, _Father_ Pierre, mention, 68.

Governor and judges, 58, 62.

Grammar, John, rep., 113.

Grand Ruisseau, 52.

Granger, _Postmaster-General_ Gideon, mention, 203.

Gratiot, Charles, 39.

Great Britain, King's proclamation, 1763, 10.

Great Western Road, 157.

Greene county, separated from Madison, 188.

Greenville, Treaty of, 79.

H

Hamilton, Alexander, 138;
  mention, 91.

Hamilton, _Gen._, leads British against Vincennes, 15.

Hampden Sidney College, mention, 209.

Hamtramck, _Maj._ John F., at Kaskaskia, 53;
  petitioned for troops, 65.

Hancock, John, mention, 34.

Harmar, _Gen._ Josiah, 50; advice to French, 52;
  expedition from Vincennes to Kaskaskia, 51;
  on emigration from Illinois, 64;
  refuses request for troops, 69.

Harrison, Benjamin, 40;
  receives petition for General Assembly, 85.

Health, 27, 91, 95.

Henry, Mr., elected magistrate, 61.

Henry, Patrick, 209;
  instructions concerning Illinois County, 9.

Hinde, Thomas S., career in Illinois, 196, 197;
  description of Peter Cartwright, 192.

Hog raising, 14, 20.

Hogs, 144.

Honey, 129, 130, 133.

Hooker, _Rev._ Thomas, founder of Hartford, _Conn._, 203.

Horse stealing, 65, 67, 69.

Hubbard, Adolphus Frederick, 210.

Hubbard, Gurdon Saltonstall, agent American Fur Company, 157.

Hubbard's Trail, extent of, 157.

Hunting, as occupation, 132.

Huron (Ouisconsin or Wisconsin) Territory, claims Galena, 150.

I

Iles, Elijah, career of, 205, 206.

Iles, Elizabeth Crockett, mention, 205.

Illinois:--
  _Country_, British in, 10 _et seq._;
  climate, 14, 95;
  Collot's description of, 14;
  map, _in pocket_:
  conditions in 1787, 50, 51;
  development, 97, 98;
  enters second grade of territorial government, 85, 86;
  French population, 10, 12, 13, 30;
  French settlers offered free land by Spanish, 55;
  game in, 14, 51;
  governor and judges, 58;
  Indian owners of, 10 _et __ seq._;
  inhabitants of, 12, 13;
  immigration to, 91, 92;
  labor conditions in, 96, 97;
  population in 1767, 1772, 1788, 70;
  in 1790, 1800, 1810; 91, 97;
  racial conflicts in, 54, 55;
  rivers of, 92, 94;
  roads, 13, 14, 93, 94, 131;
  separation from Indiana, 85 _et seq._;
  squatters in, 71.

  _County_ (1778-1783), Act creating, 9, 15;
  Act renewed, 25;
  Act dissolved, 31;
  anarchy, 40 _et seq._;
  anomalous position, 18;
  bankrupt, 40;
  civil organization, 15;
  condition in 1780, 25, 26;
  courts, 15;
  extent of, 9, 10;
  French inhabitants dissatisfied, 30;
  hardships in early period, 21, 22;
  judges, election of, 17;
  military and civil authorities conflict, 25-27;
  military operations, 19, 22-24, 32-39;
  money scarce, 21;
  Spanish claims, 38.

  _Territory_, books in, 132;
  boundaries, 90;
  cattle raising, 130;
  commerce in, 96, 129;
  delegates in Congress, 113;
  election of officials, 112;
  enters second grade of territorial government, 112;
  extent, 89;
  formed, 89-90;
  governor and judges, 111, 113;
  immigration to, 120, 121, 124, 126, 132;
  Indian troubles in, 106 _et seq._;
  internal improvements proposed, 114;
  internal revenue, 1814, 128;
  judges for, 111;
  land office authorized, 103;
  land policy, 111;
  laws, 111, 112, 114;
  legislature, 100, 113;
  legislature southern in nativity, 112 n., 113;
  manufactures, 1810, 128, 129;
  newspapers in, 132;
  petitions for state government, 115;
  physical features, 86;
  population, 1810, 91;
  post-roads, 131;
  productions, 129 _et seq._, 133;
  qualifications for representative, 113;
  slavery, _see_ general alphabet;
  suffrage in, 112;
  taxes, 133;
  transportation, 114, 129, 130.

  _State_, admission proposed, 115, opposed, 118;
  agriculture in 1820, 165;
  "Black Laws," 176, 186;
  boundary, eastern, 90, northern, 115;
  cattle raising, 130;
  cessions of Indian lands, 134, 135;
  coal in, 14, 142, 165;
  constitution completed, 117;
  cost of living in, 130;
  counties, list of, 183;
  debtors, 147;
  election in 1822, 181;
  election laws, 1826, 148;
  emigration, _see_ General alphabet;
  Enabling Act of 1818, 115;
  food supplies, 133;
  government southern in character, 145;
  governors, list of, 145;
  House of Representatives, mention, 185;
  in Congress, 118, 146;
  Indian agents, 134;
  Indian land claims, 134, 135;
  Indian traders, 134;
  Indian wars, 146, 207;
  internal revenue, 128;
  judicial circuit, 173;
  land, _see_ general alphabet;
  laws, southern influence on, 186;
  manners and customs, 128 _et seq._, 165;
  manufactures, 128;
  money, substitutes for, 130;
  New Englanders in, 146;
  newspapers, 132;
  northern boundary changed, 115;
  population required for admission, 116, 117;
  postal facilities in, 151, 158, 159;
  products of, 129, 167 _et seq._;
  public lands, 136;
  salt springs legislation, 101;
  school tax, 148;
  senators and representatives, 145;
  settlement typical, 5;
  slavery, _see_ general alphabet;
  southern influence in, 183, 184, 186;
  taxation, 1828, compared with that of Kentucky, 149, 150;
  transportation, cost of, 150; facilities, 124, _see also_ general
              alphabet;
  treasury receipts 149;
  squatter population, 148;
  voting in 1820, 148.

Illinois and Michigan Canal, estimated cost of transportation by, 141;
  route ceded, 110;
  mention, 115.

Illinois Company, holdings of, 10, 44.

Illinois Herald, 132.

Illinois Intelligencer, 132, 140.

Illinois Land Company, 10 _et seq._

Illinois river settlements, 134.

Illinois Navigation Company, 114, 115.

Illiteracy of French inhabitants, 13.

Immigration. _See with_ Emigration.

Indentured servitude, 117, 176 _et seq._

Indian agents, 134.

Indians, 11, 12;
  employed by British, 32;
  land cessions, maps: 1705-1801, 72;
  1809-1818, 104;
  1818-1830, 136;
  reservations, 134, 135;
  titles to land extinguished, 77, 79, 81, 109, 144, 146;
  traders, 134;
  tribes: Cahokias, 52;
  Chickasaws, 73;
  Chippewas, 134;
  Foxes, 33, 81;
  Kaskaskias, 12;
  Kickapoos, 110;
  Menominees, 134;
  Mitchas, 52;
  Mitchigamias, 12;
  Ottawas, 135;
  Ouias, 29;
  Peorias, 12, 52;
  Piankashaws, 81;
  Potawatomies, 134;
  Sauks, 33, 81;
  Sioux, 31;
  Tamarois, 110;
  Winnebagoes, 135.

Indiana, population, 91, 181;
  route to, from North Carolina, 156;
  slavery, 185.

Indiana Territory, divided, 81, 88, 89;
  formed, 84.

J

Jacksonville, 156;
  English emigrants at, 189.

Jarrott's mill, 167.

Jefferson, Thomas, mention, 203, 204.

Johnson, _Capt._ elected magistrate, 61.

Johnson, _Col._ R. M., 163.

Jones, John Rice, career of, 195, 196;
  death, 196;
  mention, 68;
  with Clark, 54.

Jones, _Rev._ William, rep., 113.

Judges, election of, 17, 58, 111.

Judy, Samuel, leg. coun., 113.

Jurors paid, 58.

Jury, trial by, 60.

Justices of the peace, not paid, 23.

K

Kane, Elias K., 145.

Kaskaskia, bounty lands, 57;
  court, 17, 19;
  judicial district of, 44;
  land office at, 103, 136, 137, 138, 143.

Kaskaskia Indians, 12.

Keel-boats, 125, 129;
  rates, 161.

Kenton, Simon, 179.

Kentucky, emigration to Illinois, 189;
  journey from, to Illinois, 1819, 155;
  mention, 21, 24, 32, 33, 189;
  population, 1790, 1800, 1810, 91, 93;
  1820, 181.

Kentucky boats, 93, 94.

_Kentucky Gazette_, 189.

Kickapoo Indians, 110.

Kidnapping of negroes, 186.

King's proclamation, 1763, 10.

Knox county, 75 n., 86.

Kohos (Cahokia), mention, 27.

L

La Balme, _Col._ Augustin Mottin de, career of, 33 _et seq._

Labor questions, 96, 97, 99, 130, 169.

Lafayette, _Marquis_ de, entertained by John Edgar, 193;
  mention, 209.

Lake Michigan, advantages to Illinois of port on, 115, 116.

Land, Act of 1791, 72; canal, 141, 142;
  cessions by Indian tribes, 72, 104, 110, 136;
  cession by Virginia to U. S., 45, 46;
  church and school, 141, 142;
  classified for taxation, 84;
  cultivation of, 166;
  fertility of, 14, 165;
  form of holdings, 13, 38;
  French deeds to, 13;
  government entry of, 130;
  Kickapoo cession of, 1819, 134;
  military, 100;
  owned by Federal Government, 158;
  prices, 57, 80, 88, 92, 103-5, 136-8, 143;
  rental of, 166;
  Spanish donate to French, 55;
  tavern sites, 75;
  taxes on, 130;
  unoccupied in Kentucky, Ohio and Indiana, 98.
  _See also_ Public lands.

Land-claims, 10;
  in Illinois, 140.

Land-companies, 10, 11.

Land-frauds, referred to Congress, 99, 100.

Land-grants, investigated, 57.

Land-holders, non-resident, mention, 140, 145.

Land-offices 80;
  in Illinois, 44 _et seq._, 103.

Land-titles, insecure, 51, 71;
  King's proclamation, 1763, 10.

Laws: "Black Laws," 176, 186;
  "Blue Laws," 200;
  territorial, 111-14.

La Valiniere, Pierre Huet de, mention, 68.

Lead, output of, 1823-1827, 151.

Lead region, rush to, 1826, 172.

Le Dru, removes to St. Louis, 68;
  signs petition, 66.

Le Grand, signature on land grant, 45.

Legras, _Col._ P., at Vincennes, 18.

Limestone beds at Alton, 204.

Lincoln, Abraham, in Black Hawk War, 207.

Linctot, 38 n., 39 n.

Live-stock, 27, 83, 169. _See also_ Cattle.

Log canoes, 93.

Log houses, cost of, 168.

Long Prairie, 74.

Louis XVIII. of France, mention, 209.

Louisiana, emigration to, 86;
  province of, 91.

_Louisiana Gazette_, report of steamboat speed, 162.

Luzerne, _Chevalier_, 30, 36.

Lyon, Matthew, on price of lands, 88.

M

McCarty, Richard, 19, 20, 26, 27;
  killed, 29.

McDowell, William, 196.

McIlvaine, _Miss_ Caroline M., 5.

McKendree College, opened by Methodists in 1828, 174.

McLean, John, 145.

McMaster, John Bach, 5.

Madison, _Governor of Kentucky_, 197.

Madison, James, mention, 209.

Madison, John, 196.

Madison county, population 1820, 1824, 1825, 132, 188.

Magistrates, 59 _et seq._, 67.

Mail routes 1825-1830, 158, 159.

Malaria, 91, 95.

Manufactures, 128, 129.

Maple sugar, 129.

Marietta, O., 71.

Marriage, mixed, 51;
  without priest, 12.

Mary of the Incarnation, _Mother_, 11.

Maryland, settlers from, 91.

Mason and Dixon's line, 179.

Massachusetts, emigration to Illinois, 189.

Mechanics' lien, 149.

Menard, Pierre, leg. coun., 113, 208;
  Lt.-Gov., 145.

Menominee Indians, 134.

Methodist Episcopal Church, 174;
  mention, 191.

Meurin, _Father_, mention, 12.

Michigan, legislature meets in summer, 152.

Michilimackinac, British at, 32, 39, 46, 47, 69.

Miliet, _Mr._, elected magistrate, 61.

Military bounty lands, 57.

Military organization, etc. _See under_ Illinois.

Military Tract, land in, sold for taxes, 140.

Mills, 83, 167.

Miro, Estevan, _Governor of Louisiana and Florida_, proclamation of, 63,
            71.

Mississippi river, navigation of, 21;
  settlement on hindered, 88.

Missouri, population, 82, 181;
  slavery in, 179, 180.

Missouri Compromise, 178.

Mitchigamia Indians, 12, 52.

Money, scarcity, 21, 22.

Monroe, _President_ James, letter to Jefferson, 97;
  mention, 209.

Montgomery, _Lieut.-Col._ John, 15 _et seq._

Morals. _See_ Public morals.

Morgan, ----, member of trading company, 10.

Morgan, George, agent of Indiana Company, 56;
  land frauds, 56, 57.

Morgan county, anti-slavery society, 183;
  freehold rights to housekeepers, 147;
  separated from Madison, 188.

Morrison, William, landholdings of, 74, 100, 101.

Mount Carmel, Bank of, 199;
  donation of land for church and schools, 142;
  founding of, 196, 198;
  incorporation, 200.

Murray, Edward, 23.

Murray, William, mention, 10.

N

Negroes, 12, 64;
  punishment of, 179.
  _See also_ Slavery.

New Design, founded. 91, 92, 95;
  mention, 83.

New England, immigrants from, 146.

New Jersey Land Company, 11.

New Madrid (L'Anse a la Graisse), 63 _et seq._

New Orleans, flour market, 193;
  mention, 26.

New Orleans boats, 93, 94.

Newspapers:--
  _Illinois Herald_, 132;
  _Illinois Intelligencer_, 132, 140;
  _Kentucky Gazette_, 189;
  _Louisiana Gazette_, 162;
  _Shawnee Chief_, 132;
  _Western Intelligencer_, 132.

Non-resident landholders, 140, 145.

North Carolina, route from, to Indiana, 156.

Northwest Territory, bounties in, 84;
  congressional delegate seated, 76;
  divided, 76, 84, 85;
  enters second degree, 75;
  first sale of public land in, 75;
  judges, 62;
  laws, 83, 84;
  magistrates, 61;
  mention, 58;
  taxation, 83.

O

Ogee's (Dixon's) ferry, 152.

Oglesby, _Rev._ Joshua, rep., 113.

Ohio, emigration to, 76, 190;
  population, 91, 181;
  public land sale, 144.

Ohio Company, 71.

Ohio river, boundary of Illinois, 10;
  settlers, 88;
  settlers northwest of, 18, 19.

Ordinance of 1784, 46.

Ordinance of 1787, 40;
  amendments to, 115, 116;
  anti-slavery article, 176 _et seq._;
  college township reserved by, 101;
  effect on Illinois country, 54, 55;
  violation of, 87.

Ottawa Indians, 135.

Ouia, town, 30.

Ouia (Wea) Indians, 29.

Ouisconsin (Wisconsin) Territory, Galena claimed by, 150.

P

Paget, M., mill built by, 193.

Palestine, sale of public lands at, 137.

Parker, Joseph, of Kaskaskia, 53, 54.

Peck, _Rev._ John M., Baptist minister, 124, 125, 192.

Peltry, debts paid in, 21, 43, 60.

Peoria, Indian agent at, 134;
  mention, 79.

Peoria Indians, 12.

Philips, Joseph, territorial secretary, 113.

Piankashaw Indians, 81.

Pierre, Eugenio, 38.

Pike county, separated from Madison, 188.

Pioneer clergy, 191 _et seq._

Pirogues, 93, 94, 160.

Plums, at Smith's Prairie, 129.

Pollock, Oliver, 40.

Polypotamia, mention, 46.

Pope, Nathaniel, and the northern boundary, 115, 116;
  delegate in Congress, 113.

Population, 1788, 70;
  1785-1799, 82;
  1801, 88;
  1790-1810, 91;
  1818, 116;
  1812, 113;
  1820-1840, 187, 188;
  French, 1766-1777, 12.

Post routes. _See_ Mail routes.

Post Vincennes, court regulations for, 59, 135.
  _See also_ Vincennes.

Potatoes, price, 97, 164.

Potawatomie Indians, 134.

Prairie du Chien, inhabitants, 1801, 88.

Prairie du Rocher, bounty lands, 57;
  inhabitants, 1766-1777, 12;
  1801, 88.

Prairies, 83, 86, 97, 109, 131, 156;
  fertility of, 165 _et seq._;
  settlement, 130, 131.

Preemption rights, 72, 75, 77, 78, 100, 102, 111, 113, 139, 144, 152;
  in various states, 102 _et seq._

Presbyterians, at Galena, 175;
  Cumberland Presbyterians, 143.

Prices of commodities, 49, 59, 97, 130, 131, 164;
  of land, _see under_ Land.

Priests, French, emigrate from Illinois, 68.

Pro-slavery agitation. _See under_ Slavery.

Provisions, scarcity of, 21-23, 25, 28.

Public lands, donated for schools and internal improvements, 142;
  price of in various states, 103, 104, 105;
  proceeds of sales applied to roads and schools, 116;
  receipts from sale of, 143;
  sales in Illinois, 77, 81, 105, 106, 137, 143;
  sales in other states, 103, 104, 144;
  tax regulations of, up to 1818, 130.

Public morals, 28, 29.

Publications. _See_ Books, Newspapers.

Q

Quebec, Bishop of, pastoral letter, 1767, 12.

R

Randolphs, The, mention, 209.

Randolph county, formed, 75 n., 83;
  slaves in, 180.

Rangers, volunteer for guard service, 108, 109.

Regulators of the Valley, 147.

Religious denominations, 172 _et seq._

Reynolds, _Gov._ John, 145, 196.

Richland Creek, settlement, 78.

River craft, 93, 94, 126, 129.

Riviere du Chemin, fight at, 37.

Roads, 86, 116, 153 _et seq._;
  Illinois settlements to Galena, 151;
  repairs, 158;
  Shawneetown to Birkbeck's settlement, 157;
  to Kaskaskia, Cahokia and St. Louis, 101, 102, 157;
  Vandalia to Springfield, 157.
  _See also under_ Illinois; _also_ Toll roads.

Rock river, 152.

Rock Spring Seminary (Shurtleff College) founded by Baptists in 1827, 174.

Rogers, _Capt._ ----, defense of, 28, 29.

Roosevelt, Theodore, "Winning of the West," 9.

Rush, Benjamin, mention, 195.

S

St. Clair, _Gov._ Arthur, 10, 64;
  at Kaskaskia, 69;
  establishes counties, 83;
  president of Congress, 54.

St. Clair, James, 74.

St. Clair, John Murray, 10, 193.

St. Clair, William, 74.

St. Clair county, divided, 83;
  formed, 75 n., 82.

St. Josephs, expedition against, 37, 38.

St. Louis, attacked by British, 33;
  population of, 1817, 132;
  Treaty of, 1804, 81.

St. Marie, Joseph, goods confiscated by Spanish, 63.

St. Philips, inhabitants of, 12.

St. Pierre, _Father_, leaves Cahokia, 68.

Ste. Genevieve, garrisoned by Spanish, 74.

Saline creek salt works, slave labor at, 117.

Saline river reservation, sale of, 142.

Saline spring in Gallatin county, 170, 171.

Salt, discovered at Carlyle, 1823, 171;
  legislation concerning, 101;
  prices of, 170 _et seq._;
  works, New York, 153.

Sangamon county, emigration to, 1810-1825, 188;
  housekeepers as freeholders, 147;
  separated from Madison, 188.

Sauk Indians, 33, 81.

Schools, academic, funds given for, 199;
  common, established, 173;
  early, 173;
  land granted for, 116, 141, 142;
  teachers, 173, 174.

Scotch-Irish opposed to slavery, 92.

Selkirk, _Lord_, colony, 172.

Seminaries, location of, 174.

Servitude, indentured, 117, 176, 177, 179.

_Shawnee Chief_, 132.

Shawneetown, description, 1817, 125-7;
  land-office at, 103;
  road to Kaskaskia, 101, 102, 157;
  sale of public lands, 105, 137.

Shipping, 93, 94, 125, 129.

Shippingport, Falls of Ohio, mention, 162.

Short, Jacob, rep., 113.

Shurtleff College (Rock Springs Seminary) founded by Baptists in 1827,
            174.

Sickness. _See under_ Health.

Sioux Indians, 31, 32.

Skiffs, 93, 94.

Slave code, enacted in 1819, 179.

Slavery, 64, 65, 176 _et seq._;
  abolition recommended by Coles, 185;
  anti-slavery article of Ordinance of 1787, 55, 177, 180;
  "Black Laws" of Illinois, 176, 186;
  children of slaves, 177;
  constitutional provisions, 178;
  decrease of, 187;
  effect on settlement, 177;
  freeing of slaves, 64, 65, 177, 179;
  French slaveholders, 55, 176, 177;
  importation of slaves authorized, 87;
  increase, 180, 181;
  indentured servitude, 117, 176 _et seq._;
  legalization, 176;
  number of slaves, 1820, 1840, 187;
  Ordinance of 1787, 55, 176, 177, 180;
  whipping of slaves, 179.

Slave-trade, abolition of, 178.

Smith's Prairie, fruit at, 129.

Soulard, _Mr._, 152.

Southern influence in Illinois, 145, 180.

Spain claims the Illinois country, 38;
  offers free land to Illinois settlers, 55, 71;
  refuses to allow navigation of Mississippi, 21.

Spanish, aggression upon United States, 73;
  trouble Illinois settlers, 21, 24.

Sprigg, _Judge_ William, 111.

Springfield, called Calhoun when founded, 196;
  first store, 206;
  land-office at, 144;
  sales of public land, 137, 143;
  terminus of mail route, 158.

Squatters in Illinois, 50, 58, 72, 99, 148.

State Historical Society of Wisconsin. _See under_ Wisconsin.

Steamboats, first on Ohio and Mississippi, 123;
  speed and rates of, 160, 162, 163.

Stephenson, Benjamin, delegate in Congress, 113.

Stuart, _Judge_ Alexander, 111, 113.

Stuart, John T., mention, 207.

Suffrage, qualifications, 77, 78, 112-14, 117, 147, 148.

Sugar, maple, 129.

Supreme Court, U. S., decision of, 11.

T

Talbott, Benjamin, leg. coun., 113.

Tallmadge, James, opposes admission of Illinois, 118, 179.

Tamarois, Indians, 110.

Tardiveau, Bartholomew, 51, 52, 55, 69.

Tavern-keepers (housekeepers) given freehold privileges, 147.

Tavern-sites, land ceded for, 75, 79.

Taxation, in N.-W. terr., 83;
  of land, 130, 133;
  of live-stock, 83.

Taylor, Zachary, mention, 207.

Tazewell, L. W., mention, 209.

Tea, price of, 130.

Teachers, salaries of, 174.

Tennessee, lands sold for taxes, 189.

Tennessee wagon, 155.

Thomas, _Judge_ Jesse B., signs petition for retention of slavery in
            Illinois, 111, 178;
  territorial judge, 113, 145.

Timber, want of, 131.

Todd, _Col._ John, _Jr._, 15, 16 _et seq._

Toll roads, 157.

Tomahawk rights, 51.

Trading firms: Baynton, Wharton and Morgan, 10;
  British Michilimackinac Company, 49.

Trammell, Philip, rep., 113.

Transportation,
  cost:
  _via_ canals, 141;
  _via_ rivers, 124, 125, 126, 160;
  improvement in facilities, 157;
  land, 93, 126, 154-7, 161;
  water, 83, 92 _et seq._, 114, 126, 129.
  _See also_ River craft, Wagons.

Treaties.--Fort Wayne, 1803, 79;
  Greenville, 1795, 79;
  St. Louis, 1804, 81;
  Spain-U. S., commercial treaty, 73;
  Vincennes, 1803, 79;
  1805, 81.

Trottier, F., 36.

Turbine wheel, 167.

Turner, Frederick Jackson, 5.

Turnpike, 93.

U

United States Supreme Court decision, 11.

V

Vandalia, mention, 188, 189;
  land-office at, 207;
  public lands sold, 137.

Vegetables, 168.

Vehicles, 152, 155, 156;
  emigrant wagons, 159, 164;
  Tennessee wagon, 155.

Vermilion saline, 142.

Vincennes, accept inducements of Morgan, 63;
  attack on, 32, 73;
  court, 17, 59;
  description of, 13;
  levy of troops at, 54;
  treaty, 1803, 79;
  treaty, 1805, 81.
  _See also_ Post Vincennes.

Virginia, Augusta county, 15;
  Board of Commissioners for the Settlement of Western Accounts, 42-44;
  cedes Western lands to the United States, 45, 46;
  emigration from, to Illinois, 91, 92, 190, 201;
  legislation for protection of Illinois county, 9;
  military bounty lands, 46;
  money, 21, 23, 24.

Vote, August 2, 1824, 183;
  chart of, 184.

W

Wabash Land Company, 10 _et seq._, 88.

Wabash Navigation Company, 200.

Wabash river, boundary line, 90, 154;
  expedition on, 41;
  landholders on, 10, 87, 88.

Wages, 96, 169.

Wagons, first, Galena to Chicago, 152.
  _See also_ Vehicles.

War of 1812, 106 _et seq._; mention, 118.

Water supply, 86.

Wayne county, separated from Illinois, 86.

Wea. _See_ Ouia.

West, The, Commerce of, 96.

_Western Christian Monitor_, mention, 197.

Western frontier. _See_ Frontier; _also_ Wilderness.

_Western Intelligencer_, 132.

Western Territory, Ordinance for government of, 46.

Westward movement, 190.

Wharton, ----, member of trading firm, 10.

Wheat, price of, 164.

Wheeling, _Va._, Committee of Workingmen, 144.

Wild animals, 14.

Wilderness, description of, 86;
  mention, 95.
  _See also_ Frontier.

Wilderness Road, 93.

Wilkins, John, _British Commandant in Illinois_, 10.

Wilkinson, _Gen._ James, 204.

Williams, _Maj._, 39.

Wilson, Alexander, rep., 113.

Winnebago Indians, 135, 151.

Winnebago war, 135, 146, 207.

Winston, Richard, 17, 18;
  sheriff at Kaskaskia, 26, 41, 61.

Wirt, William, mention, 209.

Wisconsin, southern boundary, 150.

Wisconsin, State Historical Society of, 11.

Wolves, 14;
  bounty for, 84, 148.

Wood, scarcity of retards settlement, 165.

Wyllys, _Maj._, 69.

Y

Yorkshire, _England_, emigrants from, reach Jacksonville, 189.

Z

Zewapetas, 63.





                 [Illustration: Map of Illinois Country.]






FOOTNOTES


    1 "Jour. H. of Del.," Va., Oct. Sess., 1778, 106-7; "Jour. of Senate,"
      Va., Oct. Sess., 1778, 52.

      Erroneous statements concerning the time of the formation of the
      County of Illinois have been made by Winsor, "Westward Movement,"
      122; Poole, in Winsor, "Narrative and Crit. Hist. of Am.," VI., 729;
      Thwaites, "How George Rogers Clark Won the Northwest," 64; Boyd, in
      "Am. Hist. Rev.," IV., 623; Mason, in "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,"
      IV., 286; Pirtle, "Clark's Campaign in the Ill.," 5; Moore, "The
      Northwest Under Three Flags," 220; Wallace, "Hist, of Ill. and La.
      Under French Rule," 402; Butler, "Hist. of Ky.," 1836 ed., 64; and
      others. Roosevelt's indefinite statement that the county was formed
      "in the fall of 1778"--"Winning of the West," II., 168--is technically
      correct. Kate Mason Rowland truthfully says--"George Mason," I., 307,
      308--that a committee was ordered to prepare a bill for the formation
      of the county, on November 19, 1778, and that such a bill was
      presented on November 30. Butterfield says--"George Rogers Clark's
      Conquest of the Ill.," 681-6--that the Act was passed between the
      10th of November and the 12th of December, 1778. It is true that the
      bill in its final amended form passed both houses on December 9, was
      signed by the Speaker of the Senate on December 17, and
      subsequently, if at all, by the Speaker of the House of Delegates.
      On the 12th of December, Governor Patrick Henry issued three
      important sets of instructions in accordance with the provisions of
      the Act creating the County of Illinois. As the signing of the bill
      by the Speakers was mandatory after its passage, it is easy to
      understand the issuance of these instructions previous to the
      signing. It is almost impossible to conceive that Governor Henry,
      who showed marked interest in the Western frontier, should first
      have begun to issue orders at least six weeks after the county was
      formed, as is implied by the date commonly given for its formation.
      For the legislative history of the act, see "Jour. H. of Del.," Va.,
      Oct. Sess., 1778, 65, 72, 79-80, 91, 96, 106-7; "Jour. of Senate,"
      Va., Oct. Sess., 1778, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 70-1.

    2 "Jour. H. of Del." Va., Oct. Sess., 1778, 72; "Hening's Statutes,"
      IX., 553.

    3 "Public Lands," II., 204, 206-9.

    4 The Illinois and Wabash Land companies, which had several members in
      common, united in 1780. After a long series of memorials to
      Congress, the Supreme Court of the United States, in 1823, decided
      that "a title to land, under grant to private individuals, made by
      Indian tribes or nations, northwest of the river Ohio, in 1773 and
      1775, can not be recognized in the courts of the United States"--8
      "Wheaton," 543-605. In general see: "Pub. Lands," I., 24, 27, 72,
      74, 160, 189, 301; II., 108-20, 138, 253; "Sen. Jour.," 1793-99,
      317, 326; _Ibid._, "2d Cong.," 165; "Va. Calendar State Papers," I.,
      314; "Jour. of Cong.," III., 676-7, 681; IV., 23; "An Account of the
      Proceedings of the Ill. and Ouabache Land Companies," 1-55, Phil'a,
      1796; "Memorial of the Ill. and Wabash Land Company," 1-26, Phil'a,
      1797; "Memorial of the Ill. and Ouabache Land Companies," 1802,
      1-20; "An Account of the Proceedings of the Ill. and Ouabache Land
      Company," 1-74, Phil'a, 1803; "Memorial of the United Ill. and
      Wabash Land Companies," 1-48, Baltimore, 1816. For a map of the
      claims, see "Map of the State of Ky. with the Adjoining
      Territories," 1794, pub. by H. D. Symonds; also a copy of the same
      published by Smith, Reid and Wayland, in 1795; and "States of
      America," by J. Russell, London, C. Dilly and G. G. & J. Robinson,
      1799. The last map gives the claims of the Ill., Wabash, and N. J.
      companies, respectively, the others, the claims of the last two
      only. All references here given are to material to be found in the
      libraries of the Chicago Historical Society and of the State Hist.
      Soc. of Wis.

    5 Mother Mary of the Incarnation, of Quebec, in 1668. In "Glimpses of
      the Monastery." "Scenes from the Hist. of the Ursulines of Quebec,"
      1639-1839, "by a Member of the Community," 90. Charlevoix, "Histoire
      de la Nouvelle-France," III., 322, expressed a similar opinion in
      1721, and Collot, "Journey in N. A.," I., 232-3, shows that the
      Illinois French of 1796-7 were a case in point.

    6 Pittman, "European Settlements on the Miss.," 55. See pp. 42, 44,
      45, 47, 48, for the settlement in detail.

    7 Hutchins, "Topographical Desc. of Va.," 36-8.

    8 "Mandements des Eveques de Quebec," II., 1741-1806, 205-6.

    9 Thwaites, "Early Western Travels," I., 141, reprint of Croghan's
      Jour.

   10 "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 165; "Ind. Hist Soc. Pub.," II.,
      513-4.

   11 "Public Lands," I., 10.

   12 Two of the many maps illustrating this are in "Pub. Lands," II.,
      facing 183, 195. A number of maps in Hopkins', "The Home Lots of the
      Early Settlers of the Providence Plantations," especially the one
      following page 17, show that the same form of holdings existed in
      Providence, R. I. For reasons for this form, see the note by Emma
      Helen Blair, in Thwaites', "Jesuit Relations," IV., 268-9. Stiles,
      "Ancient Windsor," I., 149, has a map showing such holdings in
      Windsor, Conn., 1633-1650.

   13 Monroe, "Writings," I., 117; "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 483-92;
      Hutchins, "Topographical Desc. of Va.," map facing 41; Collot, "A
      Journey in N. A.," I., 239-42, describes the roads in Illinois in
      1796, and plate 28 of the accompanying atlas gives an excellent map,
      _q. v._ in pocket.

   14 "Draper Coll., Ill. MSS.," 99.

   15 Harmar to Sec. of War from Fort Harmar, Nov. 24, 1787--"St. Clair
      Papers," II., 30-1.

   16 Collot, "A Journey in N. A.," I., 233.

   17 At the November session of 1738, Virginia had formed the County of
      Augusta, which technically included the Illinois country--"Hening's
      Statutes," V., 78-80. For a map, see Waddell, "Annals of Augusta
      Co., Va.," frontispiece.

   18 "Hening's Statutes," IX., 117, 552-5; V., 489, 491.

   19 Henry, "Life of Patrick Henry," III., 209-18.

   20 "Cal. of Va. State Papers," I., 312-14.

      Col. John Todd, jr., was born March 27, 1750, in Pennsylvania. He
      was well educated by his uncle in Virginia, in which state young
      Todd practised law for some years. In 1775, he was one of the
      representatives chosen at the call of the proprietors of
      Transylvania to form an ultra-constitutional government for that new
      settlement. In 1777, he was one of the first two burgesses from the
      county of Kentucky. He was killed at the Battle of the Blue Licks,
      August 19, 1782. For biographical sketches see John Mason Brown,
      "Oration at the Centennial of the Battle of the Blue Licks," 27-31;
      "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 285-8; Green, "Historic Families of
      Ky.," 211; White, "Descendants of John Walker," 56; "Filson Club
      Pub." VI., 27-8; Morehead, "Settlement of Ky.," 174. Morehead's
      facts were from R. Wickliffe, Todd's son-in-law, but this fact loses
      its significance from the circumstance that Todd's only living child
      was of posthumous birth.

   21 Henry, "Life of Patrick Henry," III., 216-18.

_   22 Ibid._, 237.

   23 "Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XLIX., 43, original MS. in French.

   24 "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 295.

   25 "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 294-6, 418; "Mich. Pioneer Coll.,"
      IX., 498.

      A Mr. Winston, probably Richard, was in Illinois in 1770, and was
      regarded as an authority on the prices of cattle, as is shown by the
      court records. In 1773, upon the occasion of the purchase of land
      from the Kaskaskia Indians, by the Illinois Land Company, Richard
      Winston was at Kaskaskia, and interpreted in French to the
      illiterate Indian interpreter of His Majesty what the company
      desired to say to the Indians--"Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 435;
      "An Account of the Proceedings of the Ill. and Ouabache Land
      Companies," 1796, 14. Richard Winston was one of the original
      Indiana Company--"Cal. of Va. State Papers," VI., 18, 35.

   26 "Hening's Statutes," X., 26, 32, 43, 161.

   27 "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 301; "Pub. Lands," I., 16.

   28 Todd to Winston, June 15, 1779--"Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 302;
      Todd to Judges at Kaskaskia, July 31, 1779--_Ibid._, 304; McCarty to
      Todd, from Cahokia, July 18, 1779--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XLIX.,
      72, original MS.; McCarty to Montgomery, from Cahokia, Sept. 19,
      1779,--_Ibid._, XLIX., 71, original MS.

      Richard McCarty had been a resident of Cahokia under British rule
      and had warned the British against American encroachments. He was
      licensed to trade by the county government upon the recommendation
      of the court of the District of Cahokia, June 5, 1779--"Mich. Pioneer
      Coll.," IX., 368, 383; "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 296-7-8.

   29 Capt. John Williams to G. R. Clark, from Fort Clark, Kaskaskia,
      Sept. 25, 1779--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XLIX., 73, original MS.

   30 Todd to Col. Will Fleming, senator from Botetourt, from Kaskaskia,
      Aug. 18, 1779--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XXIII, 103, original MS.

   31 Todd to Gov. of Va., from Kaskaskia, Aug. 18, 1779--"Chicago Hist.
      Soc. Coll.," IV., 319.

   32 Capt. John Williams to Col. Wm. Preston, from Ft. Clark, Kaskaskia,
      Sept. 20, 1779--"Draper Coll., Preston Papers." V., 9, original MS.

      Montgomery to Clark, from Ft. Clark, Kaskaskia, Oct. 5,
      1779--_Ibid._, "Clark MSS.," XLIX., 78, original MS.

   33 Shelby to Clark, from Vincennes, Oct. 10, 1779--_Ibid._, XLIX., 79,
      original MS.; Montgomery to Clark, from Ft. Clark, Kaskaskia, Nov.
      15, 1779--_Ibid._, XLIX., 85, original MS.

   34 Montgomery to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Feb. 1, 1780--"Draper Coll.
      Clark MSS.," L., 9, original MS.; Clark to Todd, from Louisville,
      March, 1780--"Cal. of Va. State Papers," I., 338-9; John McArthur
      from Ste. Genevieve, Mo., Oct. 22, 1883--"Draper Coll. Clark MSS.,"
      VIII., 27.

      I have been unable to determine just when Col. Todd left Illinois,
      whether he resigned as county-lieutenant, and whether he again
      returned. Boyd in his article in the "Am. Hist. Rev.," IV., says
      that he left in 1780, resigned in the same year, and apparently did
      not return. Mason, in "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 287, says
      that he seems to have left in 1779, seems not to have resigned, and
      not to have returned. Wickliffe, in Morehead, "Settlement of Ky.,"
      174, implies that he did not resign, and says that he several times
      revisited the county. No one of these writers gives any authority
      for his statement and I have found none. It is certain that Todd was
      at the Falls of Ohio on December 23, 1779; that he then wrote to the
      governor of Virginia expressing his intention of resigning; that the
      governor, Jefferson, strongly opposed his resigning--"Chicago Hist.
      Soc. Coll.," IV., 359; that he left some peltry in the joint care of
      his subordinates, Montgomery and Winston, in November, 1779; that
      goods were said to be consigned to him as county-lieutenant of
      Illinois in November, 1780; that he wrote "I still receive
      complaints from the Illinois," on April 15, 1781; that on April 29,
      1781, Winston was referred to as "Deputy County-Lieutenant for the
      Illinois County;" and that Thimothe Demunbrunt signed as "Lt. Comd.
      par interim, &c." in February and again in March, 1782--"Chicago
      Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 315-16, 335, 343, 359; "Draper's Notes, Trip
      1860," III., 40-4.

   35 Edward Murray to ----, from Kaskaskia, Apr. 19, 1780--"Draper Coll.,
      Clark MSS.," XLVI., 52, original MS. John Dodge had been an Indian
      trader between Detroit and Pittsburg. He was captured by the
      British, but escaped on Oct. 9, 1778, after thirty-three months
      detention. Washington recommended him to Congress as a man who would
      be useful because of his knowledge of the country--"Draper's Notes,
      Trip 1860," VI., 153-5.

   36 Unsigned and unaddressed, from "Williamsburg, Jan. 28, 1780"--"Draper
      Coll., Clark MSS.," I., 5, original MS.

   37 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Apr. 13, 1788--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," I., 386-7.

   38 Clark to Todd from Louisville, Mar., 1780--"Cal. of Va. State
      Papers," I., 338-9; _see also_ pp. 358, 360.

      Unsigned and unaddressed official letter, from Williamsburg, Jan.
      28, 1780--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," L., 5, original MS.

   39 Dodge to Gov. of Va., from Ft. Jefferson, Aug. 1, 1780--"Cal. of Va.
      State Papers," I., 368.

   40 Todd to Gov. Jefferson, from Richmond, June 2, 1780--"Cal. of Va.
      State Papers," I., 358; Address from the people of Cahokia to G. R.
      Clark, April 11, 1780--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," L., 27, original
      MS. in French.

   41 Legras to Clark, from Vincennes, Aug. 1, 1780--"Draper Coll., Clark
      MSS.," L., 54, original MS. in French.

   42 "Hening's Statutes," X., 303, 388-9.

   43 Extract from McCarty's journal, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 14,
      1780--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," L., 66; McCarty to Col. Slaughter,
      Jan. 27, 1781--"Draper's Notes, Trip 1860," III., 1, 2; incomplete in
      "Cal. of Va. State Papers." I., 465; Montgomery to McCarty, between
      Aug. 27 and Aug. 30, 1780--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," L., 66, 68;
      _Ibid._, L., 70, original MS.

   44 McCarty to Todd, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 14, 1780--"Cal. of Va. State
      Papers," L., 380.

   45 Winston to Todd, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 24, 1780--"Cal. of Va. State
      Papers," I., 380-2.

   46 Winston to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 24, 1780--"Draper Coll., Clark
      MSS.," L., 71, original MS.; "Draper's Notes, Trip 1860," II.,
      136-40; Helm to Slaughter, from Fort Jefferson, Oct. 29, 1780--"Cal.
      of Va. State Papers," I., 383; Williams to Clark, from Camp
      Jefferson, Oct. 28, 1780--_Ibid._, I., 383.

   47 Montgomery to Jefferson, from New Orleans, Jan. 8, 1781--"Cal. of Va.
      State Papers," I., 424-5.

   48 "Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," VIII., 78.

   49 Todd to Gov. Jefferson, from Lexington, Ky., Jan. 24, 1781--"Cal. of
      Va. State Papers," I., 460.

   50 "Draper's Notes, Trip 1860," II., 158.

   51 Rogers to Gov. Jefferson, from Harrodsburg, Apr. 29, 1781--"Draper's
      Notes, Trip 1860," III., 40-4; incomplete in "Cal. of Va. State
      Papers," II., 76-7. Rogers refers to Winston as "Deputy County
      Lieutenant for the Illinois County." Who was county-lieutenant?

   52 Slaughter to Gov. Jefferson, from Louisville, Jan. 14, 1781--"Draper
      Coll., Clark MSS.," LI., 12, original MS.; Maj. Williams's orders,
      endorsed "pretended orders," from Fort Clark, Kaskaskia, Feb. 12,
      1781.

   53 Clark to Gov. of Va., from "Yough," Mar. 27, 1781--"Cal. of Va. State
      Papers," I., 597.

   54 Montgomery to Gov. of Va., from Falls of Ohio, Aug. 10, 1781--"Cal.
      of Va. State Papers," II., 313; Montgomery to the Board of
      Commissioners for the Settlement of Western Accounts, from New
      Holland, Feb. 22, 1783--_Ibid._, III., 441-4.

   55 Todd to Gov. Jefferson, from Lexington, Ky., Apr. 15, 1781--"Cal. of
      Va. State Papers," II., 44-5.

   56 "Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," LX., 17, No. 2; Maj. de Peyster to
      Brig.-Gen. Powell, from Detroit, July 12, 1781--"Mich. Pioneer
      Coll.," XIX., 646.

   57 "Can. Archives," Series B., Vol. 182, 489; "Rept. on Can. Archives,"
      1888, 882.

   58 Montgomery to Gov. Nelson, from Falls of Ohio, Aug. 10, 1781--"Cal.
      of Va. State Papers," II., 313; Same to same, same date--_Ibid._,
      II., 315.

   59 Capt. Bailey to Col. Slaughter, from "Port Vincennes," Aug. 6,
      1781--"Cal. of Va. State Papers," II., 338.

   60 "Jour. H. of Del.," Va., Oct. Sess., 1781, 13-39.

_   61 Ibid._, 72, 73, 74. Boyd states in "Am. Hist. Rev.," IV., 632, 635,
      that the county ceased to exist in 1781. This is erroneous. Mr.
      Boyd's article is the most scholarly treatment of the County of
      Illinois which has been published. Aside from the errors as to the
      time of the beginning and the ending of the county, and doubtful
      statements as to Todd's leaving Illinois and subsequently resigning,
      no errors of fact have been noted. A more complete, but unpublished,
      article on the subject is by Dr. Edith Lyle.

   62 Sinclair to Haldim, from Michilimackinac, Feb. 17, 1780--"Mich.
      Pioneer Coll.," IX., 546; Same to same, May 29, 1780--_Ibid._, IX.,
      548-9; Same to De Peyster, Feb. 15, 1780--_Ibid._, XIX., 500-1; Same
      to Lt.-Col. Bolton, June 4, 1780--_Ibid._, XIX., 529; De Peyster to
      Lt.-Col. Bolton, from Detroit, June 8, 1780--_Ibid._, XIX., 531-2;
      McKee to De Peyster, June 4, 1780--_Ibid._, XIX., 530-1; Bird to De
      Peyster, from "a day's march from the Ohio," June 3, 1780--_Ibid._,
      XIX., 527-9.

   63 Sinclair to Bolton, from Michilimackinac, July 4, 1780--"Mich.
      Pioneer Coll.," XIX., 529-30; Same to Haldimand, July 8,
      1780--_Ibid._, IX., 558-9; Same to same, May 29, 1780--_Ibid._, IX.,
      548-9; Same to De Peyster, July 30, 1780--_Ibid._, IX., 586; "Draper
      Coll., Clark MSS.," XXVIII., No. 117, p. 6; Scharf to Lyman C.
      Draper, from Baltimore, Dec. 16, 1882--_Ibid._, p. 7; Capt. John
      Rogers' account--_Ibid._, p. 3; Capt. John Murphy's account--_Ibid._,
      VIII., 66-78; See also _Ibid._, XXVI., 18.

   64 "Rept. on Canadian Archives," 1888, p. 904; "Mag. of Am. Hist.,"
      III., 366.

   65 Bentley to Clark, from Vincennes, July 30, 1780--"Draper Coll., Clark
      MSS.," L., 51. A copy, incomplete and not exact, is in _Ibid._,
      XXVI., 85.

   66 Extracts from Capt. McCarty's Journal, at Kaskaskia--"Draper Coll.,
      Clark MSS.," XXVI., 85-6; McCarty to Todd, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 14,
      1780--"Cal. of Va. State Papers," I., 380; Winston to Todd, from
      Kaskaskia, Oct. 24, 1780--_Ibid._, I., 381-2; Auguste St. Jemme, son
      of an inhabitant of Kaskaskia, to Lyman C. Draper--"Draper's Notes,
      Trip 1851," I., 48-9--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XXVI., 82.

   67 De Peyster to Powell, from Detroit, Nov. 13, 1780--"Mich. Pioneer
      Coll.," XIX., 581; Same to Haldimand, Nov. 16, 1780--_Ibid._, X.,
      448-9; Linctot to Slaughter, "O'Post," Jan. 11, 1781--"Cal. of Va.
      State Papers," I., 429; J. L. William to Lyman C. Draper, from Fort
      Wayne, Ind., Oct. 1, 1881--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XXVI., 92;
      McCarty to Slaughter, from Ill., Jan. 27, 1781--"Cal. of Va. State
      Papers" I., 465; Col. Brodhead to Washington, from Fort Pitt, Mar.
      10, 1781, "Olden Time," II., 391; Col. Levin Powell, from
      Harrodsburg, Jan. 21, 1781--"Pa. Archives," VIII., 768; De Peyster to
      Haldimand, from Detroit, Nov. 13, 1780, Farmer, "Hist. of Detroit
      and Michigan," 257; Letter from J. M. P. Legras, from Vincennes,
      Dec. 1, 1780--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," L., 77, original corrected
      draft; "Rept. on Canadian Archives," 1888, 904-5; extract from
      "Scot's Magazine," May, 1781, in "Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XXVI.,
      82. Whether La Balme had any countenance from either the French
      government or its representatives is an unsettled question. That
      France should regain her hold in America was desired by many
      Frenchmen, but on the other hand, the French government was pledged
      by its treaty of alliance to make no acquisitions of territory in
      America. The following references raise the question, but I know of
      none which settle it: Kingsford, "Canada," VI., 342-3; Sparks,
      "Washington," VI., 106 ff., 113; Stevens, "Facsimiles," XVII., No.
      1609; "Secret Jour. of Cong.," II., 111-117, 125.

   68 Haldimand to De Peyster, from Quebec, Jan. 6, 1781--"Mich. Pioneer
      Coll.," IX., 641.

   69 This amounts to but sixteen men. De Peyster says that the party was
      one of sixteen; McCarty says there were seventeen.

   70 McCarty to Slaughter, from Ill., Jan. 27, 1781--"Cal. of Va. State
      Papers," I., 465; Sinclair to Mathews, from Michilimackinac, Feb.
      23, 1781--"Mich. Pioneer Coll.," IX., 629; De Peyster to Powell, from
      Detroit, Jan. 8, 1781--_Ibid._, XIX., 591-2; Same to Haldimand, same
      date--_Ibid._, X., 450-1; Same to McKee, from Detroit, Feb. 1,
      1781--De Peyster, "Miscellanies," p. xxvi.; Linctot to commanding
      officer at the Falls of Ohio, "Opost Vincennes," Jan. 13, 1781--"Cal.
      of Va. State Papers," I., 432; Draper on date of the expedition,
      "Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XXVI., 88; De Peyster to Powell, from
      Detroit, Mar. 17, 1781--"Mich. Pioneer Coll.," XIX., 600; Sinclair to
      Powell, from Michilimackinac Id., May 1, 1781--_Ibid._, XIX., 632;
      "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 216.

   71 Jay to Livingston, from Madrid, Apr. 28, 1782--"Secret Jour. of
      Cong.," IV., 64; or Wharton, "Dipl. Corr. of the Am. Rev.," V.,
      363-4; or Sparks, _Ibid._, VIII., 76-8; McCarty to Slaughter, from
      Ill., Jan. 27, 1781--"Draper's Notes, Trip 1860," III., 1-2;
      incomplete copy in "Cal. of Va. State Papers," I., 465; Linctot to
      commanding officer at Falls of Ohio, from Vincennes, Jan. 13,
      1781--"Cal. of Va. State Papers," I., 432; Franklin to Livingston,
      from Passy, Apr. 12, 1782--Sparks, "Dipl. Corr. of the Am. Rev.,"
      III., 339. See also _Ibid._, VIII., 150; Sparks, "Franklin's Works,"
      IX., 206, Boston, 1856.

   72 Linctot to ----, from St. Louis, July 31, 1781--"Draper Coll., Clark
      MSS.," LI., 75, original MS. in French; Gratiot to Clark, from St.
      Louis, Aug. 1, 1781--_Ibid._, LI., 77, original MS. in French.

   73 This chapter was read, by request, before the Wisconsin Academy of
      Sciences, Arts, and Letters, on February 8, 1906.

   74 In Council, Jan. 29, 1782--"Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," XLVI., 69,
      original MS.

   75 Demunbrunt to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Mar. 5, 1782--"Draper Coll.,
      Clark MSS.," L., 70; LI., 25, original MS. Demunbrunt, whose name
      also appears as Demunbrun and De Munbrun, was prominent in early
      Illinois history. Records signed by him as Lieutenant Commandant
      _par interim_ appear in "John Todd's Record-Book" under the dates
      June 14, 1779, Feb'y, 1782, and March 22, 1782. In 1783, 1784, and
      probably at other dates he made grants of land in the Illinois
      country. He served under Clark. From the time Winston was appointed
      to the command of the County of Illinois, until the coming of St.
      Clair, Demunbrunt was "commandant of the village of Kaskaskia and
      its dependencies." He had important dealings with an embassy from
      the Cherokee Indians. He was allowed land under the Virginia grants.
      In his memorial to the General Assembly, he said: "Your memorialist,
      little acquainted with the mode of doing business in this State,
      never kept a regular account, depending altogether on the justice
      and generosity of the Legislature"--"Draper's Notes, Trip 1860," V.,
      15-18; "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 315-16; "Pub. Lands," II.,
      146.

   76 Todd to Winston, June 15, 1779, in "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV.,
      302; Legras to Clark, from Vincennes, Dec. 31, 1782--"Draper Coll.,
      Clark MSS.," LII., 67, original MS.; "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,"
      IV., 289.

   77 Letter from Capt. Dodge, from Kaskaskia, Mar. 6, 1783--"Draper Coll.,
      Clark MSS.," LX., No. 3, p. 48.

   78 Dodge to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Mar. 3, 1783--_Ibid._, LII., 78.

   79 Officers to Clark, from Ft. Nelson, Falls of Ohio, March 30,
      1783--_Ibid._, LII., 80.

   80 Montgomery to Board of Commissioners, from New Holland, Feb. 22,
      1783--"Cal. of Va. State Papers," III., 441-4.

   81 Board of Commissioners to Gov. Benjamin Harrison, from Jefferson
      county, Feb. 17, 1783--"Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 350-1.

   82 Walker Daniel to Board of Commissioners, from New Holland, Feb. 3,
      1783--"Cal. of Va. State Papers," III., 430-2.

   83 "Jour. of Cong.," III., 383-5.

   84 "Jour. H. of Del.," Va., May Sess., 1780, 25, 69, 70.

   85 Law, "The Colonial Hist. of Vincennes," 1858, 117-8, gives a copy of
      the deed. For claims under such deeds see "Pub. Lands," I., 294-8.

   86 "Pub. Lands," I., 301.

   87 "Jour. of Cong.," IV., 342-4.

_   88 Ibid._, IV., 379-80; Thwaites, "The Boundaries of Wisconsin," in
      "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," XI., 452, gives a map of Jefferson's
      proposed states.

   89 "Jour. of Cong.," IV., 473, 477.

   90 John Edgar to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Nov. 7, 1785--"Draper's Notes,
      Trip 1860," VI., 214-5.

   91 Petition to Clark, from Vincennes, Mar. 16, 1786--"Draper Coll.,
      Clark MSS.," LIII., 23.

   92 Petition to Congress, from Vincennes, June 1, 1786--_Ibid._, LIII.,
      31.

   93 Clark to Richard H. Lee, pres. of Cong., from Louisville, received
      June 8, 1786--"Draper's Notes, Trip 1860," VI., 208-9.

   94 Moses Henry to Clark, from Vincennes, June 12, 1786--"Draper Coll.,
      Clark MSS.," LIII., 32.

   95 Daniel Sullivan to Clark, from Vincennes, June 23, 1786--"Draper
      Coll., Clark MSS.," LIII., 35; John Small to Clark, same place and
      day--_Ibid._, LIII., 36.

   96 John Edgar to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 23, 1786--_Ibid._, LIII.,
      56.

   97 Clark to people of Vincennes--_Ibid._, LIII., 52.

   98 Letter from a man at Falls of Ohio to a friend in N. England, Dec.
      4, 1786--"Secret Jour. of Cong.," IV., 321.

   99 "Jour. of Cong.," IV., 688-9.

  100 Harmar to Sec'y of War, from Fort Harmar, May 14, 1787--"St. Clair
      Papers," II., 20-1; Maj. Wyllys to Harmar, from Fort Finney, Rapids
      of Ohio, Feb. 6, 1787--"Draper Coll., Harmar Papers," I., 281-2; Knox
      to Harmar, June 19, 1787--_Ibid._, I., 303. See also _Ibid._, I.,
      290; Sec'y of War to Harmar, Apr. 26, 1787--"St. Clair Papers," II.,
      22.

  101 Harmar to Sec'y of War, from Vincennes, Aug. 7, 1787--"St. Clair
      Papers," II., 27-9; Address of Am. settlers at Vincennes to Harmar,
      transmitted to the War Office, Aug. 7, 1787--"Draper Coll., Harmar
      Papers," I., 337-9; Address of French at Vincennes to Harmar, July
      28, 1787--_Ibid._, I., 331-3.

  102 Harmar to Sec'y of War, from Fort Harmar, Nov. 24, 1787--"St. Clair
      Papers," II., 30-2.

  103 Harmar to the Sec'y of War, from Fort Harmar, Nov. 24, 1787--"St.
      Clair Papers," II., 34.

  104 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Nov. 3, 1787--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," I., 352.

  105 Harmar to Sec'y of War, from Fort Harmar, Nov. 24, 1787--"St. Clair
      Papers," II., 35.

  106 "Draper's Notes, Trip 1860," VI., 170-3.

  107 "Secret Jour. of Cong.," IV., 301-29.

  108 St. Clair to the President, 1790--"St. Clair Papers" II., 175.

  109 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Oct. 13, 1788--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," I., 479; extract in "St. Clair Papers," II., 105.

  110 Tardiveau to St. Clair, from Danville, June 30, 1789--"St. Clair
      Papers," II., 117-19.

  111 Extract from above letter.--_Ibid._, II., 119-20, note.

  112 George Morgan was much engaged in large land purchases. In 1763,
      some Shawanese and other Indians carried off the property of certain
      whites to the value of L85,916 10_s._, 8_d._ The offenders being
      tributary to the Six Nations, the latter granted to King George
      III., for the exclusive use of the sufferers, on November 3, 1768,
      at Fort Stanwix, the tract of some two million five hundred thousand
      acres, later known as the claim of the Indiana Company. The land lay
      southeast of the Ohio, and was claimed in part by both Virginia and
      Pennsylvania. For map see "States of America," by J. Russell,
      London, E. Dilly and G. G. and J. Robinson, 1799; Hutchins,
      "Topographical Desc. of Va.," etc., French ed., Paris, 1781; Winsor,
      "Westward Movement," 17. Morgan, who was a large shareholder in the
      company, was for years its agent. The claim was finally denied.
      Morgan was also the founder of New Madrid, in what is now Missouri,
      but he was unfortunate in assuming powers denied by the Spanish
      government. His experience in Illinois was likewise a failure--"Cal.
      of Va. State Papers" I., 273, 297, 320; VI., 1-36 (a history of the
      Indiana purchase), 261, 679, 301; "Jour. of Cong.," III., 359, 373;
      IV., 23; "Rept. on Canadian Archives," 1888, p. 939; "Draper Coll.,
      Clark MSS.," LIII., 78; Gayerre, "Hist. of La.," index under Morgan
      refers to passages giving several quotations from sources; Kate
      Mason Rowland, "George Mason," I., 230, 324-8, 289, 308, 333, 341-4;
      II., 21, 26, 239, 244, 262, 341-5, 406, 440-1. George Mason was
      manager for the commonwealth when, in 1791, the final effort was
      made by the Indiana Company to overthrow the Virginia settlement of
      its claim. Some original sources of importance are given in this
      work--"Plain Facts: being an Examination into the Rights of the
      Indian Nations of America, to their respective Countries, and a
      Vindication of the Grant, from the Six United Nations of Indians, to
      the Proprietors of Indiana, against the decision of Virginia,
      together with authentic documents, proving that the territory,
      westward of the Alleghany Mountain, never belonged to Virginia,
      etc., Philadelphia...: M.DCC.LXXXI." The work gives a resume of the
      proceedings of the company to 1779, 164 pp. "View of the Title to
      Indiana, a tract of country on the River Ohio," 24 pp., printed
      about 1775.

  113 "Jour. of Cong.," IV., 341-2, 823-5.

  114 "Jour. of Cong.," IV., 823-5. The location of the ridge of rocks is
      clearly shown in Hutchins' "Topographical Desc. of Va.," 1778, on a
      map opposite p. 41. French edition of 1781, facing p. 16; Winsor,
      "Nar. and Crit. Hist. of Am.," VI., 700; Collot, "Atlas of America,"
      1826.

  115 Throughout the period covered by this work, the term squatter
      denoted one who illegally settled on public land, without a title.
      Later laws permitted settling before securing a title, but in the
      early period, no squatting was legal.

  116 "Jour. of Cong.," IV., 857-9.

  117 "John Todd's Record-Book," "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 308-14.

  118 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, April 13, 1788--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," I., 386-7. At the time fees as above were being
      charged, prices current in Vincennes were:

      Corn, per bu. $ 2.00
      Flour, per cwt. 7.00
      Pork, per lb. .30
      Beef, per lb. .15
      Bordeaux wine, per bottle 2.00
      Spirits, per gal. 12.00
      Whisky, per gal. $ 8.00
      Butter, per lb. 1.00
      Eggs, per doz. 1.00
      Loaf sugar, per lb. 1.00
      Brown sugar, per lb. .60
      Coffee, per lb. 1.45
      A dunghill fowl $ 1.00
      Potatoes, per bu. 2.00
      Onions, per bu. 5.00
      Cabbage, per head .15
      Turnips, per bu. 1.00

      See _Ibid._, 388-9.

      Beef was probably buffalo beef, as that was then the common meat for
      garrisons and settlers in the West.

  119 "Draper Coll., Harmar Papers," I., 389-92.

  120 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, May 21, 1788--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," I., 396. "Mr. Henry, of this place, who is very much
      connected with the Indians, particularly his wife," implies that
      Henry's wife was an Indian--_Ibid._, 3-4.

  121 Same to same, Aug. 31, 1788--_Ibid._, I., 450.

  122 Same to same, July 29, 1789--_Ibid._, II., 70-1.

  123 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Nov. 11, 1789--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," II., 130-2.

  124 Same to same, June 24, 1790--_Ibid._, II., 254.

  125 Same to ----, Jan. 1, 1788--_Ibid._, I., 371.

  126 Morgan's proclamation, Oct. 3, 1788--_Ibid._, "Clark MSS.," LIII.,
      78, incomplete.

  127 From Vincennes, Aug. 26, 1788--"Draper Coll., Harmar Papers," I.,
      455-61.

  128 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Mar. 28, 1789--_Ibid._, II.,
      17-18.

  129 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Apr. 11, 1789--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," II., 27-28.

  130 Harmar to St. Clair, from Fort Harmar, May 8, 1789--_Ibid._, II., 51.
      Harmar to Knox, same date and of similar tenor--_Ibid._, II., 53.

  131 Hamtramck to Wyllys, from Vincennes, May 27, 1789--_Ibid._, II., 39.

  132 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Fort Knox, Vincennes, Jan. 19,
      1789--_Ibid._, II., 1.

  133 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Aug. 14, 1798--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," II., 90-1.

  134 Inclosed in Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Nov. 2,
      1789--"Draper Coll., Harmar Papers," II., 124-7.

  135 Offer dated Oct. 3, 1789. Inclosed in Hamtramck to Harmar, Nov. 2,
      1789--"Draper Coll., Harmar Papers," II., 127-8.

  136 Hamtramck's reply of Oct. 14, 1789, to petition of Sept. 14,
      preceding, inclosed as above--_Ibid._, II., 128-30; "Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," II., 128-130.

  137 Edgar to Hamtramck, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 28, 1789--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," II., 132-6.

  138 Jones to Hamtramck, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 29, 1789--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," II., 136-41.

_  139 Ibid._, II., 182; "St. Clair Papers," II., 164.

  140 Tardiveau to Hamtramck, from Kaskaskia, Aug. 1, 1790--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," II., 302.

  141 "St. Clair Papers," II., 165.

  142 Harmar to Hamtramck, Sept. 3, 1790--"Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,"
      II., 332.

  143 "Jour. of Cong.," IV., 823.

  144 Pittman, "European Settlements on the Miss.," 55.

  145 Hutchins, "Topographical Desc. of Va." 36-8.

  146 "St. Clair Papers," II. 122-3.

  147 "Secret Jour. of Cong.," IV., 301-29.

  148 "St. Clair Papers," I., 150.

  149 "Pub. Lands," I., 20.

  150 "Statutes at Large," I., 221-2.

  151 Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Apr. 14, 1791--"Draper Coll.,
      Harmar Papers," II., 410.

  152 "Draper MSS., Translation of Spanish Documents," 49-60.

  153 Carondolet to Duke of Alcudia, from New Orleans, Sept. 27,
      1793--"Draper MSS., Translation of Spanish Documents." 24, second
      pagination of typewritten matter.

  154 Carondolet to ----,--_Ibid._, 33, first pagination of matter in long
      hand.

  155 "Pub. Lands," I., 69.

  156 "St. Clair Papers," II., 398-9.

  157 John Edgar, for years the wealthiest citizen of Illinois, was born
      in Ireland, came to Kaskaskia in 1784, and soon became a large
      landholder by purchasing French donation-rights. Wm. Morrison, a
      native of Bucks county, Pa., came from Philadelphia to Kaskaskia in
      1790 and became a leading merchant and shipper. Wm. St. Clair, a son
      of James St. Clair, once captain in the Irish Brigade in the service
      of France, was the first clerk of the court of St. Clair county.
      John Dumoulin (or De Moulin) was a Swiss. In 1790, he was a judge of
      the Court of Common Pleas in the Cahokia district of St. Clair
      county.

  158 St. Clair county had been formed in 1790 and Randolph county in
      1795. In 1796, they were the only counties lying wholly within the
      present State of Illinois. A strip of the eastern part of Illinois
      lay in Knox county. The line between St. Clair and Randolph was an
      east-and-west line, a little south of New Design, Randolph lying to
      the south--"St. Clair Papers," II., 165, 166, 345.

  159 "Pub. Lands," I., 68-9; "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 447-52, 452-55.

  160 "Pub. Lands," I., 68; Poore, "Desc. Catalogue of Govt.
      Publications," 43; "Laws of U. S. Relating to Pub. Lands," 420-5.

  161 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 455-61; "Annals of Cong.," 6th Cong.,
      735.

  162 "Annals of Cong.," 6th Cong., 537-538; Poore, "Desc. Catalogue of
      Govt. Publications," 43; "Statutes at Large," II., 73-8.

  163 "Statutes at Large," II., 58-9; "Annals of Cong.," 6th Cong., 507,
      699, 701.

  164 According to the Act of May 10, 1800, public land was to be sold in
      tracts, not smaller than one-half sections, and for a minimum price
      of two dollars per acre. One-twentieth of the purchase-money should
      be paid at the time of sale, the remainder of one-fourth of the
      price within forty days, one-fourth in two years, one-fourth in
      three years, and one-fourth in four years. On the last three
      payments, interest should be paid at six per cent from the date of
      sale, and on the same three payments a discount of eight per cent
      per year should be granted for prepayment. Land unpaid for reverted
      to the United States--"Statutes at Large," II., 73-8.

  165 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 461-70; "Annals of Cong.," 8th Cong.,
      1st Sess., 1023-4; 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 293-4, 466-8.

  166 A western tributary of the lower part of the Kaskaskia.

  167 "Pub. Lands," I., 591.

  168 "Statutes at Large," II., 469; Poore, "Charters and Constitutions,"
      821, 832, 964, 973; McMaster, "Acquisition of the ... Rights of Man
      in Am.," 111-22; "Proceedings and Debates of the Va. State Conv. of
      1829-30," _passim_; Mowry, "The Dorr War," _passim_.

  169 "Draper Coll., Ill. MSS.," 37, 39, 43, 54, 57, 58, 67, 102, 104,
      107, 108, 113; "Pub. Lands," I., 20; "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," VII.,
      300; " 'Father Clark;' or, The Pioneer Preacher," 181 _et seq._

  170 "Indian Aff.," I., 562; "An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology," 18,
      Pt. 2, 656-7, Plates CXXIV., CXXV.; see map of Indian cessions,
      1795-1809.

  171 "An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology," 18, Pt. 2, 656-7; Plates
      CXXIV., CXXV.; "Indian Aff.," I., 688; see map of Indian cessions.

  172 "Indian Aff.," I., 687; "An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology," 18,
      Pt. 2, 664-5, Plate CXXIV.; see map of Indian cessions.

  173 "Statutes at Large," II., 277-83, 343-5, 446-8, 517, 590-1.

  174 "Indian Aff.," I., 693-4; "An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,"
      18, Pt. 2, 666-7, Plate CXXIV.; see map of Indian cessions.

  175 "Indian Aff.," I., 704-5; "An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,"
      18, Pt. 2, 672-3, Plate CXXIV.; see map of Indian cessions.

  176 "Annals of Cong.," 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 339; see map in the "Hist.
      of Randolph, Monroe, and Perry Counties, Ill.," frontispiece.

  177 St. Clair to Judge Turner, from Marietta, May 2, 1795--"St. Clair
      Papers," II., 348-9.

  178 Edwards, "Great West," 271, 274-5; figures from the official census.

  179 See map of Illinois country.

  180 "St. Clair Papers," I., 193; II., 345.

  181 "Laws of N.-W. Ter.," 1800, I., 47-51.

_  182 Ibid._, 1800, I., 58-61.

_  183 Ibid._, 1800, I., 178.

_  184 Ibid._, 1800, I., 61-71.

_  185 Ibid._, 1800, I., 119-21.

_  186 Ibid._, 1800, I., 197.

  187 "Laws of N.-W. Ter., 1800," I., 226-7; "Laws of Ill. Ter., 1815-16;"
      _Ibid._, 1816-17, 4; _Ibid._, 17-19.

  188 "Laws of N.-W. Ter., 1800," I., 157-61; McMaster, "Acquisition of
      the Pol., Social and Industrial Rights of Man in Am.," 64-66; 16th
      Cong., 2d Sess., "Rept. of Com. No. 63."

  189 "Laws of N.-W. Ter., 1800," I., 184-5.

  190 "Statutes at Large," II., 58-9; "Annals of Cong.," 6th Cong., 1007;
      _Ibid._, 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 275.

  191 "Misc.," I., 206-7.

  192 "St. Clair Papers," II., 533-4.

  193 "Annals of Cong.," 8th Cong., 1st Sess., 489, 1659-60.

  194 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 486-7.

  195 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 483-92; original among the House files
      at Washington.

  196 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 476-83.

  197 "Laws of Ind. Ter.," 1807, pp. 12-13.

  198 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 498-506.

  199 "Annals of Cong.," 9th Cong., 1st Session, 469.

_  200 Ibid._, 466-8; "Misc.," I., 450; "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II.,
      494-7.

  201 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 505-10.

  202 "H. J.," 8th and 9th Cong., 611.

  203 "Annals of Cong.," 10th Cong., 1st Sess., 1976, 2067.

_  204 Ibid._, 10th Cong., 2d Sess., 971-3, 1093; "Stat. at Large," II.,
      514-16.

  205 "Annals of Cong.," 10th Cong., 2d Sess., 1093-4.

  206 "St. Clair Papers," II., 318.

  207 Cutler, "Life of Manasseh Cutler," II., 382.

  208 " 'Father Clark,' or the Pioneer Preacher," 202; Moses, "Illinois,"
      I., 228.

  209 "Pub. Lands," I., 256.

  210 "Annals of Cong.," 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 469. The land bought in
      Kentucky was probably near Eddyville, which the purchaser founded.

  211 Littell, "Laws of Ky.," I., 275-7, 687; Speed, "The Wilderness
      Road," _passim_.

  212 Schultz, "Travels on an Inland Voyage," I., 129-32.

  213 "Annals of Cong.," 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 1049. Speech by Matthew
      Lyon of Kentucky.

  214 Schultz, "Travels on an Inland Voyage," I., 132.

  215 For vivid accounts of journeys between the East and Ohio, giving an
      excellent idea of the difficulties of transit, in the period
      1795-1809, see Cutler, "Life and Times of Ephraim Cutler," 17-22,
      38-41, 90-103; also, many passages in Cutler, "Life, Journals and
      Corr. of Rev. Manasseh Cutler." A similar journey made in 1790 is
      described in "St. Clair Papers," II., 164.

  216 Collot, "Journey in N. A.," I., 192-3, 239.

  217 " 'Father Clark,' or The Pioneer Preacher," 193.

  218 Schultz, "Travels on an Inland Voyage," II., 38.

  219 Cuming, "Sketches of a Tour," 245; Schultz, "Travels on an Inland
      Voyage," I., 199; Moses, "Illinois," I., 265.

  220 "Annals of Cong.," 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 1049. Speech by Matthew
      Lyon of Kentucky.

  221 "Pub. Lands," I., 69; "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 448.

  222 Ethelbert Stewart, "A Few Notes for an Industrial Hist. of Ill.," in
      "Pub. No. 8 of the Ill. Hist. Lib.," 120.

  223 "Draper Coll., Ill. MSS.," 73, 74. Original accounts of Wm. Biggs,
      high sheriff of the county of St. Clair in the N.-W. Ter.

  224 Hamilton, "Writings of James Monroe," I., 117.

  225 "Statutes at Large," II., 607.

  226 "Pub. Lands," II., 123.

  227 "Statutes at Large," II., 677; "Pub. Lands," II., 254-5, 257-8,
      210-41.

  228 "Territorial Records of Ill.," ("Pub. of Ill. State Hist. Lib.," No.
      III., 109-10).

  229 "Pub. Lands," II., 157-81, 210-41.

  230 "Territorial Records of Ill.," ("Pub. of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.,"
      No. III., 118-20); "Statutes at Large," II., 175; "Annals of Cong."
      (ed. 1853), 12th Cong., III., 883, 1011, 1015.

  231 "State Papers," 15th Cong., 1st Sess., III., No. 61, p. 6; Poore,
      "Charters and Constitutions," Pt. I., 436, 438, 445; "Statutes at
      Large," III., 318.

  232 "Statutes at Large," II., 797.

  233 Reynolds, "Illinois--My Own Times," 156.

  234 Littell, "Laws of Ky.," I., 430; "Acts of 1811" (Ky.), 213-15; "Acts
      of 1816" (Ky.), 107; "Acts of 1817" (Ky.), 326.

  235 "Pub. Lands," III., 2.

_  236 Ibid._, II., 873-4.

  237 "Statutes at Large," III., 125.

  238 "State Papers," II., 14th Cong., 2d Sess., folio. Other volumes of
      the same number and session are quarto.

  239 "Statutes at Large," II., 591; III., 113; "Pub. Lands," II., 873-4.

  240 Littell, "Laws of Ky.," I., 395-7, 456.

_  241 Ibid._, I., 430.

  242 O'Callaghan, "Doc. Hist. of N. Y.," III., 1069-83, quarto; 649-57,
      folio.

  243 Agnew, "Settlement and Land Titles of N.-W. Pa.," 118-19. See also
      "Jour. of H. of R." (Pa.), 1792-1794, first page of second appendix
      to record of 1st Sess. of 3d House; _ibid_., first page of second
      appendix to record of 1st Sess. of 4th House; Sergeant, "View of the
      Land Laws of Pa., with Notices of Its Early Hist. and Legislation,"
      _passim_.

  244 Littell, "Laws of Ky.," I., 516.

_  245 Ibid._, II., 420-2; "Acts of 1811" (Ky.), 213-15; "Acts of 1817"
      (Ky.), 554; "Acts of 1819" (Ky.), 832.

  246 "Acts of 1816" (Ky.), 107; "Acts of 1817" (Ky.), 326.

  247 Phelan, "Hist. of Tenn.," 303. Quoted from Jones, "The Chickasaw
      Country Lately Ceded to the U. S." (1819).

  248 "Statutes at Large," III., 307; "Pub. Lands," II., 741; III., 1-5,
      384-5.

  249 Brown, "Western Gazetteer, or Emigrants' Directory" (1817), 33.

  250 White, "Descendants of John Walker," 458-9, 461.

  251 A land-office was established at Edwardsville by an act of Apr. 29,
      1816.

  252 "State Papers," No. 52, 15th Cong., 2d Sess., IV. Hundredths of
      acres and cents are omitted from the tables. The figures for
      Shawneetown cover the periods from Jan. 1 to Sept. 30; those for the
      other offices, from Jan. 1 to Aug. 31.

  253 "Pub. Lands," III., 405.

  254 "Indian Aff.," I., 761-2; "18th An. Rept. of the Bureau of
      Ethnology," Pt. 2, 678; Nos. 73, 74. Plate CXXIV. See map of Indian
      cessions.

  255 Reynolds, "Illinois--My Own Times," 81-4.

  256 Edwards, "Hist. of Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards," 301.

  257 Reynolds, "Illinois--My Own Times," 82.

  258 Edwards, "Hist. of Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards," 329.

  259 Edwards, "Hist. of Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards," 335.

  260 Reynolds, "Illinois--My Own Times," 86-7.

_  261 Ibid._, 102.

  262 "Indian Aff.," II., 99.

  263 "Indian Aff.," II., 95-6; "18th An. Rept. of the Bureau of
      Ethnology," Pt. 2, 680-3, No. 77, Plate CXXV., and No. 78, Plate
      CXXIV. See map of Indian cessions.

  264 "Indian Aff.," II., 167; "18th An. Rept. of the Bureau of
      Ethnology," Pt. 2, 692-3; No. 96a, Plate CXXIV. See also No. 48 on
      the same plate, and No. 77, Plate CXXV. See map of Indian cessions.

  265 "Territorial Records of Ill.," ("Pub. of the Ill. Hist. Lib.," No.
      III., 3, 6, 7).

  266 "Territorial Records of Ill." ("Pub. of the Ill. Hist. Lib.," No.
      III., 10-19). Of the thirty-eight laws selected by the Governor and
      judges in the Northwest Territory, three were from the codes of
      southern states; of the fifteen so selected in Indiana Territory,
      thirteen were from southern codes--"Ind. Hist. Soc. Pamphlets," No.
      I., 16; contained in Vol. 2 of "Publications." Illinois was thus
      most southern of the three.

  267 "Territorial Records of Ill." ("Pub. of the Ill. Hist. Lib.," No.
      III., 23, 26-7).

  268 "Statutes at Large," II., 741-2.

  269 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 461-70.

  270 Edwards, "Hist. of Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards." 296, 306.

  271 "Territorial Records of Ill." ("Pub. of Ill. Hist. Lib.," No. III.,
      62, 86).

      (For each of the following officials, their Nativity and County are
      listed.)

      Legislative Council.

      Pierre Menard, Canada, Randolph.
      Wm. Biggs, Md. St. Clair.
      Sam'l Judy, Swiss or Md., Madison.
      Thos. Ferguson, Johnson.
      Benjamin Talbott, Gallatin.

      House of Reps.

      Dr. George Fisher, Va., Randolph.
      Rev. Joshua Oglesby, St. Clair.
      Jacob Short, St. Clair.
      Rev. Wm. Jones, N. C., Madison.
      Philip Trammell, Gallatin.
      Alex. Wilson, Va., Gallatin.
      John Grammar, Johnson.

      Territorial Judges.

      Jesse B. Thomas, Maryland.
      Alexander Stuart, Virginia.
      William Sprigg, Maryland.

      Territorial Secretaries.

      Nathaniel Pope, Kentucky.
      Joseph Philips, Tennessee.

      Delegates in Congress and Term.

      Shadrach Bond, Md, Dec. 3, 1812-14.
      Benj. Stephenson, Ky, Nov. 14, 1814-16.
      Nathan'l Pope, Ky, Dec. 2, 1816-18.

      Governor.

      Ninian Edwards, Md., 1809-1818.

      Officers other than members are added to the above in order to
      emphasize the southern origin of Illinois territorial officials. New
      England was not yet a factor in Illinois politics.

  272 "Territorial Records of Illinois" ("Pub. of the Ill. Hist. Lib.,"
      No. III., 62-170).

  273 "Laws of Ill. Ter., 1817-18," pp. 72-82; _Ibid._, 1815-16, p. 44.

  274 "Laws of Ill. Ter., 1817-18," pp. 57-64.

  275 "Annals of Cong.," 15th Cong., 1st Sess., 1677, 1738; "H. J.," 15th
      Cong., 1st Sess., 151, 174; Benton, "Abridgment of Debates in
      Cong.," VI., 173; "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," XI., 494-501.

  276 "Statutes at Large," III., 428; "Laws of Ill. Ter.," 1817-18. pp.
      42-5; Dana, "Sketches of Western Country," 1819, 153; "Niles'
      Register," XIV., 359 (July 18, 1818); Babcock, "Memoir of John Mason
      Peck," 99.

  277 Poore, "Charters and Constitutions," Pt. I., 442, 445. Of the
      members of the Constitutional Convention of Illinois whose nativity
      has been learned, ten were natives of the South, two were natives of
      Illinois born of southern parents, two were Irishmen from the South,
      and five were natives of the North. New England was represented by
      one man, John Messinger, a son-in-law of Matthew Lyon.

  278 "Annals of Cong.," 15th Cong., 2d Sess., 38, 305-11; "Statutes at
      Large," III., 536.

  279 "Niles' Register," XIII., 1817, 224.

  280 Kingdom, "America and the British Colonies," 1816, 17.

  281 Birkbeck, "Journey from Va. to Ill.," 1817, 25, 29.

  282 Wright, "Letters from the West, or, A Caution to Emigrants," 1818,
      1.

  283 Harding, "Tour through the Western Country," 1818-19, 5.

  284 "Am. Mag. and Review," III., 1818, 152; I., 1817, 473.

  285 Goodrich, "Recollections of a Life Time," II., 78 ff.; Birkbeck,
      "Journey from Va. to Ill.," 1817, 25; "Va. Patriot," Sept. 7, 21,
      1816; Varney, "A Brief Hist. of Me.," 239; Abbott, "Hist. of Me.,"
      424; Williamson, "Hist. of Me.," II., 664-6; Sanborn, "Hist. of N.
      H.," 265; Whiton, "Hist. of N. H.," 188; Barstow, "Hist. of N. H.,"
      392; Thompson, "Hist. of the State of Vt.," 1833, 222; same, 1853,
      Pt. I., 20; Hoskins, "Hist. of the State of Vt.," 232; Wilbur,
      "Early Hist. of Vt.," III., 162-3; Heaton, "Story of Vt.," 136;
      Beckley, "Hist. of Vt.," 171-2; "Gov. and Council-Vt.," VI., 429-31.

  286 "Va. Patriot," Sept. 11, 1816.

  287 White, "Descendants of John Walker," 425, 453, 461.

  288 Bassett, "Anti-Slavery Leaders of N. C." (J. H. U. Studies, XVI.,
      267-71).

  289 De Bow, "Industrial Resources of the U. S.," I., 122-3. Millions of
      pounds of cotton raised in the U. S.:

      1808,  75.
      1809,  82.
      1810,  85.
      1811,  80.
      1812,  75.
      1813,  75.
      1814,  70.
      1815, 100.
      1816, 124.
      1817, 130.
      1818, 125.
      1819, 167.
      1820, 160.
      1821, 180.
      1822, 210.
      In Ga. 1811, 20, 1821, 45.
      In Tenn. 1811,  3., 1821, 20.

  290 "Statutes at Large," S. C., VII., 451-66; "Laws of Tenn., revision
      of 1831," I., 314-30; "Acts of 1818," Ky., 623, 787; "Acts of 1815,"
      Ky., Feb. 8, 1815.

  291 J. L. Watkins, in "U. S. Dept. of Agric., Div. of Statistics, Misc.
      Ser., Bulletin No. 9," p. 8.

  292 "National Intelligencer," Washington, D. C., Apr. 18, 1812.

  293 "Rambler in N. A.," I., 104-11; "Am. Register," II., 1817, 202-3.

  294 "Memoir of John Mason Peck," 81.

  295 "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright," 156.

  296 Morris Birkbeck and George Flower, from England, founded in 1817, in
      Edwards County, Illinois, what was the most famous of the English
      settlements in Illinois. Birkbeck was an educated man and his
      writings are among the important sources for the early history of
      Illinois. He was at one time Secretary of State of Illinois. George
      Flower became the historian of the settlement.

  297 Birkbeck, "Letters from Ill.," 56.

  298 Flower, "Hist. of the Eng. Settlement in Edwards Co., Ill.,"
      "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," I., 95-99.

  299 "Memoir of John Mason Peck," 71, 74.

_  300 Ibid._, 74-81. The disparity in dates in the latter part of the
      quotation suggests that "23d of October" should probably read "3d of
      October."

  301 Fearon, "Sketches of America," 258; William Tell Harris, "Remarks
      Made During a Tour through the U. S. of America in the Years 1817,
      1818, 1819."

  302 Birkbeck, "Journey from Va. to Ill.," 1817, 128.

  303 Fearon, "Sketches of Am.," 1817, 260. In Fearon's work 2_s._ 3_d._
      is equal to 50 cents, p. 5.

  304 Kingdom, "Am. and the British Colonies," 2.

  305 Hecke, "Reise durch die Vereinigten Staaten von Nord-Amerika,"
      1818-19, I., 34.

  306 Warden, "Acct. of the U. S. of N. A.," 1819, III., 62.

  307 "State Papers," 13th Cong., 3d Sess.

  308 "State Papers," 14th Cong., 2d Sess., II., folio. Another volume
      with the same number is a quarto.

_  309 Ibid._, 14th Cong., 2d Sess., I.

  310 Ross, "Early Pioneers and Pioneer Events," 65.

  311 Kingston, "Early Western Days," in "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," VII.,
      313.

  312 Shaw, "Personal Narrative," in "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," II., 225.

  313 Fearon, "Sketches of Am.," 1817, 258; Brown, "Western Gazetteer; or,
      Emigrant's Directory," 1817, 20.

  314 Birkbeck, "Journey from Va. to Ill.," 1817, 137.

  315 Burnham in "Pub. of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.," No. VIII., 181.

  316 Harding, "Tour through the Western Country," 8. This passage is
      practically plagiarized in Ogden, "Letters from the West," and in
      Thwaites, "Early Western Travels," XIX., 56.

  317 Palmer, "U. S. and Canada," 1818, 417; "Statutes at Large," II.,
      584; "Incidents and Events in the Life of Gurdon Saltonstall
      Hubbard," 38.

  318 "State Papers," 13th Cong., 3d Sess.

_  319 Ibid._, 13th Cong., 2d Sess., II.

  320 "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright," 178; Birkbeck, "Journey from
      Va. to Ill.," 1817, 128.

  321 James and Loveless, "Newspapers in Ill. Prior to 1860," "Pub. of the
      Ill. State Hist. Lib.," No. I., 41, 42, 64, 73, 74; Palmer, "U. S.
      and Canada," 1818, 416.

  322 Burnham, "An Early Ill. Newspaper," "Pub. of the Ill. State Hist.
      Lib.," No. VIII., 182.

  323 Col. Daniel M. Parkison, "Pioneer Life in Wis.," in "Wis. Hist. Soc.
      Coll.," II., 326-7, _cf._ "Memoir of John Mason Peck," 76, 87.

  324 "Indian Aff.," II., 196-7; "18th An. Rept. of the Bureau of
      Ethnology," Pt. 2, 696-9, Plate CXXV.; Dana, "Sketches of Western
      Country," 1819, 147. See map of Indian cessions.

  325 "State Papers," No. 64, 18th Cong., 2d Sess., IV.

_  326 Ibid._, No. 118, 19th Cong., 1st Sess., VI.

_  327 Ibid._, No. 96, 20th Cong., 1st Sess., III.; "Ex. Doc.," No. 140,
      20th Cong., 1st Sess., IV.

  328 "Senate Doc.," No. 47, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., I.

_  329 Ibid._, No. 72, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., I.

  330 "Senate Doc.," No. 72, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., I.; see also _ibid._,
      No. 27.

  331 "State Papers," No. 24, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., II.; "18th An. Rept.
      of the Bureau of Ethnology," Pt. 2, 722-5, Plate CXXV.

_  332 Ibid._, Pt. 2, 736-7, 738-9, 750-1, Plates CXXIV. and CXXV.

  333 Tenney, "Early Times in Wis.," in "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," I., 96.

  334 McLaughlin, "Lewis Cass," 125; Young, "Life of Gen. Lewis Cass," 93.

  335 "State Papers," Senate, No. 87, 16th Cong., 1st Sess., II.

_  336 Ibid._, No. 57, 16th Cong., 1st Sess., V.

  337 "Statutes at Large," III., 566-7.

  338 Donaldson, "Public Domain," 200 ff.

  339 "State Papers," No. 35, 10th Cong., 2d Sess., II.

  340 "Pub. Lands," III., 533. It is interesting to note that for the five
      years ending in 1822, the Pulteney estate of 380,000 acres of land
      in Steuben and Alleghany counties, New York, had sold an average of
      10,000 acres per year, at an average price of $3.37 per
      acre--"Columbian Sentinel," Boston, Oct. 2, 1822.

  341 "Illinois Intelligencer," Oct. 30, 1821.

  342 "Pub. Lands," IV.. 145; " Repts. and S. Doc.," No. 25, 18th Cong.,
      2d Sess., II.

  343 "Pub. Lands," IV., 871; "S. Doc.," No. 17, 19th Cong., 2d Sess., II.

  344 "H. J.," Ill., 1826-27, p. 54.

  345 "Repts. of Com.," No. 125, 20th Cong., 1st Sess., II.

  346 "Senate Doc.," No. 58, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., I. For the long and
      futile effort made in Congress to secure a law graduating the price
      of public lands, see Meigs, "Life of Thomas Hart Benton," ch. xi.,
      with the foot references thereto.

  347 Strickland, "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright," 246, 254.

  348 "Statutes at Large," IV., 420-1.

  349 "Pub. Lands," VI., 240.

  350 "Statutes at Large," III., 786; "Repts. of Com.," No. 58, 17th
      Cong., 1st Sess., I.; "Pub. Lands," III., 406, 412-3, 421, 462-3;
      VI., 23-5; "S. Doc.," No. 10, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., I.

  351 "Illinois Intelligencer," Vandalia, Ill., Apr. 24, 1821.

  352 "Niles' Register," XXV., 117.

  353 "Washington (D. C.) Republican," Sept. 27, 1823.

  354 "Illinois Intelligencer," Oct. 3, 1829.

  355 "Senate Jour.," Ill., 1830-31, 8-51. The message was delivered on
      Dec. 7, 1830, and Edwards' successor was inaugurated the following
      day.

  356 "State Papers," No. 17, 16th Cong., 1st Sess., II.

  357 "Statutes at Large," III., 659-60; "Niles' Register," XXII., 59.

  358 "Pub. Lands," IV., 437-8; "Repts. of Com.," No. 147, 19th Cong., 1st
      Sess., II.; _ibid._, No. 53, 18th Cong., 2d Sess., I.; "S. Doc.,"
      No. 49, 19th Cong., 1st Sess., II.

_  359 Ibid._, No. 46, 19th Cong., 2d Sess., II.; "State Papers," No. 81,
      19th Cong., 2d Sess., V.

  360 "Pub. Lands," VI., 27; "Statutes at Large," IV., 234.

  361 "S. Doc.," No. 11, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., I.

  362 "Pub. Lands," IV., 888, 921; V., 33, 35, 620; "Statutes at Large,"
      IV., 305.

  363 "Laws of Ill.," 1820-21, 39-45; 1824-25, 72.

_  364 Ibid._, 1820-21, 153-4.

  365 The total receipts from sales of 1829 is erroneously given as
      $256,124.54 in the original.

  366 "Pub. Lands," VI., 158-9.

_  367 Ibid._, VI., 219; "H. Ex. Doc.," No. 19, 21st Cong., 2d Sess., I.

  368 "Rept. of a Meeting of Workingmen in the City of Wheeling, Va., on
      Forming a Settlement in the State of Ill.," Oct. 4, 1830, 1-12.

  369 "Information for Emigrants," London, 1848, 33, first pagination. The
      hogs were sold in 1829.

  370 Senators from Illinois:

      Ninian Edwards, Maryland, Dec. 4, 1818-Mar. 4, 1824
      Jesse B. Thomas, Maryland, Dec. 4, 1818-Mar. 3, 1829
      John McLean, North Carolina, Dec. 20, 1824-Mar. 3, 1825
      and Dec. 7, 1829-Oct. 14, 1830
      Elias K. Kane, New York, Dec. 5, 1825-Dec. 11, 1835
      David J. Baker, Connecticut, Dec. 6, 1830-Jan. 4, 1831

      Representatives from Illinois:

      John McLean, North Carolina, Dec. 4, 1818-Mar. 3, 1819
      Daniel P. Cook, Kentucky, Dec. 6, 1819-Mar. 3, 1827
      Joseph Duncan, Kentucky, Dec. 3, 1827-Nov.  1834

      Governors of Illinois:

      1809-1818: Ninian Edwards, Maryland
      1818-1822: Shadrach Bond, Maryland
      1822-1826: Edward Coles, Virginia
      1826-1830: Ninian Edwards, Maryland
      1830-1834: John Reynolds, Pennsylvania

      The governors from 1834-1842 were from Kentucky, 1842-1861 from the
      North, 1861-1873 from Kentucky. During the period 1846-1853,
      Illinois had a Democratic governor (Augustus C. French), from New
      Hampshire, this being the only instance of an Illinois governor from
      New England.

  371 Sulte, "Histoire des Canadiens-Francais," VIII., 53.

  372 "Annals of Cong.," 15th Cong., 2d Sess., 436, 704; "H. J.," 15th
      Cong., 2d Sess., 100, 136-7, 273, 308; "S. J.," 15th Cong., 2d
      Sess., 239, 240, 278-85, 322; 16th Cong., 1st Sess., 107, 201-2,
      245; "Annals of Cong.," 16th Cong., 1st Sess., I., 450-2, 482-5;
      II., 1331-3; "S. J.," 21st Cong., 2d Sess., 38, 48, 51.

  373 "S. J.," 18th Cong., 1st Sess., 401; "H. J.," 18th Cong., 1st Sess.,
      428; "Cong. Debates," 20th Cong., 1st Sess., IV. 786, 2471.

  374 "Cong. Debates," 20th Cong., 1st Sess., IV., 90.

  375 "Ohio Republican," April 19, 1823.

  376 Eames, "Historic Morgan and Classic Jacksonville," 22. A letter from
      the son of Mr. Eames, now deceased, says that search has failed to
      recover the constitution of the Regulators of the Valley. Regulators
      were also useful in preventing speculators from entering the claims
      of squatters, even when the squatter was too poor to enter his own
      claim--Henderson, "Early Hist. of the Sangamon Country," 21. For
      another instance, see Blaney, "Excursion through the U. S.," 233-6;
      also, Reynolds, "My Own Times," 1879, 113.

  377 "Laws of Ill.," 1820-21, pp. 45-6; 1822-23, p. 109; Henderson,
      "Early Hist. of the Sangamon Country," 21.

  378 "Laws of Ill.," 1822-23, p. 86 ff.; 1824-25, p. 116.

  379 "Miners' Journal," Galena, Dec. 22, 1829; "Revised Laws of Ill.,"
      1829, 57; "H. J.," (Ill.), 1828-29, p. 57.

  380 "Laws of Ill.," 1822-23, pp. 149-51.

_  381 Ibid._, 1824-25, pp. 121-8; "Revised Laws of Ill.," 1829, 149.

  382 "Revised Laws of Ill.," 1829, p. 100; McMaster, "Rights of Man in
      Am.," 97.

  383 "Laws of Ill.," 1822-23, pp. 229-30.

  384 "H. J.," Ill., 1828-29, p. 8.

  385 Tenney, "Early Times in Wis.," in "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," I., 97;
      "Niles' Register," XXXVII., 53; "State Papers," No. 35, 20th Cong.,
      2d Sess., II.

  386 "Repts. of Com.," No. 177, 20th Cong., 1st Sess., III.; Meeker,
      "Early Hist. of the Lead Region of Wis.," in "Wis. Hist. Soc.
      Coll.," VI., 278-9.

  387 "State Papers," No. 66, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., II.

  388 "Statutes at Large," IV., 334.

  389 "Galena Advertiser," Sept. 14, 1829.

  390 Bonner, "Life and Adventures of Beckwourth," 20, 21. Written from
      Beckwourth's dictation.

  391 Washburne, "Sketch of Edward Coles," 48.

  392 Meeker, "Early Hist. of the Lead Region of Wis.," in "Wis. Hist.
      Soc. Coll.," VI., 276-9.

  393 Blaney, "Excursion through the U. S. and Canada," 159.

  394 "Niles' Register," XXVIII., 168; Dana, "Sketches of Western
      Country," 1819, 154; "Laws of Ill. Ter.," 1817-18, pp. 57-64.

  395 Henderson, "Early Hist. of the Sangamon Country," 13.

  396 Reid, "Sketch of Enoch Long," "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," Il., 61-2.

  397 "Pub. No. 8 of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.," 156; Strickland,
      "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright," 200-1; Faux, "Memorable Days in
      Am.," 310.

  398 "Reminiscences of Levi Coffin," 89-99.

_  399 Ibid._, 76.

_  400 Ibid._, 94-5; Mrs. Delilah Mullin-Evans, in "Trans. of the McLean
      Co. (Ill.) Hist. Soc.," II., 17; Hecke, "Reise durch die Vereinigten
      Staaten," I., 37-8.

  401 Loomis, "Notes of a Journey to the Great West," pages unnumbered;
      "Niles' Register," XXII., 320.

  402 "Stories of the Pioneer Mothers of Ill.," MS. in Ill. State Hist.
      Lib.

  403 Tillson, "Reminiscences," 120.

  404 Melish, "Information and Advice to Emigrants," 1819, 108.

  405 Woods, "Residence in Ill.," 140.

  406 "Laws of Ill.," 1820-21, pp. 94-6.

  407 Tillson, "Reminiscences," 54.

  408 Hamilton, "Incidents and Events in the Life of Gurdon Saltonstall
      Hubbard," 136.

  409 Tillson, "Reminiscences," 81; Strickland, "Autobiography of Peter
      Cartwright," 250.

  410 "State Papers," No. 77, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., III.

  411 "S. Doc.," No. 28, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., I.

  412 Meeker, "Early Hist. of the Lead Region of Wis.," in "Wis. Hist.
      Soc. Coll.," VI., 278-9.

  413 Reid, "Sketch of Enoch Long," Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll., II., 67-8.
      See also Owen, in "Deutsch-Amerikanische Geschichtsblatter,"
      Jahrgang 2, Heft 2, 42.

  414 Chetlain, "Recollections of Seventy Years," 10.

  415 Hulme, in Cobbett. "Year's Residence in the U. S.," 279, 302.

  416 Birkbeck, "Letters from Ill.," 113; Birkbeck, "Jour. from Va. to
      Ill.," 133-4.

  417 Fearon, "Sketches of Am.," 260, repeated in Kingdom, "Am. and the
      British Colonies," 63. In the works of Fearon and Kingdom 4_s._
      6_d._ are equal to $1.00.

  418 Cobbett, "A Year's Residence in the U. S.," 337.

  419 Birkbeck, "Extracts," 4.

  420 Woods, "Residence in Illinois," 33, 74, 111, 131, 133, 143-4.

  421 Faux, "Memorable Days in Am.," 315.

  422 Kingdom, "Am. and the British Colonies," 2.

  423 "Niles' Register," XXV., 95.

  424 "Cincinnati Emporium," Feb. 3, 1825.

  425 "Cincinnati Gazette," Apr. 1, 1825.

  426 "Niles' Register," XXXI., 58.

_  427 Ibid._, XXXI., 38.

  428 "Cincinnati Christian Journal and Intelligencer," July 27, 1830.

  429 "Niles' Register," XXXVIII., 97.

_  430 Ibid._, XLIV., 36.

  431 "Cincinnati Christian Journal and Intelligencer," July 27, 1830.

  432 Fearon, "Sketches of Am.," 217, 260. Reprinted in Kingdom, "Am. and
      the British Colonies," 55, 62.

  433 "Niles' Register," XXIX., 165; "The Intelligencer" Petersburg, Va.,
      Mar. 11, 1825; "Charleston (S. C.) Mercury," May 25, 1825;
      "Nashville (Tenn.) Republican," Apr. 16, 1825.

  434 "Niles' Register," XXXI., 52.

  435 "Miners' Journal," Galena, Oct. 4, 1829.

_  436 Ibid._, Nov. 3, 1829; Dec. 15, 1829; Aug. 14, 1830.

  437 "Twelfth Census of the U. S., Occupations," p. xxx.

  438 Duden, "Nordamerika," 61.

  439 Hecke, "Reise durch die Vereinigten Staaten," II., 134-5.

  440 The following describes a ditch and bank fence: "I very much admire
      Mr. Birkbeck's mode of _fencing_. He makes a ditch 4 ft. wide at
      top, sloping to 1 ft. wide at bottom, and 4 ft. deep. With the earth
      that comes out of the ditch he makes a bank on one side, which is
      turfed towards the ditch. Then a long pole is put up from the bottom
      of the ditch to 2 ft. above the bank; this is crossed by a short
      pole from the other side, and then a rail is laid along between the
      forks. The banks were growing beautifully, and looked altogether
      very neat as well as formidable, though a live hedge (which he
      intends to have) instead of dead poles and rails, upon top, would
      make the fence far more effectual as well as handsomer."--Hulme, in
      Cobbett, "Year's Residence in the U. S.," 282.

  441 Ernst in "Pub. No. 8 of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.," 156;
      "Jacksonville (Ill.) Weekly Journal," Apr. 18, 1877 (in "Ill. Local
      Hist.," III., in Wis. Hist. Soc. Lib.)

  442 Faux, "Memorable Days in Am.," 213.

  443 Strickland, "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright," 244.

  444 Faux, "Memorable Days in Am.," 273.

  445 Ernst, in "Pub. No. 8 of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.," 155.

  446 Strickland, "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright," 254.

  447 Chapman, Lyde Grove, in "Stories of the Pioneer Mothers of Ill.," in
      MSS. in Ill. State Hist. Lib.

  448 "Niles' Register," XXIX., 37; "Ill. Monthly Mag.," I., 127.

  449 "Niles' Register," XXII., 2, 67, 245, 386; "Ill. Monthly Mag.," I.,
      129; Loomis, "Journey to the Great West in 1825," ch. iv., pages
      unnumbered.

  450 "Stories of the Pioneer Mothers of Ill.," in MSS. in Ill. State
      Hist. Lib.

  451 "Niles' Register," XXX., 287; "Ill. Intelligencer," May 18, 1826.

  452 "Ill. Monthly Mag.," I., 129.

_  453 Ibid._, I., 128-9

  454 Fearon, "Sketches of America," 1817, 261, reprinted in Kingdom, "Am.
      and the British Colonies," 63; Birkbeck, "Letters from Ill." 22,
      32-3, 51-2, 69, 78, 85; Birkbeck, "Extracts," 24-5, shows that a
      honey-locust hedge could be made (1819) for less than 12 cents per
      rod.

  455 Birkbeck, "Jour. from Va. to Ill.," 36; Duden, "Nordamerika," 319.

  456 Faux, "Memorable Days in Am.," 315.

  457 Birkbeck, "Letters from Ill.," 35-6.

  458 Mackenzie, "View of the U. S.," 1819, 298.

  459 "Niles' Register," XXII., 112.

_  460 Ibid._, XXV., 272.

  461 Loomis, "Notes of a Journey to the Great West in 1825," ch. iv,
      pages unnumbered.

  462 "H. J." (Ill.), 1828-29, 63.

  463 "State Papers," No. 55, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., Vol. III.; "Niles'
      Register," XXVIII., 161.

  464 "Niles' Register," XXII., 226.

  465 Parkison, "Pioneer Life in Wis.," in "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," II.,
      328-9.

  466 Owen, "Ums Jahr 1819 und 1829," in "Deutsch-Amerikanische
      Geschichtsblatter," Jahrgang 2, Heft 2, S. 42.

  467 Meeker, "Early Hist. of the Lead Region," in "Wis. Hist. Soc.
      Coll.," VI., 280.

  468 "Pub. Lands," IV, 800.

  469 "Narrative of Morgan L. Martin," in "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," XL,
      398.

  470 Chetlain, "Recollections of Seventy Years," 6; Mrs. Adile Gratiot,
      in "Early Ill. Towns," Lib. of Chicago Hist. Soc.

  471 Parkison, "Pioneer Life in Wis," in "Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.," II.,
      329.

  472 "Ex. Doc.," No. 277, 20th Cong., 1st Sess., Vol. VII.

  473 "Shattuck Memorials," 233-4.

  474 "Niles' Register," XXXIV., 344.

  475 "Jacksonville (Ill.) Weekly Journal," Apr. 18, 1877.

  476 Babcock, "Memoir of John Mason Peck," 123.

  477 Peck, " 'Father Clark'; or, The Pioneer Preacher," 240.

  478 Reynolds, "Illinois--My Own Times," 59.

  479 Babcock, "Memoir of John Mason Peck," 229.

  480 "Trans. of the McLean Co. (Ill.) Hist. Soc," II., 19.

  481 "Jacksonville (Ill.) Weekly Journal," Apr. 18, 1877.

  482 Peck, in Reynolds, "Pioneer Hist. of Ill.," 259.

_  483 Ibid._, 272-3.

  484 Strickland, "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright," 386-7.

  485 Strickland, "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright," 254.

  486 Babcock, "Memoir of John M. Peck," 96-7.

  487 Reynolds, "Illinois--My Own Times," 128.

_  488 Ibid._, 116-7.

  489 Babcock, "Memoir of John M. Peck," 94-5.

_  490 Ibid._, 183, _et seq._, 203, 209.

      In general, on the subject of religion in early Illinois, see: Peck,
      in Reynolds, "Pioneer Hist, of Ill.," 253-75, and the above
      mentioned works.

  491 Harris, "Negro Servitude in Ill.," 116-9, note 3, p. 118.

  492 "Public Laws" (Ill.). 1865, 105.

  493 The question of the binding effect of the Ordinance received much
      attention, especially from state courts, but early petitions show
      that the discussion was not early important. In general, see Haight,
      "Ordinance of 1787," in "Mich. Pol. Sci. Ass'n Pub.," II., 343-402;
      Cooley, "Michigan," 137-9; Washburne, "Sketch of Edward Coles,"
      67-71.

  494 "Pub. Lands," I., 68-9; "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 447-52, 452-5.

  495 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 455-61; "Annals of Cong.," 6th Cong.,
      735.

  496 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 461-70; "A. S. P. Misc.," I., 387;
      "Annals of Cong.," 8th Cong., 1st Sess., 1023-4; _ibid._, 9th Cong.,
      1st Sess., 466-8.

  497 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 476-83, 498-506.

_  498 Ibid._, II., 494-7; "A. S. P., Misc.," I., 450; "Annals of Cong.,"
      9th Cong., 1st Sess., 293, 466-8.

  499 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 507-10; "A. S. P., Misc.," I., 467,
      477; "Annals of Cong.," 9th Cong., 2d Sess., 375, 482.

  500 "Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.," II., 515-21; "A. S. P., Misc.," I., 484;
      "Annals of Cong.," 10th Cong., 1st Sess., 23, _et seq._, 816.

  501 Harris, "Negro Servitude in Ill.," 11, note 3.

  502 Poore, "Charters and Constitutions," Pt. I., 445-6.

  503 "Revised Laws of Ill.," 1833, 457-62.

  504 "Ninth Census of U. S., Population and Social Statistics," 5, 7,
      24-5; Melish, "Geog. Desc. of the U. S.," 1822, 359.

  505 "Ninth Census of U. S., Population and Social Statistics," 3, 7.

  506 J. Q. Adams, "Memoirs," V., 9.

  507 "Illinois Intelligencer" (Vandalia), Apr. 24, 1821.

  508 "Ninth Census of the U. S., Population and Social Statistics," 3.

  509 The vote for governor given by W. H. Brown, "Early Movement in
      Illinois for the Legalization of Slavery," ("Fergus Hist. Ser.," No.
      4, p. 15), differs from that by Washburne, "Sketch of Edward Coles,"
      58, and Bonham, "Fifty Years Recollections," 22, while neither gives
      Coles a plurality of 46 votes, as Harris in "Negro Servitude in
      Ill.," 31, says the official returns show him to have received. For
      the purposes of this work the differences are so slight as to be
      negligible.

  510 "House Journal" (Ill.), 1822-23, pp. 25-7; "Senate Journal" (Ill.),
      1822-23, pp. 29-30.

  511 "Senate Journal" (Ill.), 1822-23, pp. 43-6; "House Journal" (Ill.),
      1822-23, pp. 68, 134, 147-8.

  512 "House Journal" (Ill.), 1822-23, pp. 44, 45.

  513 Davidson and Stuve, "Hist. of Ill.," 320.

  514 "House Journal" (Ill.), 1822-23, p. 272.

_  515 Ibid._, 1822-23, P. 276; "Senate Journal" (Ill.), 1822-23, p. 252.

  516 Washburne, "Sketch of Edward Coles," _passim._

  517 "Edwardsville Spectator," Jan. 27, 1824; Nov. 29, 1823.

  518 Eames, "Historic Morgan and Classic Jacksonville," 12.

  519 "House Journal" (Ill.), 1824-25, p. 64. The corrected official vote
      (Aug. 2, 1824), by counties, is as follows:

      For. Against.
      Alexander, 75, 51
      Bond, 63, 240
      Clark, 31, 116
      Crawford, 134, 262
      Edgar, 3, 234
      Edwards, 189, 391
      Fayette, 125, 121
      Franklin, 170, 113
      Fulton, 5, 60
      Gallatin, 597, 133
      Greene, 164, 379
      Hamilton, 173, 85
      Jackson, 180, 93
      Jefferson, 99, 43
      Johnson, 74, 74
      Lawrence, 158, 261
      Madison, 351, 563
      Marion, 45, 52
      Montgomery, 74, 90
      Monroe, 141, 196
      Morgan, 42, 432
      Pike, 19, 165
      Pope, 273, 124
      Randolph, 357, 284
      Sangamon, 153, 722
      St. Clair, 408, 506
      Union, 213, 240
      Washington, 112, 173
      Wayne, 189, 111
      White, 355, 326

      Totals, 4972, 6640

      The vote as here given is from Moses, "Illinois," I., 324. It is
      also given in Harris, "Negro Servitude in Illinois," 48. It differs
      to a slight degree from that given by William H. Brown in his
      "Historical Sketch of the Early Movement in Illinois for the
      Legalization of Slavery," read at the annual meeting of the Chicago
      Hist. Soc., Dec. 5, 1864 ("Fergus Hist. Ser.," No. 4), and in
      Washburne, "Sketch of Edward Coles," 191. Brown was one of the
      leaders in the struggle and his work is of especial value. It is
      probable that the vote appended to his address was prepared by some
      one else. The work of Moses is of later date and his figures
      correspond to the official report in respect to the majority against
      the convention, as the others do not.

  520 Brown, "Early Movement in Illinois for the Legalization of Slavery,"
      in "Fergus Hist. Series," No. 4, pp. 16-17.

  521 "Niles' Register," XXV., 39; "The Columbian Star" (Washington, D.
      C.), Feb. 21, 1824.

  522 "H. J." (Ill.), 1824-25, p. 13; on kidnapping see Harris, "Negro
      Servitude in Ill.," 53 ff.

_  523 Ibid._, 1824-25, pp. 26, 27, 151.

_  524 Ibid._, 1826-27, pp. 9-10.

  525 "Revised Laws of Ill.," 1833, 180-1.

  526 "Laws of Ill.," 1824-25, p. 50.

  527 "Revised Laws of Ill." 1833, 463-65.

  528 "Ninth Census of the U. S., Population and Social Statistics," p. 7.

_  529 Ibid._, 3; "H. J." (Ill.), 1826, 11.

  530 "H. J." (Ill.), 1826, 11.

  531 "Edwardsville (Ill.) Spectator," Oct. 5, 1824.

  532 "Niles' Register," XXIX., 208.

_  533 Ibid._, XXIX., 422.

  534 Shaler, "Kentucky," 176-85.

  535 "Nashville (Tenn.) Republican," Apr. 16, 1825.

  536 "Niles' Register," XXX., 449.

  537 "Galena Advertiser," July 20, Aug. 10, Sept. 21, 1829.

  538 "Niles' Register," XXXVI., 222.

  539 "Illinois Intelligencer" (Vandalia), Oct. 31, 1829.

  540 "Niles' Register," XXXVI., 271.

  541 "Illinois Intelligencer" (Vandalia), Nov. 27, 1830.

  542 "Niles' Register," XXXVII., 195.

  543 "Galena Advertiser," July 20, 1829; "Niles' Register," XXXVII., 230.

  544 "Niles' Register," XXVIII., 161.

  545 "State Papers," No. 69, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., Vol. III.

  546 Thomas S. Hinde, writing over the signature of "Theophilus
      Arminius," in "Methodist Magazine," XI., 1828, 154-8. The identity
      of the writer is shown by a note on p. 33 of the same volume.

      Among the many writings concerning Peter Cartwright, the best are
      Strickland, "Autobiography of Peter Cartwright"; Cartwright, "Fifty
      Years as a Presiding Elder," and the obituary notice in "Minutes of
      the Annual Conferences of the M. E. Church," 1873, 115-7. See also
      Moses, "Illinois," I., 348, 379, 395, 506, 1166.

      For the character of John M. Peck, also a noted pioneer preacher and
      founder of Rock Spring Seminary in Illinois, see "Memoir of John
      Mason Peck, D. D.," edited by Rufus Babcock.

  547 "Pub. Lands," I., 69-70; II., 203-4; "Early Chicago and Illinois,"
      in "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 145, 159, 167, 169-70, 178-9,
      209; Reynolds, "Pioneer Hist, of Ill.," 110, 116-8, 180, 215; John
      Edgar to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Nov. 7, 1785, in "Draper's Notes,
      Trip 1860," VI., 214-5; Edgar to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 23,
      1786, "Draper Coll., Clark MSS.," LIII., 56; Petition from
      Kaskaskia, Sept. 14, 1789, "Draper Coll., Harmar Papers," II.,
      124-7; Offer of John Edgar, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 3, 1789, "Draper
      Coll., Harmar Papers," II., 127-8; Hamtramck's reply to the
      Kaskaskia petition of Sept. 14, 1789, from Vincennes, Oct. 14, 1789,
      "Draper Coll., Harmar Papers," II., 128-30; Edgar to Hamtramck, from
      Kaskaskia, Oct. 28, 1789, ibid., II., 132-6; "DraperColl., Kenton
      MSS.," Edgar Papers.

  548 Reynolds, "Pioneer Hist. of Ill.," 170-2; W. A. Burt Jones, in
      "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," IV., 230-70; Jones to Hamtramck, from
      Kaskaskia, Oct. 29, 1789, "Draper Coll., Harmar Papers," II.,
      136-41.

  549 "Methodist Magazine," XI., 1828, 154-8. The remarks of Hinde recall
      the difficulty which was experienced by the men who governed the
      Northwest Territory under the Ordinance of 1787 when they attempted
      to use only such laws as had been adopted by some state. The attempt
      was early and finally abandoned. Hinde gives the following in a
      foot-note: "A gentleman, a Virginian, a physician of eminence who
      was educated in Paris, visited a western state many years ago
      [written in 1827], and lost all his money by gambling, (playing at
      cards). Meeting a friend on the mountains on his return, he was thus
      addressed: 'Well, doctor, you have been to see the new country.'
      'Yes,' replied the doctor, biting his lips, 'it is a new country, it
      is true; but there are some of the oldest people in it that I ever
      saw.' "--See above reference, p. 155.

      On Mt. Carmel and its founders, in general, see: "Articles of
      Association for the City of Mount Carmel"; Bangs, "Hist. of the M.
      E. Church," IV., appendix, 3, 25; III., 230, 308-14; "Minutes of
      Conferences" Annual, M. E., I., 347, 474, 516; "American Pioneer,"
      I., 327; II., 363-8; "Laws of Ill., 1824-25," 72-5; Simpson,
      "Cyclopedia of Methodism," 97-S; "Methodist Magazine," VIII., 17,
      49, 86. Less reliable data is given in "Hist. of Edwards, Lawrence,
      and Wabash Counties, Ill.," 85, 162, 189-90, 236, 238, 239. Mount
      Carmel is now (1908) the county seat of Wabash county. The "Hinde
      MSS." in the "Draper Coll." are large in volume, but have slight
      historic value, being chiefly musings of the author's later years.

  550 Bay, "Reminiscences of the Bench and Bar of Mo.," 78-91; "Pub.
      Lands," II., index under Easton, Rufus; Easton, "Descendants of
      Joseph Easton, Hartford, Conn.," I, 37, 65; Moses, "Illinois," I.,
      272; "Laws of Ill., 1820-21," 39-45; _ibid._, 1822-23, 147.

  551 For information concerning Iles, see: "Reminiscences of Elijah
      Iles," in "Hist. of Sangamon County, Ill.," 580-3; Power, "Hist. of
      the Early Settlers of Sangamon Co., Ill.," 397-400 (practically a
      short autobiography of Iles, written in 1876); Moses, "Illinois,"
      I., 344; II., 1174. Concerning Enos, see: Stiles, "Ancient Windsor,"
      (Conn.), II., 245, 246; "Executive Journal," Senate, 1815-29, pp.
      325, 328, 551, 553, 555; _ibid._, 1829-37, pp. 50, 391; "Edwards
      Papers," in "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," III., 205, 391. Concerning
      Cox, see: Moses, "Illinois," II., 1168; "Executive Journal," Senate,
      1815-29, pp. 216-7, 325, 328, 551, 553, 555; Washburne, "Sketch of
      Edward Coles," 128-30; "Edwards Papers," in "Chicago Hist. Soc.
      Coll.," III., 76, 211, 336-7; Gue, "Hist. of Iowa," I., 205, 211;
      Fairall, "Manual of Iowa Politics," 107; "Hist. of Jackson County,"
      Iowa, 360-403. On Springfield, see: Peck, "Gazetteer of Illinois,"
      1834, 337.

  552 Moses, "Illinois," I., 287, 289-90; Reynolds, "Pioneer Hist. of
      Ill.," 291-4, 323-7.

  553 Washburne, "Sketch of Edward Coles," 16 _et seq._, 54-7. Washburne,
      the writer, came to Galena, Illinois, when it still had many
      frontier characteristics, and for seventeen years represented his
      district in Congress.

  554 Moses, "Illinois," L., 242-3, 336, 340-1, 351; Washburne, "Sketch of
      Edward Coles," 54-7; and for a general view of Edwards, see: N. W.
      Edwards, "Hist. of Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards," and "The
      Edwards Papers," in "Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.," III.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SETTLEMENT OF ILLINOIS, 1778-1830***



CREDITS


October 9, 2010

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Geetu Melwani, Audrey Longhurst, Nancy Faller of
            The Morton Arboretum, David King, and the Online Distributed
            Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>. (This file was
            produced from images generously made available by The Internet
            Archive/Canadian Libraries.)



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 34049.txt or 34049.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/4/0/4/34049/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***
