The Project Gutenberg eBook, Anglo-Saxon Primer, by Henry Sweet


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Anglo-Saxon Primer
       With Grammar, Notes, and Glossary; Eighth Edition Revised


Author: Henry Sweet



Release Date: November 14, 2010  [eBook #34316]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANGLO-SAXON PRIMER***


E-text prepared by Charlene Taylor, David Clarke, Keith Edkins, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Transcriber's note:

      In this e-text a-breve is represented by [)a], a-macron
      by [=a], c-dotted-over by [.c] and e-ogonek by [e,], etc.

      Aesc, eth and thorn have been expanded to ae, dh and th.

      Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this file
      in which these characters are displayed properly.
      See 34316-h.htm or 34316-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34316/34316-h/34316-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34316/34316-h.zip)


      Page numbers enclosed by curly braces (example: {25}) have
      been incorporated to facilitate the use of the Notes to the
      Readings.





AN ANGLO-SAXON PRIMER

With

Grammar, Notes, and Glossary

by

HENRY SWEET, M.A., PH.D., LL.D.

Eighth Edition, Revised







Oxford
At the Clarendon Press
1905

Printed in England
At the Oxford University Press




{v}

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION.

The want of an introduction to the study of Old-English has long been felt.
Vernon's _Anglo-Saxon Guide_ was an admirable book for its time, but has
long been completely antiquated. I was therefore obliged to make my
_Anglo-Saxon Reader_ a somewhat unsatisfactory compromise between an
elementary primer and a manual for advanced students, but I always looked
forward to producing a strictly elementary book like the present one, which
would enable me to give the larger one a more scientific character, and
would at the same time serve as an introduction to it. Meanwhile, however,
Professor Earle has brought out his _Book for the beginner in Anglo-Saxon_.
But this work is quite unsuited to serve as an introduction to my Reader,
and will be found to differ so totally in plan and execution from the
present one as to preclude all idea of rivalry on my part. We work on lines
which instead of clashing can only diverge more and more.

My main principle has been to make the book the easiest possible
introduction to the study of Old-English.

Poetry has been excluded, and a selection made from the easiest prose
pieces I could find. Old-English original prose is unfortunately limited in
extent, and the most suitable pieces (such as the voyages of Ohthere and
Wulfstan) are already given in the Reader; these I could not give over {vi}
again. But I hope the short extracts from the Chronicle and the Martyrdom
of King Edmund will be found not wanting in interest. For the rest of the
selections I have had to fall back on scriptural extracts, which have the
great advantages of simplicity and familiarity of subject. The Gospel
extracts have been transferred here from the Reader, where they will be
omitted in the next edition. The sentences which head the selections have
been gathered mainly from the Gospels, Aelfric's Homilies, and the
Chronicle. They are all of the simplest possible character, only those
having been taken which would bear isolation from their context. They are
intended to serve both as an introduction and as a supplement to the longer
pieces. They are grouped roughly into paragraphs, according to the
grammatical forms they illustrate. Thus the first paragraph consists mainly
of examples of the nominative singular of nouns and adjectives, the second
of accusative singulars, and so on.

The spelling has been made rigorously uniform throughout on an early
West-Saxon basis. Injurious as normalizing is to the advanced student, it
is an absolute necessity for the beginner, who wants to have the definite
results of scholarship laid before him, not the confused and fluctuating
spellings which he cannot yet interpret intelligently. Even for purely
scientific purposes we require a standard of comparison and classification,
as in the arrangement of words in a dictionary, where we have to decide,
for instance, whether to put the original of _hear_ under _[=e], [=i]e,
[=i]_ or _[=y]_. The spelling I here adopt is, in fact, the one I should
recommend for dictionary purposes. From early West-Saxon it is an easy step
both to late W. S. and to the Mercian forms from which Modern English is
derived. That I give Aelfric in a spelling slightly earlier than his date
is no more {vii} unreasonable than it is for a classical scholar to print
Ausonius (who doubtless spoke Latin with an almost Italian pronunciation)
in the same spelling as Virgil.

It is impossible to go into details, but in doubtful or optional cases I
have preferred those forms which seemed most instructive to the student.
Thus I have preferred keeping up the distinction between the indic.
_bundon_ and the subj. _bunden_, although the latter is often levelled
under the former even in early MS. In the accentuation I have for the
present retained the conventional quantities, which are really
'prehistoric' quantities, as I have shown elsewhere (Phil. Soc. Proc. 1880,
1881). It is no use trying to disguise the fact that Old English philology
(owing mainly to its neglect in its native land) is still in an unsettled
state.

In the Grammar I have cut down the phonology to the narrowest limits,
giving only what is necessary to enable the beginner to trace the
connection of forms within the language itself. Derivation and syntax have
been treated with the same fulness as the inflections. In my opinion, to
give inflections without explaining their use is as absurd as it would be
to teach the names of the different parts of a machine without explaining
their use, and derivation is as much a fundamental element of a language as
inflection. The grammar has been based throughout on the texts, from which
all words and sentences given as examples have, as far as possible, been
taken. This I consider absolutely essential in an elementary book. What is
the use of a grammar which gives a number of forms and rules which the
learner has no occasion to apply practically in his reading? Simply to cut
down an ordinary grammar and prefix it to a selection of elementary texts,
without any attempt to adapt them to one another, is a most unjustifiable
proceeding. {viii}

In the Glossary cognate and root words are given only when they occur in
the texts, or else are easily recognizable by the ordinary English reader.

All reference to cognate languages has been avoided. Of course, if the
beginner knows German, the labour of learning Old English will be lightened
for him by one half, but he does not require to have the analogies pointed
out to him. The same applies to the relation between Old and Modern
English. To trace the history of the sounds would be quite out of place in
this book, and postulates a knowledge of the intermediate stages which the
beginner cannot have.

The Notes consist chiefly of references to the Grammar, and are intended
mainly for those who study without a teacher. As a general rule, no such
references are given where the passage itself is quoted in the Grammar.

On the whole I do not think the book could be made much easier without
defeating its object. Thus, instead of simply referring the student from
_st[e,]nt_ to _standan_, and thence to the Grammar, I might have saved him
all this trouble by putting '_st[e,]nt_, 3 sg. pres. of _standan_, stand,'
but the result would be in many cases that he would not look at the Grammar
at all--surely a most undesirable result.

Although I have given everything that I believe to be _necessary_, every
teacher may, of course, at his own discretion add such further
illustrations, linguistic, historical, antiquarian, or otherwise, as he
thinks likely to instruct or interest his pupils.

My thanks are due to Professor Skeat, not only for constant advice and
encouragement in planning and carrying out this work, but also for help in
correcting the proofs.

In conclusion I may be allowed to express a hope that this little book may
prove useful not only to young beginners, but also to some of our
Professors of and {ix} Examiners in the English language, most of whom are
now beginning to see the importance of a sound elementary knowledge of
'Anglo-Saxon'--a knowledge which I believe this book to be capable of
imparting, if studied diligently, and not hurriedly cast aside for a more
ambitious one.

HENRY SWEET.

  HEATH STREET, HAMPSTEAD,
  _March 31, 1882_.



PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION.

In the present edition I have put this book into what must be (for some
time at least) its permanent form, making such additions and alterations as
seemed necessary.

If I had any opportunity of teaching the language, I should no doubt have
been able to introduce many other improvements; as it is, I have had to
rely mainly on the suggestions and corrections kindly sent to me by various
teachers and students who have used this book, among whom my especial
thanks are due to the Rev. W. F. Moulton, of Cambridge, and Mr. C. Stoffel,
of Amsterdam.

HENRY SWEET.

  LONDON,
  _October 15, 1884_.




{x}

CONTENTS.

                                                          Page

  GRAMMAR                                                    1

  TEXTS                                                     55

  NOTES                                                     91

  GLOSSARY                                                  97




{1}

GRAMMAR.

The oldest stage of English before the Norman Conquest is called 'Old
English,' which name will be used throughout in this Book, although the
name 'Anglo-Saxon' is still often used.

There were several dialects of Old English. This book deals only with the
_West-Saxon_ dialect in its earliest form.

SOUNDS.

VOWELS.

The vowel-letters in Old English had nearly the same values as in Latin.
Long vowels were occasionally marked by ('), short vowels being left
unmarked. In this book long vowels are marked by (-). The following are the
elementary vowels and diphthongs, with examples, and key-words from
English, French (F.), and German (G.):--

  a     _as in_     mann (G.)       nama (_name_).
  [=a]     "      father          st[=a]n (_stone_).
  ae       "      man             glaed (_glad_).
  [=ae]    "                      d[=ae]d (_deed_)[1].
  e        "      ete (F.)        ic ete[2] (_I eat_).
  [=e]     "      see (G.)        h[=e] (_he_).
  [e,]     "      men             m[e,]nn (_men_).
  {2}
  i        "      fini (F.)       cwic (_alive_).
  [=i]     "      sieh (G.)       w[=i]n (_wine_).
  ie       "      fin             ieldran (_ancestors_).
  [=i]e    "                      h[=i]eran (_hear_).
  o        "      beau (F.)       god (_god_).
  [=o]     "      so (G.)         g[=o]d (_good_).
  u        "      sou (F.)        sunu (_son_).
  [=u]     "      gut (G.)        n[=u] (_now_).
  y        "      vec_u_ (F.)     synn (_sin_).
  [=y]     "      gruen (G.)      br[=y]d (_bride_).
  ea       =      ae + a          eall (_all_).
  [=e]a    =      [=ae] + a       [=e]ast (_east_).
  eo       =      e + o           weorc (_work_).
  [=e]o    =      [=e] + o        d[=e]op (_deep_).
        _e_ and _[e,]_ are both written e in the MSS.

The diphthongs are pronounced with the stress on the first element.

    Those who find a difficulty in learning strange vowel-sounds may adopt
    the following approximate pronunciation:--

      a     as in     ask (short)     nama (n[)a]hm[)a]h).
      [=a]     "      father          st[=a]n (stahn).
      ae       "      man             glaed (glad).
      [=ae]    "      there           [=ae]r (air).
      e, [e,]  "      men             ete (etty), m[e,]nn (men).
      [=e]     "      they            h[=e] (hay).
      i, ie    "      fin             cwic (quick), ieldran (ildr[)a]hn).
      [=i], [=i]e  "  see             w[=i]n (ween), h[=i]eran
                                      (heer[)a]hn).
      o        "      not             god (god).
      [=o]     "      note            g[=o]d (goad).
      u        "      full            full (full).
      [=u]     "      fool            n[=u] (noo).
      y        "      fin             synn (zin).
      [=y]     "      see             br[=y]d (breed).
      ea       =      [)e]-[)a]h      eall ([)e]-[)a]hl).
      [=e]a    =      ai-[)a]h        [=e]ast (ai-[)a]hst).
      {3}
      eo       =      [)e]-o          weorc (w[)e]-ork).
      [=e]o    =      ai-o            d[=e]op (dai-op).

    The pronunciation given in parentheses is the nearest that can be
    expressed in English letters as pronounced in Southern English.

CONSONANTS.

Double consonants must be pronounced double, or long, as in Italian. Thus
_sunu_ (son) must be distinguished from _sunne_ (sun) in the same way as
_penny_ is distinguished from _penknife_. So also _in_ (in) must be
distinguished from _inn_ (house); noting that in modern English final
consonants in accented monosyllables after a short vowel are long, our _in_
and _inn_ both having the pronunciation of Old English _inn_, not of O.E.
_in_.

_c_ and _g_ had each a _back_ (guttural) and a _front_ (palatal) pron.,
which latter is in this book written _[.c]_, _[.g]_.

c = _k_, as in _c[=e]ne_ (bold), _cn[=a]wan_ (know).

[.c] = _kj_, a _k_ formed in the _j_ (English _y_) position, nearly as in
the old-fashioned pron. of _sky_: _[.c]iri[.c]e_ (church), _sty[.c][.c]e_
(piece), _th[e,]n[.c]an_ (think).

g initially and in the combination _ng_ was pron. as in 'get': _g[=o]d_
(good), _lang_ (long); otherwise (that is, medially and finally after
vowels and _l, r_) as in German _sagen: dagas_ (days), _burg_ (city),
_h[=a]lga_ (saint).

[.g] initially and in the combination _n[.g]_ was pronounced _gj_
(corresponding to _kj_): _[.g][=e]_ (ye), _[.g]eorn_ (willing),
_spr[e,]n[.g]an_ (scatter); otherwise = _j_ (as in 'you'): _dae[.g]_ (day),
_wr[=e][.g]an_ (accuse), _h[e,]r[.g]ian_ (ravage). It is possible that
_[.g]_ in _[.g]e-boren_ (born) and other unaccented syllables was already
pronounced _j. [.c][.g] = [.g][.g]: s[e,][.c][.g]an_ (say), _hry[.c][.g]_
(back).

f had the sound of _v_ everywhere where it was possible:--_faran_ (go),
_of_ (of), _ofer_ (over); not, of course, in _oft_ (often), or when
doubled, as in _offrian_ (offer). {4}

h initially, as in _h[=e]_ (he), had the same sound as now. Everywhere else
it had that of Scotch and German _ch_ in _loch_:--_h[=e]ah_ (high), _Wealh_
(Welshman), _riht_ (right). _hw_, as in _hwaet_ (what), _hw[=i]l_ (while),
had the sound of our _wh_; and _hl, hn, hr_ differed from _l, n, r_
respectively precisely as _wh_ differs from _w_, that is, they were these
consonants devocalized, _hl_ being nearly the same as Welsh
_ll:--hl[=a]ford_ (lord), _hl[=u]d_ (loud); _hnappian_ (doze), _hnutu_
(nut); _hrathe_ (quickly), _hr[=e]od_ (reed).

r was always a strong trill, as in Scotch:--_r[=ae]ran_ (to raise),
_h[=e]r_ (here), _word_ (word).

s had the sound of _z_:--_s[=e][.c]an_ (seek), _sw[=a]_ (so), _w[=i]s_
(wise), _[=a].r[=i]san_ (rise); not, of course, in combination with hard
consonants, as in _st[=a]n_ (stone), _faest_ (firm), _r[=i][.c]sian_
(rule), or when double, as in _cyssan_ (kiss).

th had the sound of our _th_ (= dh) in _then_:_--th[=u]_ (thou), _thing_
(thing), _s[=o]th_ (true), _h[=ae]then_ (heathen); except when in
combination with hard consonants, where it had that of our _th_ in _thin_,
as in _s[=e][.c]th_ (seeks). Note _haefth_ (has) = _haevdh_.

w was fully pronounced wherever written:--_wr[=i]tan_ (write), _n[=i]we_
(new), _s[=e]ow_ (sowed _pret._).

STRESS.

The stress or accent is marked throughout in this book, whenever it is not
on the first syllable of a word, by (.) preceding the letter on which the
stress begins. Thus _for.[.g]iefan_ is pronounced with the same stress as
that of _forgive_, _andswaru_ with that of _answer_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHONOLOGY.

VOWELS.

Different vowels are related to one another in various ways in O.E., the
most important of which are _mutation_ (German _umlaut_) and _gradation_
(G. _ablaut_). {5}

The following changes are _mutations_:--

a .. [e,]:--mann, _pl._ m[e,]nn; wand (wound _prt._), w[e,]ndan (to turn).

ea (= a) .. ie (= [e,]):--eald (old), ieldra (older); feallan (fall),
fielth (falls).

[=a] .. [=ae]:--bl[=a]wan (to blow), bl[=ae]wth (bloweth); h[=a]l (sound),
h[=ae]lan (heal).

u .. y:--burg (city), _pl._ byri[.g]; trum (strong), trymman (to
strengthen).

o .. y:--gold, gylden (golden); coss (a kiss), cyssan (to kiss).

e .. i:--beran (to bear), bireth (beareth); cwethan (speak), cwide
(speech).

eo (= e) .. ie (= i):--heord (herd), hierde (shepherd); [.c]eorfan (cut),
[.c]ierfth (cuts).

u .. o:--curon (they chose), [.g]e.coren (chosen).

[=u] .. [=y]:--c[=u]th (known), c[=y]than (to make known); f[=u]l (foul),
[=a].f[=y]lan (defile).

[=o] .. [=e]:--s[=o]hte (sought _prt._), s[=e][.c]an (to seek); f[=o]da
(food), f[=e]dan (to feed).

[=e]a .. [=i]e:--h[=e]awan (to hew), h[=i]ewth (hews); t[=e]am (progeny),
t[=i]eman (teem).

[=e]o .. [=i]e:--st[=e]or (rudder), st[=i]eran (steer); [.g]e.str[=e]on
(possession), [.g]es.tr[=i]enan (gain).

Before proceeding to gradation, it will be desirable to describe the other
most important vowel-relations.

a, ae, ea. In O.E. original _a_ is preserved before nasals, as in _mann_,
_lang_, _nama_ (name), and before a single consonant followed by _a_, _u_,
or _o_, as in _dagas_ (days), _dagum_ (to days), _faran_ (go), _gafol_
(profit), and in some words when _e_ follows, as in _ic fare_ (I go),
_faren_ (gone). Before _r_, _l_, _h_ followed by another consonant, and
before _x_ it becomes _ea_, as in _heard_ (hard), _eall_ (all), _eald_
(old), _eahta_ (eight), _weaxan_ (to grow). Not in _baerst_ (p. 7). In most
other cases it becomes _ae_:--_dae[.g]_, (day), _dae[.g]es_ (of a day),
_faest_ (firm), _waer_ (wary). {6}

e before nasals always becomes _i_: compare _bindan_ (to bind), pret.
_band_, with _beran_ (to bear), pret. _baer_.

_e_ before _r_ (generally followed by a consonant) becomes _eo:--eorthe_
(earth), _heorte_ (heart). Not in _berstan_ (p. 7). Also in other
cases:--_seolfor_ (silver), _heofon_ (heaven).

i before _r_ + cons. becomes _ie:--bierth_ (beareth) contr. from _bireth,
hierde_ (shepherd) from _heord_ (herd), _wiersa_ (worse).

[e,] before _r_, or _l_ + cons. often becomes _ie:--fierd_ (army) from
_faran_, _bieldo_ (boldness) from _beald_, _ieldra_ (elder) from _eald_.

By _gradation_ the vowels are related as follows:--

e (i, eo) .. a (ae, ea) .. u (o):--

_bindan_ (inf.), _band_ (pret.), _bundon_ (they bound). _beran_ (inf.),
_baer_ (pret.), _boren_ (past partic.). _[.c]eorfan_ (cut), _[.c]earf_
(pret.), _curfon_ (they cut), _corfen_ (past partic.). _b[e,]nd_ (bond) =
mutation of band, _byr-then_ (burden) of _bor-en_.

a (ae, ea) .. [=ae]:--_spraec_ (spoke), _spr[=ae]con_ (they spoke),
_spr[=ae][.c]_ (speech).

a .. [=o]:--_faran_ (to go), _f[=o]r_ (pret.), _f[=o]r_ (journey).
_[.g]e.f[=e]ra_ (companion) mutation of _f[=o]r_.

[=i] .. [=a] .. i:--_wr[=i]tan, wr[=a]t, writon, [.g]e.writ_ (writing,
_subst._). _(be).l[=i]fan_ (remain), _l[=a]f_ (remains), whence by mutation
_l[=ae]fan_ (leave).

[=e]o ([=u]) .. [=e]a .. u (o):--_[.c][=e]osan_ (choose), _[.c][=e]as,
curon, coren_. _cys-t_ (choice). _(for).l[=e]osan_ (lose), _l[=e]as_
(loose), _[=a].l[=i]esan_ (release), _losian_ (to be lost). _b[=u]gan_
(bend), _boga_ (bow).

We see that the laws of gradation are most clearly shown in the conjugation
of the strong verbs. But they run through the whole language, and a
knowledge of the laws of gradation and mutation is the main key to O.E.
etymology.

    It is often necessary to supply intermediate stages in connecting two
    words. Thus _l[e,][.c][.g]an_ (lay) cannot be directly referred to
    _li[.c][.g]an_ (lie), but only to a form *_lag_-, preserved in the
    preterite _lae[.g]_. So also _bl[e,]ndan_ (to blind) can be referred
    only indirectly to the adjective _blind_ through an intermediate
    *_bland_-. Again, the root-vowel of _byrthen_ {7} (burden) cannot be
    explained by the infinitive _beran_ (bear), but only by the past
    participle _[.g]e.boren_. In the same way _hryre_ (fall _sb._) must be
    referred, not to the infinitive _hr[=e]osan_, but to the preterite
    plural _hruron_.

    The vowel-changes in the preterites of verbs of the 'fall'-conjugation
    (1) _feallan_, _f[=e]oll_, &c., are due not to gradation, but to other
    causes.

CONSONANTS.

s becomes _r_ in the preterite plurals and past participles of strong
verbs, as in _curon_, _[.g]e.coren_ from _[.c][=e]osan_, _w[=ae]ron_ pl. of
_waes_ (was), and in other formations, such as _hryre_ (fall) from
_hr[=e]osan_.

th becomes _d_ under the same conditions, as in _wurdon_, _[.g]e.worden_
from _weorthan_ (become), _cwaeth_ (quoth), pl. _cw[=ae]don_, _cwide_
(speech) from _cwethan_ (infin.).

r is often transposed, as in _iernan_ (run) from original *_rinnan_ (cp.
the subst. _ryne_), _berstan_ (burst) from *_brestan_, _baerst_ (burst
_pret._) from _braest_, _hors_ (horse) from *_hross_.

The combinations cae-, gae- become _[.c]ea-_, _[.g]ea-_, as in _[.c]eaf_
(chaff) from *_caef_, _s[.c]eal_ (shall) from *_scael_, _[.g]eaf_ (gave) =
*_gaef_ from _[.g]iefan_ (cp. _cwaeth_ from _cwethan_), _[.g]eat_
(gate)--cp. _faet_ (vessel).

g[=ae]- often becomes _[.g][=e]a-_, as in _[.g][=e]afon_ (they gave), with
which compare _cw[=ae]don_ (they said).

ge- becomes _[.g]ie_, as in _[.g]iefan_, _[.g]ieldan_ (pay) from *_gefan_,
*_geldan_--cp. _cwethan_, _delfan_. Not in the prefix _[.g]e-_ and
_[.g][=e]_ (ye).

When g comes before a consonant in inflection, it often becomes _h_, as in
_h[=e] l[=i]ehth_ (he lies) from _l[=e]ogan_ (mentiri).

h after a consonant is dropt when a vowel follows, the preceding vowel
being lengthened, thus _Wealh_ (Welshman) has plural _W[=e]alas_.

       *       *       *       *       *

INFLECTIONS.

NOUNS.

Gender. There are three genders in O.E.--masculine, neuter, and feminine.
The gender is partly natural, partly {8} grammatical. By the natural gender
names of male beings, such as _se mann_ (the man), are masculine; of female
beings, such as _s[=e]o dohtor_ (the daughter), are feminine; and of young
creatures, such as _thaet [.c]ild_ (the child), neuter. Note, however, that
_thaet w[=i]f_ (woman) is neuter.

Grammatical gender is known only by the gender of the article and other
words connected with the noun, and, to some extent, by its form. Thus all
nouns ending in _-a_, such as _se m[=o]na_ (moon), are masculine, _s[=e]o
sunne_ (sun) being feminine. Those ending in _-d[=o]m_, _-h[=a]d_, and
_-s[.c]ipe_ are also masculine:--_se w[=i]sd[=o]m_ (wisdom), _se
[.c]ildh[=a]d_ (childhood), _se fr[=e]onds[.c]ipe_ (friendship). Those in
_-nes_, _-o_ (from adjectives) _-r[=ae]den_, and _-ung_ are
feminine:--_s[=e]o rihtw[=i]snes_ (righteousness), _s[=e]o bieldo_
(boldness) from _beald_, _s[=e]o mann-r[=ae]den_ (allegiance), _s[=e]o
scotung_ (shooting).

Compounds follow the gender of their last element, as in _thaet
burg-[.g]eat_ (city-gate), from _s[=e]o burg_ and _thaet [.g]eat_. Hence
also _se w[=i]f-mann_ (woman) is masculine.

The gender of most words can be learnt only by practice, and the student
should learn each noun with its proper definite article.

Strong and Weak. Weak nouns are those which form their inflections with
_n_, such as _se m[=o]na_, plural _m[=o]nan_; _s[=e]o sunne_, genitive
sing. _th[=ae]re sunnan_. All the others, such as _se dae[.g]_, pl.
_dagas_, _thaet h[=u]s_ (house), gen. sing. _thaes h[=u]ses_, are strong.

Cases. There are four cases, nominative, accusative, dative, and genitive.
The acc. is the same as the nom. in all plurals, in the sing. of all neuter
nouns, and of all strong masculines. Masculine and neuter nouns never
differ in the plural except in the nom. and acc., and in the singular they
differ only in the acc. of weak nouns, which in neuters is the same as the
nom. The dative plural of nearly all nouns ends in _-um_. {9}

STRONG MASCULINES.

(1) as-plurals.

         SINGULAR.                    PLURAL.
  _Nom[3]._  st[=a]n (_stone_).   _Nom._  st[=a]n-as.
  _Dat._     st[=a]n-e.           _Dat._  st[=a]n-um.
  _Gen._     st[=a]n-es.          _Gen._  st[=a]n-a.

So also _d[=ae]l_ (part), _cyning_ (king), _[.c]ildh[=a]d_ (childhood).

_dae[.g]_ (day) changes its vowel in the pl. (p. 5):--_dae[.g]_,
_dae[.g]e_, _dae[.g]es_; _dagas_, _dagum_, _daga_.

Nouns in _-e_ have nom. and dat. sing. the same:--_[e,]nde_, (end),
_[e,]nde_, _[e,]ndes_; _[e,]ndas_, _[e,]ndum_, _[e,]nda_.

Nouns in _-el_, _-ol_, _-um_, _-en_, _-on_, _-er_, _-or_ often
contract:--_[e,]n[.g]el_ (angel), _[e,]n[.g]le_, _[e,]n[.g]les_;
_[e,]n[.g]las_, _[e,]n[.g]lum_, _[e,]n[.g]la_. So also _nae[.g]el_ (nail),
_the[.g]en_ (thane), _ealdor_ (prince). Others, such as _aecer_ (field), do
not contract.

_h_ after a consonant is dropped in inflection (p. 7), as in _feorh_
(life), _f[=e]ore_, _f[=e]ores_. So also in _Wealh_ (Welshman), plur.
_W[=e]alas_.

There are other classes which are represented only by a few nouns each.

(2) e-plurals.

    A few nouns which occur only in the plur.:--_l[=e]ode_ (people),
    _l[=e]odum_, _l[=e]oda_. So also several names of
    nations:--_[E,]n[.g]le_ (English), _D[e,]ne_ (Danes); _Seaxe_ (Saxons),
    _Mier[.c]e_ (Mercians), have gen. plur. _Seaxna_, _Mier[.c]na_.

(3) Mutation-plurals.

       SINGULAR.                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  f[=o]t (_foot_).   _Nom._  f[=e]t.
  _Dat._  f[=e]t.            _Dat._  f[=o]t-um.
  _Gen._  f[=o]t-es.         _Gen._  f[=o]t-a.

So also _t[=o]th_ (tooth). _Mann_ (man), _m[e,]nn_, _mannes_; _m[e,]nn_,
_mannum_, _manna_.

{10}

(4) u-nouns.

      SINGULAR.                    PLURAL.
  _Nom._  sun-u (_son_).        _Nom._ sun-a.
  _Dat._  sun-a.                _Dat._ sun-um.
  _Gen._  sun-a.                _Gen._ sun-a.

So also _wudu_ (wood).

(5) r-nouns (including feminines).

       SINGULAR.                           PLURAL.
  _Nom._  m[=o]dor (_mother_).         _Nom._  m[=o]dor.
  _Dat._  m[=e]der.                    _Dat._  m[=o]dr-um.
  _Gen._  m[=o]dor.                    _Gen._  m[=o]dr-a.

So also _br[=o]thor_ (brother); _faeder_ (father), _dohtor_ (daughter),
have dat. sing. _faeder_, _dehter_.

(6) nd-nouns.

Formed from the present participle of verbs.

       SINGULAR.                          PLURAL.
  _Nom._  fr[=e]ond (_friend_).       _Nom._  fr[=i]end.
  _Dat._  fr[=i]end.                  _Dat._  fr[=e]ond-um.
  _Gen._  fr[=e]ond-es.               _Gen._  fr[=e]ond-a.

So also _f[=e]ond_ (enemy).

Those in _-end_ inflect thus:--_b[=u]end_ (dweller), _b[=u]end_,
_b[=u]endes_; _b[=u]end_, _b[=u]endum_, _b[=u]endra_. So also _H[=ae]lend_
(saviour). The _-ra_ is an adjectival inflection.

STRONG NEUTERS.

(1) u-plurals.

       SINGULAR.                       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  s[.c]ip (_ship_).        _Nom._  s[.c]ip-u.
  _Dat._  s[.c]ip-e.               _Dat._  s[.c]ip-um.
  _Gen._  s[.c]ip-es.              _Gen._  s[.c]ip-a.

So all neuters with short final syllable, such as _[.g]e.bed_ (prayer),
_[.g]e.writ_ (writing), _[.g]eat_ (gate). {11}

_Faet_ (vessel), _faete_, _faetes_; _fatu_, _fatum_, _fata_ (p. 5).

_R[=i][.c]e_ (kingdom), _r[=i][.c]e_, _r[=i][.c]es_; _r[=i][.c]u_,
_r[=i][.c]um_, _r[=i][.c]a_. So also all neuters in _e_, except _[=e]age_
and _[=e]are_ (p. 13): _[.g]e.th[=e]ode_ (language), _sty[.c][.c]e_
(piece).

Those in _-ol_, _-en_, _-or_, &c. are generally contracted:--_d[=e]ofol_
(devil), _d[=e]ofles_, _d[=e]oflu_. So also _w[=ae]pen_ (weapon), _mynster_
(monastery), _wundor_ (wonder).

(2) Unchanged plurals.

      SINGULAR.                        PLURAL.
  _Nom._  h[=u]s (_house_).        _Nom._  h[=u]s.
  _Dat._  h[=u]s-e.                _Dat._  h[=u]s-um.
  _Gen._  h[=u]s-es.               _Gen._  h[=u]s-a.

So all others with long final syllables (that is, containing a long vowel,
or a short vowel followed by more than one consonant), such as _bearn_
(child), _folc_ (nation), _w[=i]f_ (woman).

_Feoh_ (money) drops its _h_ in inflection and lengthens the _eo_:--_feoh_,
_f[=e]o_, _f[=e]os_. So also _bleoh_ (colour).

STRONG FEMININES.

(1) a-plurals.

           SINGULAR.                         PLURAL.
  (a)  _Nom._ [.g]ief-u (_gift_).        _Nom._  [.g]ief-a.
       _Acc._ [.g]ief-e.                 _Acc._  [.g]ief-a.
       _Dat._ [.g]ief-e.                 _Dat._  [.g]ief-um.
       _Gen._ [.g]ief-e.                 _Gen._  [.g]ief-ena.

So also _lufu_ (love), _scamu_ (shame). _Duru_ (door) is an _u_-noun: it
has acc. _duru_, d., g. _dura_, g. pl. _dura_. Observe that all these nouns
have a short syllable before the final vowel. When it is long, the _u_ is
dropped, and the noun falls under (_b_). {12}

             SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  (_b_)  _Nom._  spr[=ae][.c] (_speech_).   _Nom._  spr[=ae][.c]-a.
         _Acc._  spr[=ae][.c]-e.            _Acc._  spr[=ae][.c]-a.
         _Dat._  spr[=ae][.c]-e.            _Dat._  spr[=ae][.c]-um.
         _Gen._  spr[=ae][.c]-e.            _Gen._  spr[=ae][.c]-a.

So also _str[=ae]t_ (street), _sorg_ (sorrow). Some have the acc. sing. the
same as the nom., such as _d[=ae]d_, _hand_, _miht_.

Those in _-ol_, _-er_, _-or_, &c. contract:--_s[=a]wol_ (soul), _s[=a]wle_,
_s[=a]wla_, _s[=a]wlum_. So also _[.c]easter_ (city), _hl[=ae]dder_
(ladder).

Some in _-en_ double the _n_ in inflection:--_byrthen_ (burden),
_byrthenne_. So also those in _-r[=ae]den_, such as _hierdr[=ae]den_
(guardianship). Those in _-nes_ also double the _s_ in inflection:
_g[=o]dnes_ (goodness), _g[=o]dnesse_.

(2) Mutation-plurals.

      SINGULAR.                   PLURAL.
  _Nom._  b[=o]c (_book_).    _Nom._  b[=e][.c].
  _Dat._  b[=e][.c].          _Dat._  b[=o]c-um.
  _Gen._  b[=e][.c].          _Gen._  b[=o]c-a.

_Burg_ (city), _byri[.g]_, _burge_; _byri[.g]_, _burgum_, _burga_.

(3) Indeclinable.

      SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  bieldo (_boldness_).
  _Dat._  bieldo.
  _Gen._  bieldo.

So also _ieldo_ (age).

For _r_-nouns, see under Masculines.

WEAK MASCULINES.

        SINGULAR.                PLURAL.
  _Nom._  nam-a (_name_).    _Nom._  nam-an.
  _Acc._  nam-an.            _Acc._  nam-an.
  _Dat._  nam-an.            _Dat._  nam-um.
  _Gen._  nam-an.            _Gen._  nam-ena.

{13}

So also all nouns in _-a_:--_[.g]e.f[=e]ra_ (companion), _guma_ (man),
_[.g]e.l[=e]afa_ (belief). _Ieldran_ (elders) occurs only in the plural.

_[.G]e.f[=e]a_ (joy) is contracted throughout:--_[.g]ef[=e]a_,
_[.g]ef[=e]an_.

WEAK NEUTERS.

      SINGULAR.                    PLURAL.
  _Nom._  [=e]ag-e (_eye_).    _Nom._  [=e]ag-an.
  _Acc._  [=e]ag-e.            _Acc._  [=e]ag-an.
  _Dat._  [=e]ag-an.           _Dat._  [=e]ag-um.
  _Gen._  [=e]ag-an.           _Gen._  [=e]ag-ena.

So also _[=e]are_ 'ear.'

WEAK FEMININES.

      SINGULAR.                  PLURAL.
  _Nom._  sunn-e (_sun_).    _Nom._  sunn-an.
  _Acc._  sunn-an.           _Acc._  sunn-an.
  _Dat._  sunn-an.           _Dat._  sunn-um.
  _Gen._  sunn-an.           _Gen._  sunn-ena.

So also _[.c]iri[.c]e_ (church), _f[=ae]mne_ (virgin), _heorte_ (heart).

_L[=e]o_ (lion) has acc., &c. _l[=e]on_.

PROPER NAMES.

Native names of persons are declined like other nouns:--_Aelfred_, gen.
_Aelfredes_, dat. _Aelfrede_; _[=E]ad-burg_ (fem.), gen. _[=E]adburge_, &c.

Foreign names of persons sometimes follow the analogy of native names, thus
_Cr[=i]st_, _Salomon_ have gen. _Cr[=i]stes_, _Salomones_, dat.
_Cr[=i]ste_, _Salomone_. Sometimes they are declined as in Latin,
especially those in _-us_, but often with a mixture of English endings, and
the Latin endings are used {14} somewhat loosely, the accus. ending being
often extended to the other oblique cases; thus we find nom. _C[=y]rus_,
gen. _C[=y]res_, acc. _C[=y]rum_, dat. _C[=y]rum_ (th[=ae]m cyninge
C[=y]rum).

Almost the only names of countries and districts in Old English are those
taken from Latin, such as _Breten_ (Britain), _C[e,]nt_ (Kent),
_[.G]erm[=a]nia_ (Germany), and those formed by composition, generally with
_land_, such as _[E,]n[.g]la-land_ (land of the English, England),
_Isr.ah[=e]la-th[=e]od_ (Israel). In both of these cases the first element
is in the gen. pl., but ordinary compounds, such as _Scot-land_, also
occur. In other cases the name of the inhabitants of a country is used for
the country itself:--_on [=E]ast-[e,]n[.g]lum_ = in East-anglia, lit.
'among the East-anglians.' So also _on Angel-cynne_ = in England, lit.
'among the English race,' more accurately expressed by _Angelcynnes land_.

Uncompounded names of countries are sometimes undeclined. Thus we find _on
C[e,]nt_, _t[=o] Hierusal[=e]m_.

_[.G]erm[=a]nia_, _Asia_, and other foreign names in _-a_ take _-e_ in the
oblique cases, thus gen. _[.G]erm[=a]nie_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADJECTIVES.

Adjectives have three genders, and the same cases as nouns, though with
partly different endings, together with strong and weak inflection. In the
masc. and neut. sing. they have an _instrumental_ case, for which in the
fem. and plur., and in the weak inflection the dative is used.

STRONG ADJECTIVES.

Adjectives with a short syllable before the endings take _-u_ in the fem.
sing. nom. and neut. pl. nom., those with a long one drop it. {15}

                          SINGULAR.
                     Masc.             Neut.        Fem.
  (_a_)  _Nom._    cwic (_alive_),    cwic,       cwic-u.
         _Acc._    cwic-ne,           cwic,       cwic-e.
         _Dat._    cwic-um,           cwic-um,    cwic-re.
         _Gen._    cwic-es,           cwic-es,    cwic-re.
         _Instr._  cwic-e,            cwic-e.     (cwicre).

                           PLURAL.
         _Nom._    cwic-e,            cwic-u,     cwic-e.
                   \____________________  ______________/
                                        \/
         _Dat._                       cwic-um.
         _Gen._                       cwic-ra.

So also _sum_ (some), _f[=ae]rlic_ (dangerous).

Those with _ae_, such as _glaed_ (glad), change it to _a_ in dat. _gladum_,
&c.

Those in _-e_, such as _bl[=i]the_ (glad), drop it in all
inflections:--_bl[=i]thne_, _bl[=i]thu_, _bl[=i]thre_.

Those in _-ig_, _-el_, _-ol_, _-en_, _-er_, _-or_ often contract before
inflections beginning with a vowel, as in _h[=a]li[.g]_ (holy),
_h[=a]lges_, _h[=a]lgum_; _mi[.c]el_ (great), _mi[.c]lu_, _mi[.c]le_. Not,
of course, before consonants:--_h[=a]li[.g]ne_, _mi[.c]elne_, _mi[.c]elra_.

Those in _-u_, such as _[.g]earu_ (ready), change the _u_ into a _w_ before
vowels:--_[.g]earwes_, _[.g]earwe_.

Adjectives with long syllable before the endings drop the _u_ of the fem.
and neuter:--

                          Masc.             Neut.      Fem.
  (_b_)  _Nom. Sing._  g[=o]d (_good_),    g[=o]d,    g[=o]d.
              _Plur._  g[=o]de,            g[=o]d,    g[=o]de.

_F[=e]a_ (few) has only the plural inflections, dat. _f[=e]am_, gen.
_f[=e]ara_.

_H[=e]ah_ (high) drops its second _h_ in inflection and
contracts:--_h[=e]are_, nom. pl. _h[=e]a_, dat. _h[=e]am_, acc. sing. masc.
_h[=e]anne_.

_Fela_ (many) is indeclinable. {16}

WEAK ADJECTIVES.

The weak inflections of adjectives agree exactly with the noun ones:-

                        SINGULAR.
            Masc.         Neut.         Fem.
  _Nom._  g[=o]d-a,     g[=o]d-e,     g[=o]d-e.
  _Acc._  g[=o]d-an,    g[=o]d-e,     g[=o]d-an.
  _Dat._  g[=o]d-an,    g[=o]d-an,    g[=o]d-an.
  _Gen._  g[=o]d-an,    g[=o]d-an,    g[=o]d-an.
          \________________  __________________/
                           \/
                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._                g[=o]d-an.
  _Dat._                g[=o]d-um.
  _Gen._                g[=o]d-ra.

The vowel- and consonant-changes are as in the strong declension.

COMPARISON.

The comparative is formed by adding _-ra_, and is declined like a weak
adjective:--_l[=e]of_ (dear), _l[=e]ofra_ masc., _l[=e]ofre_ fem.,
_l[=e]ofran_ plur., etc.; _m[=ae]re_ (famous), _m[=ae]rra_. The superlative
is formed by adding _-ost_, and may be either weak or strong:--_l[=e]ofost_
(dearest).

The following form their comparisons with mutation, with superlative in
_-est_ (the forms in parentheses are adverbs):--

  eald (_old_),        ieldra,          ieldest.
  lang (_long_),       l[e,]n[.g]ra,    l[e,]n[.g]est.
  n[=e]ah (_near_),    (n[=e]ar),       n[=i]ehst.
  h[=e]ah (_high_),    h[=i]erra,       h[=i]ehst.

The following show different roots:--

  g[=o]d (_good_),        b[e,]tera,            b[e,]tst.
  yfel (_evil_),          wiersa,               wierrest.
  mi[.c]el (_great_),     m[=a]ra (m[=a]),      m[=ae]st.
  l[=y]tel (_little_),    l[=ae]ssa (l[=ae]s),  l[=ae]st.

{17}

The following are defective as well as irregular, being formed from
adverbs:--

  [=ae]r (_formerly_),   [=ae]rra ([=ae]ror),  [=ae]rest.
  fore (_before_),             . . .           forma, fyrmest.
  [=u]t (_out_),         [=y]terra,            [=y]temest.

NUMERALS.

               CARDINAL.                         ORDINAL.
  [=a]n,                    _one_.              forma (_first_).
  tw[=a],                   _two_.              [=o]ther.
  thr[=e]o,                 _three_.            thridda.
  f[=e]ower,                _four_.             f[=e]ortha.
  f[=i]f,                   _five_.             f[=i]f-ta.
  siex,                     _six_.              siex-ta.
  seofon,                   _seven_.            seofotha.
  eahta,                    _eight_.            eahtotha.
  nigon,                    _nine_.             nigotha.
  t[=i]en,                  _ten_.              t[=e]otha.
  [e,]ndlufon,              _eleven_.           [e,]ndlyf-ta.
  tw[e,]lf,                 _twelve_.           tw[=e,]lf-ta.
  thr[=e]o-t[=i]ene,        _thirteen_.         thr[=e]o-t[=e]otha.
  f[=e]ower-t[=i]ene,       _fourteen_.
  f[=i]f-t[=i]ene,          _fifteen_.
  siex-t[=i]ene,            _sixteen_.
  seofon-t[=i]ene,          _seventeen_.
  eahta-t[=i]ene,           _eighteen_.
  nigon-t[=i]ene,           _nineteen_.
  tw[e,]n-ti[.g],           _twenty_.
  thri-ti[.g],              _thirty_.
  f[=e]ower-ti[.g],         _forty_.
  f[=i]f-ti[.g],            _fifty_.
  siex-ti[.g],              _sixty_.
  {18}
  hund-.seofon-ti[.g],      _seventy_.
  hund-.eahta-ti[.g],       _eighty_.
  hund-.nigon-ti[.g],       _ninety_.
  hund                 }    _hundred_.
  hund-.t[=e]onti[.g], }
  hund-.[e,]ndlufonti[.g],  _hundred and ten_.
  hund-.tw[e,]lfti[.g],     _hundred and twenty_.
  th[=u]send,               _thousand_.

_[=A]n_ is declined like other adjectives.

_Tw[=a]_ is declined thus:--

              Masc.         Neut.            Fem.
  _Nom._  tw[=e][.g]en,    tw[=a],          tw[=a].
          \__________________  ___________________/
                             \/
  _Dat._                   tw[=ae]m.
  _Gen._                   tw[=e][.g]ra.

So also _b[=e][.g]en_ (both), _b[=a]_, _b[=ae]m_, _b[=e][.g]ra_.

_Thr[=e]o_ is declined thus:--

           Masc.       Neut.        Fem.
  _Nom._  thr[=i]e,   thr[=e]o,   thr[=e]o.
          \_____________  _______________/
                        \/
  _Dat._              thrim.
  _Gen._              thr[=e]ora.

The others up to _tw[e,]nti[.g]_ are generally indeclinable. Those in
_-ti[.g]_ are sometimes declined like neuter nouns, sometimes like
adjectives, and are often left undeclined. When not made into adjectives
they govern the genitive.

_Hund_ and _th[=u]send_ are either declined as neuters or left undeclined,
always taking a genitive:--_eahta hund m[=i]la_ (eight hundred miles),
_f[=e]ower th[=u]send wera_ (four thousand men).

Units are always put before tens:--_[=a]n and tw[e,]nti[.g]_ (twenty-one).
{19}

The ordinals are always weak, except _[=o]ther_, which is always strong.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRONOUNS.

PERSONAL.

                    SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  i[.c] (_I_),       th[=u] (_thou_).
  _Acc._  m[=e],             th[=e].
  _Dat._  m[=e],             th[=e].
  _Gen._  m[=i]n,            th[=i]n.

                      DUAL.
  _Nom._  wit (_we two_),    [.g]it (_ye two_).
  _Acc._  unc,               inc.
  _Dat._  unc,               inc.
  _Gen._  uncer,             incer.

                     PLURAL.
  _Nom._  w[=e] (_we_),      [.g][=e] (_ye_).
  _Acc._  [=u]s,             [=e]ow.
  _Dat._  [=u]s,             [=e]ow.
  _Gen._  [=u]re,            [=e]ower.



                        SINGULAR.
           Masc.             Neut.          Fem.
  _Nom._  h[=e] (_he_),    hit (_it_),    h[=e]o (_she_).
  _Acc._  hine,            hit,           h[=i]e.
  _Dat._  him,             him,           hiere.
  _Gen._  his,             his,           hiere.
          \_________________  _________________/
                            \/
                          PLURAL.
  _Nom._                   h[=i]e (_they_).
  _Dat._                   him.
  _Gen._                   hiera.

There are no reflexive pronouns in O.E., and the ordinary {20} personal
pronouns are used instead:--_h[=i]e [.g]e.samnodon h[=i]e_ (they collected
themselves, assembled); _h[=i]e [=a].b[=ae]don him w[=i]f_ (they asked for
wives for themselves). _Self_ is used as an emphatic reflexive adjective
agreeing with its pronoun:--_sw[=a] sw[=a] h[=i]e w[=y]s[.c]ton him selfum_
(as they wished for themselves).

POSSESSIVE.

_M[=i]n_ (my), _th[=i]n_ (thy), _[=u]re_ (our), _[=e]ower_ (your), and the
dual _uncer_ and _incer_ are declined like other adjectives. The genitives
_his_ (his, its), _hiere_ (her), _hiera_ (their) are used as indeclinable
possessives.

INTERROGATIVE.

        Masc. and Fem.             Neut.
  _Nom._    hw[=a] (_who_),    hwaet (_what_).
  _Acc._    hwone,             hwaet.
  _Dat._    hw[=ae]m,          hw[=ae]m.
  _Gen._    hwaes,             hwaes.
  _Instr._  hw[=y],            hw[=y].

_Hwelc_ (which) is declined like a strong adjective: it is used both as a
noun and an adjective.

DEMONSTRATIVE.

                         SINGULAR.
               Masc.               Neut.        Fem.
  _Nom._    se (_that_, _the_),    thaet,      s[=e]o.
  _Acc._    thone,                 thaet,      th[=a].
  _Dat._    th[=ae]m,              th[=ae]m,   th[=ae]re.
  _Gen._    thaes,                 thaes,      th[=ae]re.
  _Instr._  th[=y], thon,          th[=y],     (th[=ae]re).
            \_______________________  __________________/
                                    \/
                          PLURAL.
  _Nom._                           th[=a].
  _Dat._                           th[=ae]m.
  _Gen._                           th[=a]ra.

{21}

_Se_ is both a demonstrative and a definite article. It is also used as a
personal pronoun:--_h[=e] [.g]e.h[=i]erth m[=i]n word, and wyr[.c]th
th[=a]_ (he hears my words, and does them). _S[=e]_ as a demonstrative and
pers. pronoun has its vowel long.

                    SINGULAR.
             Masc.            Neut.      Fem.
  _Nom._    thes (_this_),   this,      th[=e]os.
  _Acc._    thisne,          this,      th[=a]s.
  _Dat._    thissum,         thissum,   thisse.
  _Gen._    thisses,         thisses,   thisse.
  _Instr._  th[=y]s,         th[=y]s.   (thisse).
            \__________________  ______________/
                               \/
                     PLURAL.
  _Nom._                     th[=a]s.
  _Dat._                     thissum.
  _Gen._                     thissa.

Other demonstratives, which are used both as nouns and as adjectives, are
_se ilca_ (same), which is always weak, _swelc_ (such), which is always
strong.

RELATIVE.

The regular relative is the indeclinable _the_, as in _[=ae]lc th[=a]ra the
th[=a]s m[=i]n word [.g]e.h[=i]erth_ (each of those who hears these my
words). It is often combined with _s[=e]_, which is declined:--_s[=e] the_
= who, masc., _s[=e]o the_, fem., &c. _S[=e]_ alone is also used as a
relative:--_h[=e]r is m[=i]n cnapa, thone ic [.g]e.[.c][=e]as_ (here is my
servant, whom I have chosen); sometimes in the sense of 'he who':--_h[=e]r
th[=u] haefst thaet th[=i]n is_ (here thou hast that which is thine).

INDEFINITE.

Indefinites are formed with _sw[=a]_ and the interrogative pronouns,
thus:--_sw[=a] hw[=a] sw[=a]_, _sw[=a] hwel[.c] sw[=a]_ (whoever), _sw[=a]
hwaet sw[=a]_ (whatever). {22}

_[=A]n_ and _sum_ (some) are used in an indefinite sense:--_[=a]n mann_,
_sum mann_ = 'a certain man,' hence 'a man.' But the indefinite article is
generally not expressed.

_[=Ae]l[.c]_ (each), _[=ae]ni[.g]_ (any), _n[=ae]ni[.g]_ (no, none), are
declined like other adjectives.

_[=O]ther_ (other) is always strong:--_th[=a] [=o]thre m[e,]nn_.

_Man_, another form of _mann_, is often used in the indefinite sense of
'one,' French _on_:--_his br[=o]thor Horsan man of.sl[=o]g_ (they killed
his brother Horsa).

       *       *       *       *       *

VERBS.

There are two classes of verbs in O.E., _strong_ and _weak_. The
conjugation of strong verbs is effected mainly by means of vowel-gradation,
that of weak verbs by the addition of _d_ (-ode, -ede, -de) to the
root-syllable.

The following is the conjugation of the strong verb _bindan_ (bind), which
will serve to show the endings which are common to all verbs:--

                   INDICATIVE.             SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._  1. bind-e,                  bind-e.
                 2. bind-est, bintst,        bind-e.
                 3. bind-eth, bint,          bind-e.
        _plur._     bind-ath,                bind-en.

  _Pret. sing._  1. band,                    bund-e.
                 2. bund-e,                  bund-e.
                 3. band,                    bund-e.
        _plur._     bund-on,                 bund-en.

  _Imper. sing._ bind; _plur._ bind-ath. _Infin._ bind-an.
      _Partic. pres._ bind-ende; _pret._ [.g]e-.bund-en.
                _Gerund._ t[=o] bind-enne.

For the plural _bindath_, both indicative and imperative, _binde_ is used
when the personal pronoun follows immediately after {23} the verb:--_w[=e]
bindath_ (we bind), but _binde w[=e]_ (let us bind); so also _g[=a]th!_ (go
plur.), but _g[=a] [.g][=e]!_ (go ye).

The present participle may be declined like an adjective. Its declension
when used as a noun is given above, p. 10.

The past participle generally prefixes _[.g]e-_, as in _[.g]e.bunden_,
_[.g]e.numen_ from _niman_ (take), unless the other parts of the verbs have
it already, as in _[.g]e.h[=i]eran_ (hear), _[.g]e.h[=i]ered_. It is
sometimes prefixed to other parts of the verb as well. No _[.g]e_ is added
if the verb has another prefix, such as _[=a]-_, _be-_, _for-_; thus
_for.[.g]iefan_ (forgive) has the past participle _for.[.g]iefen_. The past
participle may be declined like an adjective.

Traces of an older passive voice are preserved in the form _h[=a]t-te_ from
_h[=a]tan_ (call, name), which is both present 'is called,' and preterite
'was called':--_se munuc h[=a]tte Abbo_ (the monk's name was Abbo).

STRONG VERBS.

In the strong verbs the plural of the pret. indic. generally has a
different vowel from that of the sing. (_ic band_, _w[=e] bundon_). The 2nd
sing. pret. indic. and the whole pret. subj. always have the vowel of the
preterite plural indicative (_th[=u] bunde, ic bunde, w[=e] bunden_.)

The 2nd and 3rd persons sing. of the pres. indic. often mutate the
root-vowel, thus:--

  a _becomes_ [e,] _as in_ (h[=e]) st[e,]nt _from_ standan (_stand_).
  ea    "     ie      "            fielth      "   feallan (_fall_).
  e     "     i       "            cwithth     "   cwethan (_say_).
  eo    "     ie      "            wierth      "   weorthan (_happen_).
  [=a]  "     [=ae]   "            h[=ae]tt    "   h[=a]tan (_command_).
  [=o]  "     [=e]    "            gr[=e]wth   "   gr[=o]wan (_grow_).
  [=e]a "     [=i]e   "            h[=i]ewth   "   h[=e]awan (_hew_).
  [=e]o "     [=i]e   "            [.c][=i]est "   [.c][=e]osan (_choose_).
  [=u]  "     [=y]    "            l[=y]cth    "   l[=u]can (_close_).

{24}

The full ending of the 3rd pers. sing. pres. indic. is _-eth_, which is
generally contracted, with the following consonant-changes:--

  -teth _becomes_ -tt _as in_ l[=ae]tt _from_ l[=ae]tan (_let_).
  -deth     "     -tt    "    b[=i]tt     "   b[=i]dan (_wait_).
  -ddeth    "     -tt    "    bitt        "   biddan (_pray_).
  -theth    "     -thth  "    cwithth     "   cwethan (_say_).
  -seth     "     -st    "    [.c][=i]est "   [.c][=e]osan (_choose_).
  -ndeth    "     -nt    "    bint        "   bindan (_bind_).

Double consonants become single, as in _h[=e] fielth_ from _feallan_.

Before the _-st_ of the 2nd pers. consonants are often dropt, as in _th[=u]
cwist_ from _cwethan_, _th[=u] [.c][=i]est_ from _[.c][=e]osan_; and _d_
becomes _t_, as in _th[=u] bintst_ from _bindan_.

For the changes between _s_ and _r_, _th_ and _d_, _g_ and _h_, see p. 7.

Some verbs, such as _s[=e]on_ (see), drop the _h_ and contract before most
inflections beginning with a vowel:--_ic s[=e]o_, _w[=e] s[=e]oth_, _t[=o]
s[=e]onne_; but _h[=e] sihth_.

There are seven conjugations of strong verbs, distinguished mainly by the
different formation of their preterites. The following lists comprise all
the strong verbs that occur in the texts given in this book, together with
several others of the commoner ones.

I. 'Fall'-conjugation.

The pret. sing. and pl. has _[=e]o_ or _[=e]_, and the past partic. retains
the original vowel of the infinitive. {25}

  (_a_) [=e]o-_preterites_.

      ea:--
    INFINITIVE.         THIRD PRES.   PRET. SING.   PRET. PL.    PTC. PRET.
  feallan (_fall_)        fielth       f[=e]oll    f[=e]ollon    feallen
  healdan (_hold_)        hielt        h[=e]old    h[=e]oldon    healden
  wealdan (_wield_)       wielt        w[=e]old    w[=e]oldon    wealden
  weaxan (_grow_)         wiext        w[=e]ox     w[=e]oxon     weaxen

      [=a]:--
  bl[=a]wan (_blow_)      bl[=ae]wth   bl[=e]ow    bl[=e]owon    bl[=a]wen
  cn[=a]wan (_know_)      cn[=ae]wth   cn[=e]ow    cn[=e]owon    cn[=a]wen
  s[=a]wan (_sow_)        s[=ae]wth    s[=e]ow     s[=e]owon     s[=a]wen

      [=e]:--
  w[=e]pan (_weep_)       w[=e]pth     w[=e]op     w[=e]opon     w[=o]pen

_W[=e]pan_ has really a weak present (p. 30) with mutation (the original
_[=o]_ re-appearing in the past partic.), but it makes no difference in the
inflection.

      [=o]:--
  fl[=o]wan (_flow_)      fl[=e]wth    fl[=e]ow    fl[=e]owon    fl[=o]wen
  gr[=o]wan (_grow_)      gr[=e]wth    gr[=e]ow    gr[=e]owon    gr[=o]wen
  r[=o]wan (_row_)        r[=e]wth     r[=e]ow     r[=e]owon     r[=o]wen

      [=e]a:--
  b[=e]atan (_beat_)      b[=i]ett     b[=e]ot     b[=e]oton     b[=e]aten
  h[=e]awan (_hew_)       h[=i]ewth    h[=e]ow     h[=e]owon     h[=e]awen
  hl[=e]apan (_leap_)     hl[=i]epth   hl[=e]op    hl[=e]opon    hl[=e]apen

(_b_) [=e]-_preterites_.

      [=a]:--
  h[=a]tan (_command_)    h[=ae]tt     h[=e]t      h[=e]ton      h[=a]ten

      [=ae]:--
  l[=ae]tan (_let_)       l[=ae]tt     l[=e]t      l[=e]ton      l[=ae]ten

      [=o]:--
  f[=o]n (_seize_)        f[=e]hth     f[=e]ng     f[=e]ngon     fangen
  h[=o]n (_hang_)         h[=e]hth     h[=e]ng     h[=e]ngon     hangen

{26}

II. 'Shake'-conjugation.

Verbs in _a_ (_ea_) and _[e,]_ (_ie_). _[=O]_ in pret. sing, and pl., _a_
(_ae_) in partic. pret. _Standan_ drops its _n_ in the pret. The partic.
pret. of _sw[e,]rian_ is irregular.

a:--

   INFINITIVE.        THIRD. PRES.   PRET. SING.     PRET. PL.  PTC. PRET.
  faran (_go_)            faerth        f[=o]r       f[=o]ron    faren
  sacan (_quarrel_)       saecth        s[=o]c       s[=o]con    sacen
  scacan (_shake_)        scaecth       sc[=o]c      sc[=o]con   scacen
  standan (_stand_)       st[e,]nt      st[=o]d      st[=o]don   standen

The following shows contraction of original _ea_:--

  sl[=e]an (_strike_)     sliehth       sl[=o]g      sl[=o]gon   slae[.g]en

[e,]:--

  h[e,]bban (_lift_)      h[e,]fth      h[=o]f       h[=o]fon    hafen
  s[.c]ieppan (_create_)  s[.c]iepth    sc[=o]p      sc[=o]pon   scapen
  sw[e,]rian (_swear_)    sw[e,]reth    sw[=o]r      sw[=o]ron   sworen

The presents of these verbs are inflected weak, so that their imperative
sing. is _h[e,]fe_ and _sw[e,]re_, like that of _w[e,]nian_ (p. 32).
_Sw[e,]rian_ has indic. _sw[e,]rige_, _sw[e,]rest_, like _w[e,]nian_;
_h[e,]bban_ has _h[e,]bbe_, _h[e,]fst_, &c. like _h[=i]eran_ (p. 30).

III. 'Bind'-conjugation.

_I_ (_ie_, _e_, _eo_) followed by two consonants, one or both of which is
nearly always a liquid (_l_, _r_) or nasal (_m_, _n_) in the infin., _a_
(_ae_, _ea_) in pret. sing., _u_ in pret. pl., _u_ (_o_) in ptc. pret.
_Findan_ has a weak preterite.

i:--

   INFINITIVE.          THIRD PRES.   PRET.SING.   PRET. PL.    PTC. PRET.
  bindan (_bind_)          bint         band         bundon      bunden
  drincan (_drink_)        drincth      dranc        druncon     druncen
  findan (_find_)          fint         funde        fundon      funden
  [.g]ieldan (_pay_)       [.g]ielt     [.g]eald     guldon      golden
  (on)[.g]innan (_begin_)  -[.g]inth    -gann        -gunnon     -gunnen
  {27}
  grindan (_grind_)        grint        grand        grundon     grunden
  iernan (_run_) [p. 7]    iernth       arn          urnon       urnen
  [.g]e-.limpan (_happen_) -limpth      -lamp        -lumpon     -lumpen
  scrincan (_shrink_)      scrincth     scranc       scruncon    scruncen
  springan (_spring_)      springth     sprang       sprungon    sprungen
  swincan (_toil_)         swincth      swanc        swuncon     swuncen
  windan (_wind_)          wint         wand         wundon      wunden
  winnan (_fight_)         winth        wann         wunnon      wunnen

e:--

  berstan (_burst_)        bierst       baerst        burston     borsten
  bre[.g]dan (_pull_)       ...         brae[.g]d     brugdon     brogden
  delfan (_dig_)           dilfth       dealf        dulfon      dolfen
  sweltan (_die_)          swilt        swealt       swulton     swolten

eo:--

  beorgan (_protect_)      bierhth      bearg        burgon      borgen
  beornan (_burn_)[p. 7]   biernth      barn         burnon      burnen
  [.c]eorfan (_cut_)       [.c]ierfth   [.c]earf     curfon      corfen
  feohtan (_fight_)        fieht        feaht        fuhton      fohten
  weorpan (_throw_)        wierpth      wearp        wurpon      worpen
  weorthan (_become_)      wierth       wearth        wurdon      worden

IV. 'Bear'-conjugation.

Verbs in _e_ (_i_), followed by a single consonant, generally a liquid or
nasal; in _brecan_ the liquid precedes the vowel. _A_ (_ae_) in pret.
sing., _[=ae]_ (_[=a]_) in pret. pl., _o_ (_u_) in ptc. pret. _Cuman_ is
irregular.

i:--

   INFINITIVE.            THIRD PRES.   PRET. SG.   PRET. PL.    PTC. PRET.
  niman (_take_)           nimth        nam          n[=a]mon       numen

e:--

  beran (_bear_)           bierth       baer         b[=ae]ron      boren
  brecan (_break_)         bricth       braec        br[=ae]con     brocen
  s[.c]eran (_shear_)      s[.c]ierth   s[.c]ear     s[.c][=e]aron  scoren
  stelan (_steal_)         stilth       stael        st[=ae]lon     stolen
  teran (_tear_)            ..          taer         t[=ae]ron      toren

{28}

u:--

  cuman (_come_)           cymth         c[=o]m      c[=o]mon       cumen

V. 'Give'-conjugation.

Verbs in _e_ (_i_, _eo_, _ie_) followed by single consonants, which are not
liquids or nasals. This class differs from the last only in the ptc. pret.
which keeps the vowel of the infinitive.

e:--

   INFINITIVE.             THIRD PRES.   PRET. SG.  PRET. PL.    PTC. PRET.
  cwethan (_say_)              cwithth    cwaeth    cw[=ae]don    cweden
  etan (_eat_)                 itt        [=ae]t    [=ae]ton      eten
  sprecan (_speak_)            spricth    spraec    spr[=ae]con   sprecen
  wrecan (_avenge_)            wricth     wraec     wr[=ae]con    wrecen

i:--

  biddan (_pray_)              bitt       baed      b[=ae]don     beden
  li[.c][.g]an (_lie_)         l[=i]th    lae[.g]   l[=ae]gon     le[.g]en
  sittan (_sit_)               sitt       saet      s[=ae]ton     seten
  thi[.c][.g]an (_receive_)    thi[.g]eth theah     th[=ae]gon    the[.g]en

All these have weak presents:--imper. _bide_, _li[.g]e_, _site_,
_thi[.g]e_. Their _i_s are mutations of the _e_ which appears in their past
partic.

ie:--

  [.g]iefan (_give_)           [.g]iefth  [.g]eaf   [.g][=e]afon  [.g]iefen
  (on)[.g]ietan (_understand_) -[.g]iett  -[.g]eat  -[.g][=e]aton
      -[.g]ieten

The following is contracted in most forms:--

  s[=e]on (_see_)              sihth      seah      s[=a]won      sewen

VI. 'Shine'-conjugation.

Verbs in _[=i]_, with pret. sing, in _[=a]_, pl. _i_, ptc. pret. _i_.

     INFINITIVE.            THIRD PRES.  PRET. SING.  PRET. PL.  PTC. PRET.
  b[=i]dan (_wait_)          b[=i]tt       b[=a]d      bidon      biden
  b[=i]tan (_bite_)          b[=i]tt       b[=a]t      biton      biten
  dr[=i]fan (_drive_)        dr[=i]fth     dr[=a]f     drifon     drifen
  {29}
  (be)l[=i]fan (_remain_)    -l[=i]fth     -l[=a]f     -lifon     -lifen
  r[=i]dan (_ride_)          r[=i]tt       r[=a]d      ridon      riden
  r[=i]pan (_reap_)          r[=i]pth      r[=a]p      ripon      ripen
  ([=a])r[=i]san (_rise_)    -r[=i]st      -r[=a]s     -rison     -risen
  s[.c][=i]nan (_shine_)     s[.c][=i]nth  sc[=a]n     s[.c]inon  s[.c]inen
  sn[=i]than (_cut_)         sn[=i]thth    sn[=a]th    snidon     sniden
  st[=i]gan (_ascend_)       st[=i][.g]th  st[=a]g     stigon     sti[.g]en
  (be)sw[=i]can (_deceive_)  -sw[=i]cth    -sw[=a]c    -swicon    -swicen
  [.g]e.w[=i]tan (_depart_)  -w[=i]tt      w[=a]t      -witon     -witen
  wr[=i]tan (_write_)        wr[=i]tt      wr[=a]t     writon     writen

VII. 'Choose'-conjugation.

Verbs in _[=e]o_ and _[=u]_, with pret. sing. _[=e]a_, pl. _u_, ptc. pret.
_o_. _Fl[=e]on_ and _t[=e]on_ contract.

     INFINITIVE.            THIRD PRES.   PRET. SING. PRET. PL. PTC. PRET.
  b[=e]odan (_offer_)        b[=i]ett      b[=e]ad      budon      boden
  br[=e]otan (_break_)       br[=i]ett     br[=e]at     bruton     broten
  [.c][=e]osan (_choose_)    [.c][=i]est   [.c][=e]as   curon      coren
  fl[=e]ogan (_fly_)         fl[=i]ehth    fl[=e]ag     flugon     flogen
  fl[=e]on (_flee_)          fl[=i]ehth    fl[=e]ah     flugon     flogen
  fl[=e]otan (_float_)       fl[=i]ett     fl[=e]at     fluton     floten
  hr[=e]osan (_fall_)        hr[=i]est     hr[=e]as     hruron     hroren
  hr[=e]owan (_rue_)         hr[=i]ewth    hr[=e]aw     hruwon     hrowen
  for.l[=e]osan (_lose_)     -l[=i]est     -l[=e]as     -luron     -loren
  s[.c][=e]otan (_shoot_)    s[.c][=i]ett  s[.c][=e]at  scuton     scoten
  sm[=e]ocan (_smoke_)       sm[=i]ecth    sm[=e]ac     smucon     smocen
  t[=e]on (_pull_)           t[=i]ehth     t[=e]ah      tugon      togen
  [=a]-thr[=e]otan (_fail_)  -thr[=i]ett   -thr[=e]at   -thruton   -throten

[=u]:--

  br[=u]can (_enjoy_)        br[=y]cth     br[=e]ac     brucon     brocen
  b[=u]gan (_bow_)           b[=y]hth      b[=e]ag      bugon      bogen
  l[=u]can (_lock_)          l[=y]cth      l[=e]ac      lucon      locen
  l[=u]tan (_bow_)           l[=y]tt       l[=e]at      luton      loten
  sc[=u]fan (_push_)         sc[=y]fth     s[.c][=e]af  scufon     scofen

{30}

WEAK VERBS.

There are three conjugations of weak verbs--(1) in _-an_, pret. _-de_
(_h[=i]eran_, _h[=i]erde_, 'hear'); (2) in _-ian_, pret. _-ede_
(_w[e,]nian_, _w[e,]nede_, 'wean'); (3) in _-ian_, pret. _-ode_ (_lufian_,
_lufode_, 'love'). The verbs of the first two conjugations nearly all have
a mutated vowel in the present and infinitive, which those of the third
conjugation very seldom have.

I. _an-_verbs.

This class of weak verbs has the same endings as the strong verbs, except
in the pret. and past partic., which are formed by adding _-de_ and _-ed_
respectively, with the following consonant changes.

  -ndde _becomes_ -nde _as in_ s[e,]nde _from_ s[e,]ndan (_send_).
  -llde     "     -lde    "    fylde       "   fyllan (_fill_).
  -tde      "     -tte    "    m[=e]tte    "   m[=e]tan (_find_).
  -pde      "     -pte    "    dypte       "   dyppan (_dip_).
  -cde      "     -hte    "    t[=ae]hte   "   t[=ae][.c]an (_show_).

The past partic. is generally contracted in the same way:--_s[e,]nd_,
_m[=e]tt_, _t[=ae]ht_, but some of them often retain the uncontracted
forms:--_fylled_, _dypped_. When declined like adjectives they drop their
_e_ where practicable:--_fylled_, plur. _fylde_; _h[=i]ered_, _h[=i]erde_.

The 2nd and 3rd pres. sing. ind. are contracted as in the strong verbs.

(_a_) 'Hear'_-class_.

               INDICATIVE.               SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.  h[=i]er-e (_hear_),   h[=i]er-e.
                2.  h[=i]er-st,           h[=i]er-e.
                3.  h[=i]er-th,           h[=i]er-e.
         _plur._    h[=i]er-ath,          h[=i]er-en.
  {31}

  _Pret. sing._ 1. h[=i]er-de,            h[=i]er-de.
                2. h[=i]er-dest,          h[=i]er-de.
                3. h[=i]er-de,            h[=i]er-de.
         _plur._   h[=i]er-don,           h[=i]er-den.

    Imper. sing. h[=i]er; plur. h[=i]er-ath.   Infin. h[=i]er-an.
            Ptc. pres. h[=i]er-ende; pret. h[=i]er-ed.
                    Gerund. t[=o] h[=i]er-enne.

Further examples of this class are:--

   INFINITIVE.                     THIRD PRES.     PRET.      PARTIC. PRET.
  aet.[=i]ewan (_show_)              -[=i]ewth     -[=i]ewde    -[=i]ewed.
  c[=y]than (_make known_)           c[=y]thth     c[=y]thde    c[=y]thed,
                                                                c[=y]dd
  fyllan (_fill_)                    fylth         fylde        fylled
  (n[=e]a)l[=ae][.c]an (_approach_)  -l[=ae][.c]th -l[=ae]hte   -l[=ae]ht
  l[=ae]dan (_lead_)                 l[ae]tt       l[=ae]dde    l[=ae]dd
  l[e,][.c][.g]an (_lay_)            l[e,][.g]th   l[e,][.g]de  l[e,][.g]d
  [.g]e.l[=i]efan (_believe_)        -l[=i]efth    -l[=i]efde   -l[=i]efed
  n[e,]mnan (_name_)                 n[e,]mneth    n[e,]mnde    n[e,]mned
  s[e,]ndan (_send_)                 s[e,]nt       s[e,]nde     s[e,]nd
  s[e,]ttan (_set_)                  s[e,]tt       s[e,]tte     s[e,]tt
  sm[=e]an (_consider_)              sm[=e]ath     sm[=e]ade    sm[=e]ad
  t[=ae][.c]an (_show_)              t[=ae][.c]th  t[=ae]hte    t[=ae]ht
  w[e,]ndan (_turn_)                 w[e,]nt       w[e,]nde     w[e,]nd

(_b_) 'Seek'-_class_.

In this class the mutated vowels lose their mutation in the preterite and
past partic., besides undergoing other changes in some verbs.

Those in double consonants (and _[.c][.g]_) simplify them in the contracted
2nd and 3rd sing. pres. indic.:--_s[e,]lle_, _s[e,]lst_, _s[e,]lth_;
_s[e,][.c][,g]e_, _s[e,][.g]st_, _s[e,][.g]th_; also in the imperative,
which is formed as in Conj. II:--_s[e,]le_, _s[e,][.g]e_, _by[.g]e_, &c.
{32}

[e,]:--

   INFINITIVE.               THIRD PRES.       PRET.      PARTIC. PRET.

  cw[e,]llan (_kill_)        cw[e,]lth        cwealde      cweald
  r[e,][.c][.c]an (_tell_)   r[e,][.c]th      reahte       reaht
  s[e,][.c][.g]an (_say_)    s[e,][.g]th      sae[.g]de    sae[.g]d
  s[e,]llan (_give_)         s[e,]lth         sealde       seald
  w[e,][.c][.c]an (_wake_)   w[e,][.c]th      weahte       weaht
  th[e,]n[.c]an (_think_)    th[e,]n[.c]th    th[=o]hte    th[=o]ht

i:--

  bringan (_bring_)          bringth          br[=o]hte    br[=o]ht

y:--

  by[.c][.g]an (_buy_)       by[.g]th         bohte        boht
  thyn[.c]an (_appear_)      thyn[.c]th       th[=u]hte    th-uht
  wyr[.c]an (_work_)         wyr[.c]th        worhte       worht

[=e]:--

  r[=e][.c]an (_care_)       r[=e][.c]th      r[=o]hte     r[=o]ht
  s[=e][.c]an (_seek_)       s[=e][.c]th      s[=o]hte     s[=o]ht

II. 'Wean'-_conjugation_.

              INDICATIVE.                    SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.   w[e,]n-i[.g]e (_wean_),  w[e,]n-i[.g]e.
                2.   w[e,]n-est,              w[e,]n-i[.g]e.
                3.   w[e,]n-eth,              w[e,]n-i[.g]e.
         _plur._     w[e,]n-iath,             w[e,]n-ien.

  _Pret. sing._ 1.   w[e,]n-ede,              w[e,]n-ede.
                2.   w[e,]n-edest,            w[e,]n-ede.
                3.   w[e,]n-ede,              w[e,]n-ede.
         _plur._     w[e,]n-edon,             w[e,]n-eden.

    _Imper._ w[e,]n-e, w[e,]n-iath.      _Infin._ w[e,]n-ian.
       _Partic. pres._ w[e,]n-iende; _pret._ w[e,]n-ed.
                _Gerund._ t[=o] w[e,]n-ienne.

{33}

So are conjugated all weak verbs with a short mutated root syllable, such
as _f[e,]rian_ (carry), _w[e,]rian_ (defend), _[.g]e.byrian_ (befit). There
are not many of them.

III. 'Love'-_conjugation_.

              INDICATIVE.                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.  luf-i[.g]e (_love_),   luf-i[.g]e.
                2.  luf-ast,               luf-i[.g]e.
                3.  luf-ath,               luf-i[.g]e.
         _plur._    luf-iath,              luf-ien.

  _Pret. sing._ 1.  luf-ode,               luf-ode.
                2.  luf-odest,             luf-ode.
                3.  luf-ode,               luf-ode.
         _plur._    luf-odon,              luf-oden.

         _Imper._ luf-a, luf-iath.  _Infin._ luf-ian.
  _Partic. pres._ luf-iende: _pret._ luf-od. _Gerund._ t[=o] luf-ienne.

So also _[=a]scian_ (ask), _macian_ (make), _weorthian_ (honour), and many
others.

_Irregularities._

Some verbs are conjugated partly after I, partly after III. Such are
_habban_ (have) and _libban_ (live).

_Habban_ has pres. indic. _haebbe_, _haefst_, _haefth_; _habbath_, subj.
_haebbe_, _haebben_, pret. _haefde_, imper. _hafa_, _habbath_, particc.
_habbende_, _haefd_.

_Libban_ has pres. _libbe_, _leofast_, _leofath_; _libbath_, subj. _libbe_,
pret. _leofode_, imper. _leofa_, _libbath_, particc. _libbende_,
_lifiende_; _leofod_.

_F[e,]tian_ (fetch) has pret. _f[e,]tte_.

STRONG-WEAK VERBS.

The strong-weak verbs have for their presents old strong preterites, from
which new weak preterites are formed. Note the occasional second person
sing. in _t_. {34}

              INDICATIVE.                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.  w[=a]t (_know_),       wite.
                2.  w[=a]st,               wite.
                3.  w[=a]t,                wite.
         _plur._    witon,                 witen.

  _Pret._           wiste.

     _Imper._ wite, witath. _Infin._ witan.
     _Partic. pres._ witende; _pret._ witen.

The other most important weak-strong verbs are given below in the 1st and
2nd sing. pres. indic., in the plur. indic., in the pret., in the infin.
and partic. pret. Of several the last two forms are doubtful, or do not
exist.

[=A]h (_possess_), [=a]ge, [=a]gon; [=a]hte; [=a]gen (_only as
adjective_)[4].

Cann (_know_) canst, cunnon; c[=u]the; cunnan; c[=u]th (_only as
adjective_.)

Dearr (_dare_), durre, durron; dorste.

[.G]e.man (_remember_), -manst; -munde; -munan.

Mae[.g] (_can_), miht, magon, mae[.g]e (_subj._); mihte.

M[=o]t (_may_), m[=o]st, m[=o]ton; m[=o]ste.

S[.c]eal (_shall_), s[.c]ealt, sculon, scyle (_subj._); scolde.

Thearf (_need_), thurfon, thyrfe (_subj._); thorfte; thurfan.

ANOMALOUS VERBS.

(1) Willan (_will_) shows a mixture of subj. forms in the pres. indic.
sing.:--

              INDICATIVE.                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.  wile,                  wile.
                2.  wilt,                  wile.
                3.  wile,                  wile.
         _plur._    willath,               willen.

  _Pret._           wolde, etc.

{35}

Similarly _nyllan_ (will not):--

              INDICATIVE.                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.  nyle,                  nyle.
                2.  nylt,                  nyle.
                3.  nyle,                  nyle.
         _plur._    nyllath,               nyllen.

  _Pret._           nolde, etc.

(2) Wesan (_be_).

              INDICATIVE.                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.  eom; b[=e]o,           s[=i]e; b[=e]o.
                2.  eart; bist,            s[=i]e; b[=e]o.
                3.  is; bith,              s[=i]e; b[=e]o.
         _plur._    sind; b[=e]oth,        s[=i]en; b[=e]on.

  _Pret. sing._ 1.  waes,                  w[=ae]re.
                2.  w[=ae]re,              w[=ae]re.
                3.  waes,                  w[=ae]re.
       _plur._      w[=ae]ron,             w[=ae]ren.

  _Imper._ wes, wesath; b[=e]o, b[=e]oth. _Infin._ wesan; b[=e]on.
                   _Partic. pres._ wesende.

The contracted negative forms are:--_neom_, _neart_, _nis_; _naes_,
_n[=ae]re_, _n[=ae]ron_; _n[=ae]re_, _n[=ae]ren_.

(3) D[=o]n (_do_).

              INDICATIVE.                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.  d[=o],                 d[=o].
                2.  d[=e]st,               d[=o].
                3.  d[=e]th,               d[=o].
        _plur._     d[=o]th,               d[=o]n.

  _Pret._           dyde, etc.

           _Imper._ d[=o], d[=o]th. _Infin._ d[=o]n.
       _Partic. pres._ d[=o]nde; _pret._ [.g]e.d[=o]n.

{36}

(4) G[=a]n (_go_).

              INDICATIVE.                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres. sing._ 1.  g[=a],                 g[=a].
                2.  g[=ae]st,              g[=a].
                3.  g[=ae]th,              g[=a].
         _plur._    g[=a]th,               g[=a]n.

  _Pret._           [=e]ode,               [=e]ode.

          _Imper._ g[=a], g[=a]th. _Infin._ g[=a]n.
       _Partic. pres._ gangende; _pret._ [.g]e.g[=a]n.

       *       *       *       *       *

DERIVATION.

PREFIXES.

The following are the most important prefixes, some of which are _verbal_,
being confined to verbs and words formed directly from them; some
_nominal_, being confined to nouns and adjectives.

[=a]- (1) originally 'forth,' 'away,' as in _[=a].r[=i]san_, 'rise forth,'
'arise'; _[=a].faran_, 'go away,''depart'; but generally only intensive, as
in _[=a].cw[e,]llan_ (kill), _[=a].hr[=e]osan_ (fall).

(2) = 'ever' in pronouns and particles, where it gives an indefinite sense,
as in _[=a]-hw[=ae]r_ (anywhere), _[=a]-wiht_ (anything).

[=ae][.g]- from _[=a]-[.g]e_-, the _[=a]_ being mutated and the _e_
dropped, has a similar meaning, as in _[=ae][.g]-hwelc_ (each),
_[=ae][.g]ther_ = _[=ae][.g]-hwaether_ (either).

be-, originally 'by,' 'around' (cp. the preposition _be_), (1) specializes
the meaning of a transitive verb, as in _be.s[e,]ttan_ (beset, surround),
_be.s[.c]ieran_ (shear); (2) makes an intransitive verb transitive, as in
_be.th[e,]n[.c]an_ (consider) from _th[e,]n[.c]an_ (think); (3) gives a
privative meaning, as in _be.h[=e]afdian_ (behead). In some words, such as
_be.cuman_ (come), it is practically unmeaning. {37}

for- (which is distinct from the preposition _for_) generally has the sense
of 'loss' or 'destruction,' as in _for.d[=o]n_ (destroy), _for.weorthan_
(perish). Of course, if the verb with which it is compounded already has
this meaning, it acts merely as an intensitive, as in _for.br[=e]otan_
(break up, break), _for.scrincan_ (shrink up). It also modifies in a bad
sense generally, as in _for.s[=e]on_ (despise), or negatives, as in
_for.b[=e]odan_ (forbid).

[.g]e- originally meant 'together,' as in _[.g]e.f[=e]ra_
(fellow-traveller, companion) from _f[=e]ran_ (travel). With verbs it often
signifies 'completion,' 'attainment,' and hence 'success,' as in
_[.g]e.g[=a]n_ (conquer), originally 'go over,' or 'reach,' _[.g]e.winnan_
(win) from _winnan_ (fight). Hence generally prefixed to _h[=i]eran_ and
_s[=e]on_, _[.g]e.h[=i]eran_ and _[.g]e.s[=e]on_ strictly meaning 'succeed
in hearing, seeing.' It is generally prefixed to past participles (p. 23),
where it originally gave the meaning of completion--_[.g]e.lufod_ =
'completely loved.'

mis- = 'mis,' as in _mis-d[=ae]d_ (misdeed).

n- = _ne_ (not), as in _n[=a]_ (not), literally 'never,' _n[=ae]fre_
(never), _naes_ (was not) = _ne waes_.

on- as a verbal prefix has nothing to do with the preposition _on_. It
properly signifies 'separation,' as in _on.l[=u]can_ (open) from _l[=u]can_
(lock, close), but is often practically unmeaning, as in _on.[.g]innan_
(begin).

or-, literally 'out of,' is privative, as in _orsorg_ (unconcerned) from
_sorg_ (sorrow).

t[=o]- as a verbal prefix has nothing to do with the preposition _t[=o]_
(which occurs in _t[=o].gaedre_, 'together,' &c.), but signifies
'separation,' as in _t[=o].berstan_ (burst asunder), _t[=o].bre[.g]dan_
(shake off), and hence 'destruction,' as in _t[=o].cw[=i]esan_ (crush to
pieces, bruise).

un- negatives, as in _un-[.g]es[=ae]li[.g]_ (unhappy). {38}

ENDINGS.

(_a_) NOUNS.

_Personal._

-end, from the present participle _-ende_, = '-er':--_H[=ae]lend_ (healer,
Saviour), _b[=u]end_ (dweller).

-ere = '-er':--_s[=a]were_ (sower), _mynetere_ (money-changer, minter) from
_mynet_ (coin).

-ing, patronymic, _aetheling_ (son of a noble, prince) from _aethele_
(noble).

_Abstract._

-nes, fem. from adjectives:--_g[=o]d-nes_ (goodness), _rihtw[=i]snes_
(righteousness).

-uth, -tho, fem., generally from adjectives:--_[.g][=e]oguth_ (youth),
_str[e,]n[.g]tho_ (strength) from _strang_.

-ung, fem. from verbs:--_scotung_ (shooting, shot), _h[e,]rgung_
(ravaging), from _scotian_, _h[e,]rgian_.

The following are also independent words:--

-d[=o]m, masc.:--_w[=i]s-d[=o]m_ (wisdom), _th[=e]ow-d[=o]m_ (servitude).

-h[=a]d, masc.:--_[.c]ild-h[=a]d_ (childhood).

-r[=ae]den, fem.:--_[.g]e.cwid-r[=ae]den_ (agreement) from _cwide_
(speech); _mann-r[=ae]den_ (allegiance).

-s[.c]ipe, masc.:--_fr[=e]ond-s[.c]ipe_ (friendship). Concrete in
_waeter-s[.c]ipe_ (piece of water, water).

(_b_) ADJECTIVES.

-en, with mutation, denotes 'material,' 'belonging to':--_gylden_ (golden),
_st[=ae]nen_ (of stone), _h[=ae]then_ (heathen) from _h[=ae]th_ (heath). In
_seolcen_ (silken) there is no mutation.

-feald = '-fold':--_hund-feald_ (hundred-fold).

-i[.g]:--_miht-i[.g]_ (mighty); _h[=a]l-i[.g]_ (holy) from _h[=a]l_
(whole). {39}

-isc, with mutation:--_[E,]n[.g]lisc_ (English) from _Angel_; _m[e,]nn-isc_
(human) from _mann_.

-ol:--_swic-ol_ (deceitful).

-iht, with mutation, denotes 'material,' 'nature':--_st[=ae]n-iht_ (stony).

-sum = 'some':--_h[=i]er-sum_ (obedient).

The following exist (sometimes in a different form) as independent words:--

-faest:--_s[=o]th-faest_ (truthful).

-full:--_sorg-full_ (sorrowful), _[.g]e.l[=e]af-full_ (believing, pious).

-l[=e]as = '-less':--_[=a]r-l[=e]as_ (dishonoured, wicked).

-lic (cp. _[.g]e.l[=i]c_) = '-ly':--_folc-lic_ (popular), _heofon-lic_
(heavenly).

-weard = '-ward':--_s[=u]than-weard_ (southward).

VERBS.

-l[=ae][.c]an:--_[=a]n-l[=ae][.c]an_ (unite),
_[.g]e.thw[=ae]r-l[=ae][.c]an_ (agree).

ADVERBS.

-e, the regular adverb-termination:--_lange_ (long), _[.g]e.l[=i]ce_
(similarly) from _lang_, _[.g]e.l[=i]c_. Sometimes _-l[=i]ce_ (from _-lic_)
is used to form adverbs, as _bl[=i]the-l[=i]ce_ (gladly) from _bl[=i]the_.

DERIVATIONS FROM PARTICIPLES.

Many abstract words are formed from present participles (often in a passive
sense) and past participles (often in an active sense):--

-nes:--_for.[.g]iefen-nes_ (forgiveness), _[.g]e.r[e,][.c]ed-nes_
(narrative), _welwillend-nes_ (benevolence).

-lic:--_un[=a]r[=i]med-lic_ (innumerable).

-l[=i]ce:--_welwillend-l[=i]ce_ (benevolently).

       *       *       *       *       * {40}

SYNTAX.

GENDER.

When masculine and feminine beings are referred to by the same adjective or
pronoun, the adjective or pronoun is put in the neuter:--_h[=i]e
[.g]e.samnodon h[=i]e_, _ealle th[=a] h[=e]afod-m[e,]nn, and [=e]ac swelce
w[=i]f-menn_ ... _and th[=a] h[=i]e bl[=i]thost w[=ae]ron_ ... (they
gathered themselves, all the chief men, and also women ... and when they
were most merry ...). Here _bl[=i]thost_ is in the neuter plur.

CASES.

Accusative. Some verbs of asking (a question) and requesting, together with
_l[=ae]ran_ (teach), take two accusatives, one of the person, and another
of the thing:--_h[=i]e hine ne dorston [=ae]ni[.g] thing [=a]scian_ (they
durst not ask him anything); _w[=e] magon [=e]ow r[=ae]d [.g]e.l[=ae]ran_
(we can teach you a plan).

The accusative is used adverbially to express duration of time: _hw[=y]
stande [.g][=e] h[=e]r ealne dae[.g] [=i]dle?_ (why stand ye here all the
day idle?)

Dative. The dative in Old E. is of two kinds, (1) the dative proper, and
(2) the instrumental dative, interchanging with the regular instrumental.
It is not always easy to separate the two.

(1) The dative proper usually designates personal relations, and is
frequently used with verbs, together with an accusative (generally of the
thing). The dative is also used with adjectives. It is used not only with
verbs of _giving_, &c., as in _h[=e] sealde [=ae]lcum [=a]nne p[e,]ning_
(he gave each a penny); _addressing_, as in _ic [=e]ow s[e,][.c][.g]e_ (I
say to you), _h[=e] thancode his Dryhtne_ (he thanked his Lord); but also
with many verbs of _benefiting_, _influencing_, &c., as in _ne d[=o] ic
th[=e] n[=a]nne t[=e]onan_ (I do thee no injury), _h[=i]e noldon him
l[=i]efan_ (they would not allow {41} them to do so); _th[=ae]m r[=e]thum
st[=i]erde_ (restrained the cruel ones). Also in looser constructions, to
denote the person indirectly affected, benefited, &c., as in _by[.c][.g]ath
[=e]ow ele_ (buy for yourselves oil). Note especially the following idiom:
_h[=i]e [.g]e.s[=o]hton Bretene Brettum t[=o] fultume_ (they came to
Britain as a help to the Britains--to help them); _h[=e] clipode Cr[=i]st
him t[=o] fultume_ (he called Christ to his help).

The dative is also used with adjectives of _nearness_, _likeness_,
&c.:--_[=E]admund cyning clipode [=a]nne biscop the him [.g]e.h[e,]ndost
waes_ (King Edmund summoned a bishop who was nearest at hand to him);
_heofona r[=i][.c]e is [.g]e.l[=i]c th[=ae]m mangere the s[=o]hte thaet
g[=o]de m[e,]regrot_ (the kingdom of the heavens is like the merchant who
sought the good pearl).

(2) The instrumental dative is used to denote the _instrument_ and _manner_
of an action: _h[=e] [.g]e.[e,]ndode yflum d[=e]athe_ (he ended with an
evil death). Hence its use to form adverbs, as in _s[.c][=e]afm[=ae]lum_
(sheafwise). It also signifies time when:--_thrim [.g][=e]arum [=ae]r
th[=ae]m the h[=e] forth.f[=e]rde_ (three years before he died), which is
also expressed by the instrumental itself:--_s[=e]o wolde [e,]fsian
[=ae]lce [.g][=e]are thone sanct_ (she used to cut the saint's hair every
year); _th[=y] f[=e]orthan [.g][=e]are his r[=i][.c]es_ (in the fourth year
of his reign). A past participle with a noun in the instrumental dative is
used like the ablative absolute in Latin: _Hubba be.l[=a]f on
Northhymbra-lande, [.g]e.wunnenum si[.g]e mid waelhr[=e]ownesse_ (H.
remained in Northumbria, victory having been won with cruelty).

Genitive. The genitive is often used in a partitive sense:--_his f[=e]onda
sum_ (one of his enemies); _hiera f[=i]f w[=ae]ron dysi[.g]e_ (five of them
were foolish). Hence it is generally used with _fela_, as in _fela wundra_
(many miracles); also with numerals when used as substantives (p. 18).

The genitive is often used like an accusative to denote the object of
various emotions and mental states, such as {42} _joy_, _desire_,
_remembering_:--_h[=i]e thaes fae[.g]nodon sw[=i]the_ (they rejoiced at it
greatly); _m[=e] l[=e]ofre w[=ae]re thaet ic on [.g]e.feohte f[=e]olle with
th[=ae]m the m[=i]n folc m[=o]ste hiera eardes br[=u]can_ (it would be
pleasanter to me to fall in fight that my people might enjoy (possess)
their country); _ic thaes [.g]e.wilni[.g]e_ (I desire that); _[.g]if h[=e]
his f[=e]ores r[=o]hte_ (if he cared about his life); _h[=e] waes thaes
H[=ae]lendes [.g]e.myndi[.g]_ (he was mindful of--he remembered the
Saviour).

Some of these verbs, such as _biddan_ (ask), take an accusative of the
person and a genitive of the thing:--_h[=e] hine hl[=a]fes bitt_ (he asks
him for bread).

Verbs of _depriving_, _restraining_, &c., have the same construction:--_nis
Angel-cynn be.d[=ae]led Dryhtnes h[=a]lgena_ (England is not deprived of
the Lord's saints).

Some verbs of _giving_, &c., take a genitive of the thing and a dative of
the person:--_him waes of.togen [=ae]lces f[=o]dan_ (they were deprived of
all food).

The genitive is often used to _define_ an adjective or noun:--_th[=u] eart
wierthe sl[e,][.g]es_ (thou art worthy of death); _on th[=ae]m [.g][=e]are
the Aelfred aetheling [=a]n and tw[e,]nti[.g] [.g][=e]ara waes_ (in the
year when Prince Alfred was twenty-one).

CONCORD.

Adjectives agree with their nouns not only when used attributively (g[=o]de
m[e,]nn), but also when the adjective follows the noun, either
predicatively or in apposition:--_th[=a] m[e,]nn sind g[=o]de_; _h[=e]
[.g]e.seah [=o]thre [=i]dle standan_ (he saw others standing idle); _h[=i]e
c[=o]mon mid langum s[.c]ipum, n[=a] manigum_ (they came with long ships,
not many).

APPOSITION.

In such expressions as 'the island of Britain,' the second noun is not put
in the genitive, but the two are simply put in {43} apposition, both being
declined separately:--_Breten [=i]e[.g]land, on Bretene (th[=ae]m)
[=i]e[.g]lande_. In 'king Alfred,' &c., the proper name is put first in the
same way:--_Aelfred aetheling_ (prince Alfred); _on Aethelredes cyninges
dae[.g]e_ (in the days of king Aethelred).

There is a similar apposition with the adjective _sum_ followed by a noun
or pronoun, as in _sume th[=a] m[e,]nn_ (some of the men); _th[=a] th[=a]
h[=e] s[=e]ow, sumu h[=i]e f[=e]ollon with we[.g]_ (while he sowed, some of
them [the seeds] fell by the road). Sometimes the pronoun precedes, as in
_th[=a] b[=ae]don h[=i]e sume thaet Samson m[=o]ste him macian sum gamen_
(then some of them asked that Samson might make some sport for them).

Another kind of apposition occurs in instances like the following, where we
have an adjective agreeing with a following noun, and denoting a part of
it:--_h[=i]e [.g]e.s[=ae]ton s[=u]thanwearde Bretene [=ae]rest_ (they
occupied the south of Britain first); _s[=u]thanweard hit_ (= thaet land)
_haefdon Peohtas_ (the Picts had the south part of it).

ADJECTIVES.

The weak forms are used:

(1) after the definite article:--_se aethela cyning_ (the noble king);
_thaes aethelan cyninges_, _thaet g[=o]de m[e,]regrot_, _th[=a] g[=o]dan
m[e,]regrotu_.

(2) after _this_:--_th[=a]s earman landl[=e]ode_ (these poor people,
_pl._); _thes h[=a]lga cyning_ (this holy king), _thisses h[=a]lgan
cyninges_.

(3) occasionally after other demonstrative and indefinite adjectives, and
often after possessive pronouns:--_th[=i]ne d[=i]eglan gold-hordas_ (thy
hidden treasures).

(4) in the vocative:--_th[=u] yfla th[=e]ow and sl[=a]wa!_ (thou bad and
slothful servant); _[=e]al[=a] th[=u] l[=e]ofa cyning!_ (oh, thou dear
king).

Note that _[=o]ther_ always keeps the strong form: _th[=a] [=o]thru
d[=e]or_ (the other wild beasts). So also do the possessive pronouns: {44}
_th[=a]s m[=i]n word_ (these my words). _[=A]n_ in the sense of 'one' keeps
the strong form to distinguish it from the weak _[=a]na_ = 'alone': _thaet
[=a]n d[=e]orwierthe m[e,]regrot_ (the one precious pearl).

ARTICLES.

The definite article is omitted as in Modern English before names such as
_God_, and also before _Dryhten_ (the Lord), _D[=e]ofol_ (the Devil),
although _se D[=e]ofol_ also occurs, and names of nations:--_Bretta cyning_
(king of the Britons).

It is omitted in many prepositional combinations, not only in those where
it is omitted in Modern English also, as in _si[.g]efaest on s[=ae] and on
lande_ (victorious on sea and on land), but also in many others:
_[.g]ew[e,]nde t[=o] wuda on.[.g][=e]an_ (went back to the wood); _se
floth[e,]re f[=e]rde eft t[=o] s[.c]ipe_ (the army of pirates went back to
their ships); _h[=e] f[=e]ng t[=o] r[=i][.c]e_ (he took the
government--came to the throne).

The definite article is, on the other hand, sometimes used where it would
not be in Modern E., as in _se mann_ = 'man' (men in general).

The indefinite article is often not expressed at all:--_thaet dyde unhold
mann_ (an enemy did that); _h[=e] be.stealcode on land sw[=a] sw[=a] wulf_
(he stole to land like a wolf). Or it is expressed by _sum_: _on th[=ae]m
lande waes sum mann, L[=e]ofr[=i][.c] [.g]e.h[=a]ten_ (in that country was
a man called L.). Or by _[=a]n_, as in Modern English_:--[=a]n wulf wearth
[=a].s[e,]nd t[=o] be.w[e,]rienne thaet h[=e]afod with th[=a] [=o]thru
d[=e]or_ (a wolf was sent to protect the head against the other wild
beasts).

PRONOUNS.

_Hwaet_ is used interrogatively of persons where we should use
'who':--_h[=e] nyste hwaet h[=i]e w[=ae]ron_ (he did not know who they
were). {45}

VERBS.

NUMBER.

After _[=ae]lc th[=a]ra the_ (each of-those-who) the verb is put in the
sing., agreeing not with _th[=a]ra the_ but with _[=ae]lc_:--_[=ae]lc
th[=a]ra the th[=a]s m[=i]n word [.g]e.h[=i]erth_ (each of those who hear
these my words).

When _thaet_ or _this_ is connected with a plural predicate by means of the
verb 'to be,' the verb is put in the plural:--_thaet w[=ae]ron th[=a]
[=ae]restan s[.c]ipu D[e,]niscra manna the Angel-cynnes land
[.g]e.s[=o]hton_ (those were the first ships of Danish men which came to
the land of the English race).

Impersonal verbs take an accusative of the person, sometimes also with a
genitive of the thing.

Others, such as _thyn[.c]an_ (appear), take a dative of the person:--_waes
him [.g]e.th[=u]ht thaet h[=i]e be.h[=y]dden thaet h[=e]afod_ (they thought
they (the Danes) had hidden the head).

TENSES.

There being no future inflection in Old E., the present is used
instead:--_ne [=a].b[=y]hth n[=ae]fre E[=a]dmund Hinguare_ (Edmund will
never submit to H.); _g[=a] [.g][=e] on m[=i]nne w[=i]n[.g]eard, and ic
s[e,]lle [=e]ow thaet riht bith_ (go ye into my vineyard, and I will give
you what is right). As we see in this example, there is a tendency to use
_b[=e]on_ in a future sense. Another example is _[.g]if ic b[=e]o
[.g]e.bunden mid seofon r[=a]pum, s[=o]na ic b[=e]o [.g]e.wield_ (if I am
bound with seven ropes, I shall at once be overcome). The future is
sometimes expressed by _will_ and _shall_, as in Modern English, though
generally with a sense of volition with the one, and of necessity with the
other, the idea of simple futurity coming out most clearly in the
preterites _wolde_ and _scolde_:--

_H[=e] [.g]e.l[=ae]hte [=a]ne l[=e]on the hine [=a].b[=i]tan wolde_ (he
seized a lion {46} that was going to devour him); _h[=i]e w[=e]ndon thaet
h[=i]e scolden m[=a]re on.f[=o]n_ (they expected to receive more).

The preterite has the meaning of the modern

(1) Preterite and imperfect:--_se s[=a]were [=u]t [=e]ode his s[=ae]d t[=o]
s[=a]wenne, and th[=a] th[=a] h[=e] s[=e]ow ..._ (the sower _went_ out to
sow his seed, and while he _was sowing_ ...).

(2) Perfect:--_h[=e]r is m[=i]n cnapa, thone ic [.g]e[.c][=e]as_ (here is
my servant, whom I have chosen);--_[=u]re cyning c[=o]m n[=u] h[=e]r t[=o]
lande_ (our king has just landed here).

(3) Pluperfect:--_th[=a] th[=a] [.g]e.c[=o]mon the ymb th[=a] [e,]ndlyftan
t[=i]d c[=o]mon_ (when those came who had come at the eleventh hour).

Periphrastic tenses are sometimes formed, as in Modern E., by _haebbe_ and
_haefde_ with the past participles, and often have the meanings of the
modern perfect and pluperfect respectively, as in _n[=u] ic haebbe
[.g]estr[=i]ened [=o]thru tw[=a] pund_ (now I have gained two other
pounds), but even the pluperfect often has the sense of a simple preterite.
The participle is undeclinable in the later language, but originally it was
declined, being really an adjective in apposition to the noun or pronoun
governed by _habban_: _h[=i]e haefdon hiera cyning [=a].worpenne_ (they had
deposed their king).

The pluperfect sense is often indicated by the addition of the adverb
_[=ae]r_ (before):--_his sw[=e]ora, the [=ae]r waes for.slae[.g]en_ (his
neck, which had been cut through).

The periphrastic forms of intransitive verbs are formed with
_wesan_:--_siththan h[=i]e [=a].farene w[=ae]ron_ (after they had gone
away). Here the participle always agrees with the noun or pronoun with
which it is connected.

The periphrases with the present participle have no distinctive meanings of
duration, &c.:--_[=a]n mann waes eardiende on Israh[=e]la th[=e]ode,
Manu[=e] [.g]e.h[=a]ten_ (a man dwelt in Israel called Manue). {47}

PASSIVE.

The passive is formed with _wesan_ or _weorthan_ with the past participle.
These forms are very vague in meaning, and the distinction between the two
auxiliaries is not clearly marked, but _wesan_ appears to indicate a state,
_weorthan_ an action.

_wearth [.g]e.lufod_ is generally preterite or perfect in meaning: _[=a]n
wulf wearth [=a].s[e,]nd_ (a wolf was sent); _m[=i]ne l[=e]ofe the[.g]nas,
the on hiera b[e,]ddum wurdon of.slae[.g]ene_ (my beloved thanes, who have
been killed in their beds).

_waes [.g]e.lufod_, indicating a state, is naturally pluperfect in
meaning:--_se [=ae]rendraca sae[.g]de his hl[=a]forde h[=u] him
[.g]e.andwyrd waes_ (the messenger told his lord how he had been answered).

SUBJUNCTIVE.

The subjunctive states something not as a fact, as in the indicative, but
merely as an object of thought. Hence it is used to express wish,
conditions, doubt, &c.

A. In principal sentences.

_Wish_ and _command_ (often nearly equivalent to the imperative):--_thaes
him s[=i]e wuldor and lof [=a] b[=u]tan [e,]nde_ (therefore let there be to
him praise and glory ever without end); _ne h[=e] ealu ne drince n[=ae]fre
oththe w[=i]n_ (nor shall he ever drink ale or wine).

B. In dependent sentences.

The chief cases are the following:--

(1) In _indirect narrative_ and _question_: _s[=e]o cw[=e]n sae[.g]de thaet
hiere n[=ae]re be healfum d[=ae]le [.g]e.sae[.g]d be Salomones m[=ae]rtho_
(the queen said that she had not been told about Solomon's glory by half);
_ic [=a]sci[.g]e hw[=ae]r s[=e]o offrung s[=i]e_ (I ask where the offering
is); _m[e,]nn woldon s[.c][=e]awian h[=u] h[=e] l[=ae][.g]e_ (men {48}
wished to see how he lay). When the statement in the indirect narration is
perfectly certain in itself, and not merely accepted on the authority of
the speaker, it is put in the indicative:--_h[=e] hiere sae[.g]de on
hw[=ae]m his miht waes_ (he told her what his strength consisted in).

(2) After verbs of _desiring_ and _commanding_:--

_thaes ic [.g]e.wilni[.g]e and [.g]e.wys[.c]e mid m[=o]de thaet ic [=a]na
ne be.l[=i]fe aefter m[=i]num l[=e]ofum the[.g]num_ (that I desire and wish
with heart that I may not remain alone after my dear thanes).

(3) To express _purpose_:--_th[=y] l[=ae]s [.g][=e] thone hw[=ae]te
[=a].wyrtwalien_ (lest ye root up the wheat);--_Dryhten [=a]s.t[=a]g
nither, t[=o] b[=ae]m thaet h[=e] [.g]e.s[=a]we th[=a] burg_ (the Lord
descended, in order that he might see the city).

(4) To express _result_:--_th[=u] naefst th[=a] mihte thaet th[=u] mae[.g]e
him with.standan_ (thou hast not the power that thou canst withstand him).

(5) To express _hypothetical comparison_ (as if):--_se wulf folgode forth
mid th[=ae]m h[=e]afde, swelce h[=e] tam w[=ae]re_ (the wolf followed on
with the head, as if he were tame); _h[=e] [.g]e.l[=ae]hte [=a]ne l[=e]on,
and t[=o].brae[.g]d h[=i]e t[=o] sty[.c][.c]um, swelce h[=e] t[=o].t[=ae]re
ti[.c][.c]en_ (he seized a lion and tore her to pieces, as if he were
rending a kid).

(6) In _conditional_ clauses, generally with _[.g]if_ or _b[=u]tan_, and in
_concessive_ clauses with _th[=e]ah_, _th[=e]ah the_:--_God w[=a]t thaet ic
nyle [=a].b[=u]gan fram his b[=i]g[e,]ngum [=ae]fre, swelte ic, libbe ic_
(God knows that I will not swerve from his worship ever, whether I die or
live); _th[=a]s flotm[e,]nn cumath, and th[=e] cwicne [.g]e.bindath,
b[=u]tan th[=u] mid fl[=e]ame th[=i]num f[=e]ore [.g]e.beorge_ (these
pirates will come and bind thee alive, unless thou savest thy life with
flight); _God hielt [=E]admund h[=a]lne his l[=i]chaman oth thone mi[.c]lan
dae[.g], th[=e]ah the h[=e] on moldan c[=o]me_ (God will keep Edmund {49}
with his body whole until the great day, although he has come to
earth--been buried). Sometimes the idea of 'if' must be got from the
context:--_clipiath t[=o] thissum [.g]ieftum sw[=a] hwelce sw[=a] [.g][=e]
[.g]e.m[=e]ten_ (summon to this wedding whomsoever ye meet, = _if_ ye meet
any one); _h[=i]e be.h[=e]ton hiere s[.c]eattas with th[=ae]m the h[=e]o
be.swice Samson_ (they promised her money in consideration of her betraying
Samson, = if she would...).

When the statement is assumed as unreal, instead of merely hypothetical, as
in the above instances, both clauses are put in the subjunctive, the
preterite being substituted for the present, as in Modern English also,
where _if I were_ ... implies _I am not_.... The modern distinction between
_if I were_ and _if I had been_, the former corresponding to the present
indicative _I am not_, the latter to the preterite _I was not_, is not made
in Old English, which uses _gif ic w[=ae]re_ in both instances. Sometimes
the 'if'-clause has to be supplied in thought:--_m[=e] l[=e]ofre w[=ae]re
thaet ic on [.g]e.feohte f[=e]olle with th[=ae]m the m[=i]n folc m[=o]ste
hiera eardes br[=u]can_ (I would rather fall in fight that my people might
possess their country), where we must supply some such clause as _[.g]if
hit sw[=a] b[=e]on mihte_ (if it might be so--if it were possible to save
my people by my death).

(7) In clauses dependant on a _negative sentence_:--_nis n[=a]n thing the
his mihte with.stande_ (there is nothing that resists his might). Sometimes
the negation must be gathered from the context, as in _se h[=a]lga is
m[=ae]rra thonne m[e,]nn mae[.g]en [=a].sm[=e]an_ (the saint is more
illustrious than men can conceive = the saint is so illustrious that no men
can conceive it).

(8) In other cases, to express uncertainty, futurity, &c.: _th[=i]n
r[=i][.c]e [.g]e.w[=i]tt fram th[=e], oth thaet th[=u] wite thaet God
[.g]e.wielt manna r[=i][.c]a_ (thy kingdom shall depart from thee, till
thou knowest that God rules the kingdoms of men); _uton_ {50} _weorthian
[=u]rne naman, [=ae]r th[=ae]m the w[=e] s[=i]en t[=o].d[=ae]lde [.g]eond
ealle eorthan!_ (let us make our name famous, before we are dispersed over
the earth).

The preterite subjunctive is often expressed by _should_ and _would_ with
an infinitive, as in Modern English.

_Scolde_ is used after verbs of _desiring_, _requesting_ and
_commanding_:--_biddende thone Aelmihtigan thaet h[=e] him [=a]rian scolde_
(praying the Almighty to have mercy on him). In the following example the
verb of commanding is understood from the noun _[=ae]rende_:--_h[=e]
s[e,]nde t[=o] thaem cyninge b[=e]otlic [=ae]rende, thaet h[=e]
[=a].b[=u]gan scolde t[=o] his mannr[=ae]denne, [.g]if h[=e] his f[=e]ores
r[=o]hte_ (he sent to the king an arrogant message, that he was to turn to
his allegiance, if he cared about his life).

_Wolde_ is used after verbs of _purpose_:--_se cyning [=e]ode inn thaet he
wolde [.g]e.s[=e]on th[=a] the th[=ae]r s[=ae]ton_ (the king went in to see
those who were sitting there).

INFINITIVE.

After verbs of commanding the infinitive often seems to have a passive
sense:--_h[=i]e h[=e]ton him s[e,]ndan m[=a]ran fultum_ (they ordered that
more forces should be sent to them). So also after verbs of hearing,
&c.:--_thaet m[=ae]ste wael the w[=e] s[e,][.c][.g]an h[=i]erdon_ (the
greatest slaughter we have heard told of). In such cases an indefinite
pronoun has been omitted: 'ordered them to send ...' etc.

GERUND.

The gerund is used--

(1) to express purpose:--_[=u]t [=e]ode se s[=a]were his s[=ae]d t[=o]
s[=a]wenne_ (the sower went forth to sow his seed).

(2) it defines or determines an adjective (adverb or noun): _hit is
scandlic ymb swelc t[=o] sprecenne_ (it is shameful to speak of such
things). {51}

PREPOSITIONS.

Some prepositions govern the accusative, such as _thurh_ (through), _ymbe_
(about); some the dative (and instrumental), such as _aefter_ (after),
_[=ae]r_ (before), _aet_ (at), _be_ (by), _binnan_ (within), _b[=u]tan_
(without), _for_ (for), _fram_ (from), _of_ (of), _t[=o]_ (to).

Some govern both accusative and dative, such as _ofer_ (over), _on_ (on,
in), _under_ (under). The general rule is that when motion is implied they
take the accusative, when rest is implied, the dative. Thus _on_ with the
accusative signifies 'into,' with the dative 'in.' But this rule is not
strictly followed, and we often find the accusative used with verbs of
rest, as in _h[=e] his h[=u]s [.g]e.timbrode ofer st[=a]n_ (he built his
house on a rock), and conversely, the dative with verbs of motion, as in
_h[=i]e f[=e]ollon on st[=ae]nihte_ (they fell on stony ground).

As regards the use and meaning of the prepositions, it must be noticed that
_in_ is very seldom used, its place being supplied by _on_, the meaning
'on' being in its turn often expressed by _ofer_, as in the passage just
quoted.

When a thing is referred to, _th[=ae]r_ is substituted for _hit_, the
preposition being joined on to the _th[=ae]r_, so that, for instance,
_th[=ae]r-t[=o]_ corresponds to _t[=o] him_; _h[=i]e l[=ae]ddon thone
cyning t[=o] [=a]num tr[=e]owe, and t[=i]e[.g]don hine th[=ae]r-t[=o]_
(they led the king to a tree, and tied him to it). So also
_h[=e]r-be[=e]astan_ is equivalent to 'east of this (country).'

Prepositions sometimes follow, instead of preceding the words they modify,
sometimes with other words intervening: _h[=i]e scuton mid gafelocum him
t[=o]_ (they shot at him with missiles); _h[=i]e cw[=ae]don him
be.tw[=e]onan_ (they said among themselves); _th[=ae]m Aelmihtigan t[=o]
lofe, the h[=i]e on [.g]e.l[=i]efdon_ (to the praise of the Almighty, in
whom they believed), where _on_ {52} refers to the indeclinable _the_. So
also in _thaet h[=u]s the h[=e] inne wunode_ (the house he dwelt in).

Where the noun modified by such a preposition is not expressed, the
preposition becomes an adverb: _se cyning s[e,]nde his h[e,]re t[=o], and
for.dyde th[=a] mannslagan_ (the king sent his army to the place, and
destroyed the murderers).

NEGATION.

The negative particle is _ne_, which drops its _e_ before some common verbs
and pronouns, as in _nis_ = _ne is_, _n[=a]n_ = _ne [=a]n_. The negative
particle is prefixed to every finite verb in a sentence, and to all the
words besides which admit the contracted forms:--_t[=o].cw[=i]esed hr[=e]od
h[=e] ne for.br[=i]ett_ (he breaks not the bruised reed), _hit n[=a] ne
f[=e]oll_ (it did not fall); _n[=a]n mann nyste n[=a]n thing_ (no man knew
anything). So also with _ne ... ne_ = 'neither ... nor': _ne fl[=i]tt h[=e]
ne h[=e] ne hr[=i]emth_ (he neither disputes nor cries out).

CORRELATION.

Correlation is often more fully expressed in Old than in Modern English, as
in _th[=a] th[=a] m[e,]nn sl[=e]pon, th[=a] c[=o]m his f[=e]onda sum_ =
'_when_ the men slept, _then_ came one of his enemies.' In _th[=a] th[=a]_
= 'when' the two correlatives are brought immediately together:--_th[=a]
th[=a] h[=e] s[=e]ow, sumu h[=i]e f[=e]ollon with we[.g]_ = 'then when he
sowed, some of them fell by the road.' In the following example the
conjunction _thaet_ is correlative with the pronoun _thaet_:--_thaes ic
[.g]e.wilni[.g]e thaet ic [=a]na ne be.l[=i]fe aefter m[=i]num l[=e]ofum
the[.g]num_--'that I desire, that I may not remain alone after my dear
thanes.' Sometimes a word is used to include both the demonstrative and the
relative meaning:--_h[=e] [.g]e.br[=o]hte hine th[=ae]r h[=e] hine [=ae]r
[.g]e.nam_ (he brought him to the place where he took him from). {53}

WORD-ORDER.

The Old English word-order resembles that of German in many respects,
though it is not so strict, thus:--

The verb comes before its nominative when the sentence is headed by an
adverb or adverbial group, or when the object or predicate is put at the
head of the sentence:--_th[=a] cwaeth se cyning_ (then said the king);
_[=ae]rest w[=ae]ron b[=u]end thisses landes Brettas_ (at first the Britons
were the inhabitants of this country); _on his dagum c[=o]mon [=ae]rest
thr[=e]o s[.c]ipu_ (in his days three ships first came); _thaet b[=ae]ron
olfendas_ (camels carried it); _m[=ae]re is se God the Dani[=e]l on
be.l[=i]efth_ (great is the God that Daniel believes in).

The infinite often comes at the end of the sentence; _w[=e] magon [=e]ow
r[=ae]d [.g]e.l[=ae]ran_ (we can teach you a plan).

The finite verb often comes at the end in dependent sentences, an auxiliary
verb often coming after an infinitive or participle; _thaet w[=ae]ron
th[=a] [=ae]restan s[.c]ipu D[e,]niscra manna the Angel-cynnes land
[.g]e.s[=o]hton_ (those were the first ships of Danish men which came to
the land of the English race); _thaet m[=ae]ste wael the w[=e]
s[e,][.c][.g]an h[=i]erdon oth thisne andweardan dae[.g]_ (the greatest
slaughter that we have heard tell of up to this present day); _thaet h[=i]e
thone Godes mann [=a].bitan scolden_ (in order that they should devour the
man of God).

There is a tendency to put the verb at the end in principal sentences also,
or, at least, to bring it near the end: _hiene man of.sl[=o]g_ (they killed
him); _h[=i]e th[=ae]r si[.g]e n[=a]mon_ (they got the victory there).

       *       *       *       *       *

{54}

GENERAL TABLE OF ENDINGS.

                        NOUNS.
             STRONG.             WEAK.
            _M._   _N._   _F._       _M._   _N._   _F._
    _Sg. N._ --     --     -(u)       -a     -e     -e
        _A._ --     --     -(e)       -an    -e     -an
        _D._ -e     -e     -e         -an    -an    -an
        _G._ -es    -es    -e         -an    -an    -an
                                      \______  ______/
                                             \/
    _Pl. N._ -as    -(u)   -a                -an
        _D._ -um    -um    -um               -um
        _G._ -a     -a     -(en)a            -ena

                          ADJECTIVES.
    _Sg. N._ --     --     -(u)       -a     -e     -e
        _A._ -ne    --     -(e)       -an    -e     -an
        _D._ -um    -um    -re        -an    -an    -an
        _G._ -es    -es    -re        -an    -an    -an
        _I._ -e     -e    (-re)      (-an    -an    -an)
    _Pl. N._ -e     -(u)   -e         \______  ______/
             \______  ______/                \/
                    \/                       -an
        _D._        -um                      -um
        _G._        -ra                      -ra



                               VERBS.
                   PRESENT.                       PRETERITE.
            _Indic._       _Subj._          _Indic._      _Subj._
    _Sg._ 1. -e;      -i[.g]e -(i[.g])e    - ;  -de      -e;  -de
          2. -(e)st;  -ast    -(i[.g])e    -e;  -dest    -e;  -de
          3. -(e)th;  -ath    -(i[.g])e    - ;  -de      -e;  -de
    _Pl._    -ath;    -iath   -(i)en       -on; -don     -en; -den
         _Imper. sg._ -(a); _pl._ -(i)ath.   _Infin._ -(i)an.
  _Partic. pres._ -(i)ende; _pret._ -en, -ed, -od.   _Ger._ (i)enne.

       *       *       *       *       *


{55}

TEXTS.

I.

SENTENCES.

  [=A]n on-[.g]inn is ealra thinga, thaet is God ael-mihti[.g]. Se
  [.g]e.l[=e]afa the bith b[=u]tan g[=o]dum weorcum, s[=e] is d[=e]ad; this
      sind
  th[=a]ra apostola word. Ic eom g[=o]d hierde: se g[=o]da hierde
  s[e,]lth his [=a]gen l[=i]f for his s[.c][=e]apum. [=U]re [=A].l[=i]esend
      is se g[=o]da
  hierde, and w[=e] cr[=i]stene m[e,]nn sind his s[.c]eap. Se m[=o]na his
      5
  leoht ne s[e,]lth, and steorran of heofone feallath. Sw[=a] sw[=a]
  waeter [=a].dw[=ae]s[.c]th f[=y]r, sw[=a] [=a].dw[=ae]s[.c]th s[=e]o
      aelmesse synna.

  Ealle [.g]e.s[.c]eafta, heofonas and [e,]n[.g]las, sunnan and m[=o]nan,
  steorran and eorthan, eall n[=i]etenu and ealle fuglas, s[=ae] and
  ealle fiscas God [.g]e.sc[=o]p and [.g]e.worhte on siex dagum; and  10
  on th[=ae]m seofothan dae[.g]e h[=e] [.g]e.[e,]ndode his weorc; and h[=e]
  be.h[=e]old th[=a] eall his weorc the h[=e] [.g]e.worhte, and h[=i]e
      w[=ae]ron
  eall sw[=i]the g[=o]d. H[=e] f[=e]rde [.g]eond manigu land, bodiende
  Godes [.g]e.l[=e]afan. H[=e] for.l[=e]t eall woruld-thing. Se cyning
  be.b[=e]ad thaet man scolde ofer eall Angel-cynn s[.c]ipu wyr[.c]an;  15
  and hiera waes sw[=a] fela sw[=a] n[=ae]fre [=ae]r ne waes on n[=a]nes
  cyninges dae[.g]e. Se cyning h[=e]t of.sl[=e]an ealle th[=a] D[e,]niscan
  m[e,]nn the on Angel-cynne w[=ae]ron.

  Th[=a] ne mihton h[=i]e him n[=a]n word and-swarian, ne n[=a]n
  mann ne dorste hine n[=a]n thing m[=a]re [=a]scian. H[=i]e fuhton  20
  {56}
  on th[=a] burg ealne dae[.g], and th[=o]hton thaet h[=i]e h[=i]e scolden
  [=a].brecan. Se eorl [.g]e.w[e,]nde west t[=o] [=I]r-lande, and waes
      th[=ae]r
  ealne thone winter. Aethelred cyning and Aelfred his br[=o]thor
  fuhton with ealne thone h[e,]re on Aesces-d[=u]ne.

  Se mann is [=e][.c]e on [=a]num d[=ae]le, thaet is, on th[=ae]re
      s[=a]wle;  25
  h[=e]o ne [.g]e.[e,]ndath n[=ae]fre. [.G]if se biscop d[=e]th be his
      [=a]gnum
  willan, and wile bindan thone un-scyldigan, and thone scyldigan
  [=a].l[=i]esan, thonne for.l[=i]est h[=e] th[=a] miht the him God
  for.[.g]eaf. Th[=e]od winth on.[.g][=e]an th[=e]ode, and r[=i][.c]e
      on.[.g][=e]an r[=i][.c]e.
  Ealle m[e,]nn [=e]ow hatiath for m[=i]num naman. H[=e] [.g]e.worhte  30
  fela wundra binnan th[=ae]m fierste the h[=e] biscop waes. H[=e]
  [.g]e.h[=ae]lde sum w[=i]f mid h[=a]lgum waetre. Se cyning wearth
  of.slae[.g]en fram his [=a]gnum folce. On th[=ae]m ilcan [.g][=e]are waes
  se mi[.c]la hungor [.g]eond Angel-cynn. Se maesse-pr[=e]ost [=a]scath
  thaet [.c]ild, and cwithth: 'With.saecst th[=u] d[=e]ofle?' Thonne
      andwyrt  35
  se god-faeder, and cwithth: 'Ic with.sace d[=e]ofle.' God
  aelmihtiga, [.g]e.miltsa m[=e] synn-fullum! Aethelred cyning c[=o]m
  h[=a]m t[=o] his [=a]genre th[=e]ode, and h[=e] glaedl[=i]ce fram him
      eallum
  on.fangen wearth.

  Cr[=i]st, [=u]re Dryhten, be.b[=e]ad his leornung-cnihtum thaet  40
  h[=i]e scolden t[=ae][.c]an eallum th[=e]odum th[=a] thing th[=a] h[=e]
      self him
  t[=ae]hte. [.G]if [.g][=e] for.[.g]iefath mannum hiera synna, thonne
      for.giefth
  [=e]ower se heofonlica Faeder [=e]owre synna. Ne mae[.g] n[=a]n
  mann tw[=ae]m hl[=a]fordum th[=e]owian: oththe h[=e] [=a]nne hatath and
  [=o]therne lufath, oththe h[=e] bith [=a]num [.g]e.h[=i]ersum and
      [=o]thrum un[.g]eh[=i]ersum.  45

  Se cyning nam thaes eorles sunu mid him t[=o] [E,]n[.g]la-lande.
  M[e,]nn be.h[=o]fiath g[=o]dre l[=a]re on thissum t[=i]man, the is
      [.g]e.[e,]ndung
  thisse worulde. Se l[=i]chama, the is th[=ae]re s[=a]wle r[=e]af,
      andb[=i]dath
  thaes mi[.c]lan d[=o]mes; and th[=e]ah h[=e] b[=e]o t[=o] d[=u]ste
      for.molsnod,  50
  {57}
  God hine [=a].r[=ae]rth, and [.g]e.bringth t[=o].gaedre s[=a]wle and
  l[=i]chaman t[=o] th[=ae]m [=e][.c]an l[=i]fe. Hwelc faeder wile
      s[e,]llan his
  [.c]ilde st[=a]n, [.g]if hit hine hl[=a]fes bitt? [=A].[.g]iefath
      th[=ae]m c[=a]sere th[=a]
  thing the thaes c[=a]seres sind, and Gode th[=a] thing the Godes sind.
  S[=e]o s[=a]wol and-b[=i]dath thaes [=e][.c]an [=ae]ristes.   55

  H[=e] waes cyning ofer eall [E,]n[.g]la-land tw[e,]nti[.g] wintra. God
  aelmihti[.g] is ealra cyninga cyning, and ealra hl[=a]forda hl[=a]ford.
  D[=e]ofol is ealra un-riht-w[=i]sra manna h[=e]afod, and th[=a]
  yflan m[e,]nn sind his limu. Synnfulra manna d[=e]ath is yfel and
  earmlic, for th[=ae]m the h[=i]e farath of thissum scortan l[=i]fe t[=o]
      [=e][.c]um  60
  w[=i]tum. H[=u] fela hl[=a]fa haebbe [.g][=e]? Seofon, and f[=e]a fisca.
  Ne [.g]e.wilna th[=u] [=o]thres mannes [=ae]hta!

  On th[=ae]m landum eardodon [E,]n[.g]le, [=ae]r th[=ae]m the h[=i]e hider
      on
  land c[=o]mon. H[=i]e fuhton on th[=a] burg ealne dae[.g], ac h[=i]e ne
  mihton h[=i]e [=a].brecan. Th[=a] [=e]odon h[=i]e t[=o] hiera s[.c]ipum.
      Th[=ae]r  65
  b[=e]oth sw[=i]the mani[.g]e byri[.g] on th[=ae]m lande, and on [=ae]lcre
      byri[.g]
  bith cyning.

  God cwaeth t[=o] No[=e]: 'Ic wile for.d[=o]n eall mann-cynn mid
  waetre for hiera synnum, ac ic wile [.g]e.healdan th[=e], and th[=i]n
  w[=i]f, and th[=i]ne thr[=i]e suna.' [=A]n mann haefde tw[=e][.g]en suna;
      th[=a]  70
  cwaeth h[=e] t[=o] th[=ae]m ieldran: 'g[=a] and wyr[.c] t[=o].dae[.g] on
      m[=i]num
  w[=i]n-[.g]earde.' Th[=a] cwaeth h[=e]: 'ic nyle:' [=e]ode th[=e]ah
      siththan t[=o]
  th[=ae]m w[=i]n[.g]earde. H[=e] dyde his faeder willan. Se pr[=e]ost
  cwaeth t[=o] th[=ae]m folce: 'Ic [=e]ow bl[=e]tsi[.g]e on naman thaes
      Faeder,
  thaes Suna, and thaes H[=a]lgan G[=a]stes.' [=A]ra th[=i]num faeder and
      75
  th[=i]nre m[=e]der! Sum w[=i]f c[=o]m t[=o] Cr[=i]ste, and baed for hiere
  dehter. S[=e]o dohtor wearth [.g]e.h[=ae]led thurh [.g]e.l[=e]afan
      th[=ae]re
  m[=o]dor.

  B[=e]oth [.g]e.myndi[.g]e th[=a]ra tw[=e][.g]ra worda the Dryhten cwaeth
      on
  {58}
  his god-spelle! H[=e] cwaeth: 'For.[.g]iefath, and [=e]ow bith
      for.[.g]iefen;  80
  s[e,]llath, and [=e]ow bith [.g]e.seald.'

  Tw[=e][.g]en m[e,]nn [=e]odon int[=o] Godes temple h[=i]e t[=o]
      [.g]e.biddenne.
  Aelfred cyning f[=o]r mid thrim s[.c]ipum [=u]t on s[=ae], and
  [.g]e.feaht with f[=e]ower s[.c]ip-hlaestas D[e,]niscra manna, and
      th[=a]ra
  s[.c]ipa tw[=a] [.g]e.nam, and th[=a] m[e,]nn of.slae[.g]ene w[=ae]ron
      the  85
  th[=ae]r-on w[=ae]ron. Th[=a] c[=o]mon thr[=e]o s[.c]ipu. Th[=a]
      [.g]e.f[=e]ngon h[=i]e
  th[=a]ra thr[=e]ora s[.c]ipa tw[=a], and th-a m[e,]nn of.sl[=o]gon, ealle
      b[=u]tan
  f[=i]fum. Se w[=i]tega [=a].wr[=a]t be th[=ae]m f[=e]ower n[=i]etenum the
      him
  aet.[=i]ewdu w[=ae]ron, thaet h[=i]e haefden [=e]agan him on [=ae]lce
      healfe.
  [=A]n th[=a]ra n[=i]etena waes on m[e,]nniscre ons[=i]ene him
      aet.[=i]ewed,  90
  [=o]ther on l[=e]on ons[=i]ene, thridde on [.c]ealfes, f[=e]orthe on
      earnes.

  God thone [=ae]restan mann rihtne and g[=o]dne [.g]e.sc[=o]p, and
  eall mann-cynn mid him. Aelfred Aethelwulfing waes cyning
  ofer eall Angel-cynn b[=u]tan th[=ae]m d[=ae]le the under D[e,]na
      onwealde
  waes. [=Ae]lc g[=o]d tr[=e]ow bierth g[=o]de waestmas, and [=ae]lc  95
  yfel tr[=e]ow bierth yfle waestmas; ne mae[.g] thaet g[=o]de tr[=e]ow
  beran yfle waestmas, ne thaet yfle tr[=e]ow g[=o]de waestmas.
  [=E]adigu sind [=e]owru [=e]agan, for th[=ae]m the h[=i]e [.g]e.s[=e]oth,
      and
  [=e]owru [=e]aran, for th[=ae]m the h[=i]e [.g]e.h[=i]erath. Sw[=a]
      hw[=a] sw[=a] s[e,]lth
  [=a]num thurstigum m[e,]nn [.c]eald waeter on m[=i]num naman, ne  100
  for.l[=i]est h[=e] his m[=e]de. Ne fare [.g][=e] on h[=ae]thenra manna
      we[.g]e!
  G[=o]d mann of g[=o]dum gold-horde bringth g[=o]d forth; and yfel
  mann of yflum goldhorde bringth yfel forth.

  Greg[=o]rius se h[=a]lga p[=a]pa is rihtl[=i]ce [.g]e.cweden
      [E,]n[.g]liscre
  th[=e]ode apostol. Th[=a] h[=e] [.g]e.seah thaet se m[=ae]sta d[=ae]l
      th[=ae]re th[=e]ode  105
  his l[=a]re for.s[=a]won, th[=a] for.l[=e]t h[=e] h[=i]e, and
      [.g]e.[.c][=e]as th[=a] h[=ae]thnan
  l[=e]ode. [.G]if se blinda blindne l[=ae]tt, h[=i]e feallath b[=e][.g]en
      on [=a]nne
  pytt. Se H[=a]lga G[=a]st is lufu and willa thaes Faeder and thaes
  Suna; and h[=i]e sind ealle [.g]e.l[=i]ce mihti[.g]e. B[e,]tere is s[=e]o
  s[=a]wol thonne se m[e,]te, and b[e,]tera se l[=i]chama thonne his
      scr[=u]d.  110
  {59}
  S[=e]o s[=a]wol is g[=a]st, and be eorthlicum m[e,]ttum ne leofath.
  Be.healdath th[=a]s fl[=e]ogendan fuglas, the ne s[=a]wath ne ne
      r[=i]path,
  ac se heofonlica Faeder h[=i]e [=a].f[=e]tt. H[=e] cwaeth, 'Ic neom
  [=o]thrum mannum [.g]e.l[=i]c;' swelce h[=e] cw[=ae]de, 'Ic [=a]na eom
      rihtw[=i]s,
  and th[=a] [=o]thre sind synn-fulle.'                        115

  Th[=a] se H[=ae]lend thanon f[=o]r, th[=a] folgodon him tw[=e][.g]en
      blinde,
  cwethende: '[.G]e.miltsa unc, Dav[=i]des sunu!' H[=e] cwaeth t[=o]
  him: '[.G]e.l[=i]efe [.g]it thaet ic inc mae[.g]e [.g]e.haelan?' H[=e]
      cwaeth:
 'S[=i]e inc aefter incrum [.g]e.l[=e]afan.' Aethelst[=a]n cyning f[=o]r
  inn on Scot-land, [=ae][.g]ther [.g]e mid land-h[e,]re [.g]e mid
      s[.c]ip-h[e,]re,  120
  and his mi[.c]el ofer.h[e,]rgode. Se mann the God for.[.g]iett, God
  for.[.g]iett [=e]ac hine. Farath, and l[=ae]rath ealle th[=e]oda!
      L[=ae]rath
  h[=i]e thaet h[=i]e healden eall th[=a] thing the ic [=e]ow be.b[=e]ad!
      Sume
  m[e,]nn sae[.g]don be him thaet h[=e] w[=ae]re Aelfredes sunu cyninges.
  Se H[=ae]lend [=a]scode his leornung-cnihtas, 'Hwone s[e,][.c][.g]ath
      125
  m[e,]nn thaet s[=i]e mannes Sunu?' Hwaet s[e,][.c][.g]e [.g][=e] thaet ic
      s[=i]e?
  Th[=u] eart thaes libbendan Godes sunu. Cr[=i]st cwaeth be his
  Faeder: '[.G][=e] s[e,][.c][.g]ath thaet h[=e] [=e]ower God s[=i]e, and
      [.g][=e] hine ne
  on.cn[=e]owon.' [.G]if h[=i]e thone h[=a]lgan Faeder on.cn[=e]owen,
  thonne under.f[=e]ngen h[=i]e mid [.g]e.l[=e]afan his Sunu, the h[=e]
      [=a].s[e,]nde  130
  t[=o] middan-[.g]earde. Se we[.g] is sw[=i]the nearu and sticol
  s[=e] the l[=ae]tt t[=o] heofona r[=i][.c]e; and se we[.g] is sw[=i]the
      br[=a]d and
  sm[=e]the s[=e] the l[=ae]tt t[=o] h[e,]lle w[)i]te. Dysi[.g] bith se
      we[.g]-f[=e]renda
  mann s[=e] the nimth thone sm[=e]than we[.g] the h[=i]ne mis-l[=ae]tt,
      and
  for.l[=ae]tt thone sticolan the hine [.g]e.bringth t[=o] th[=ae]re
      byri[.g]. Thaet  135
  ic [=e]ow s[e,][.c][.g]e on th[=e]ostrum, s[e,][.c][.g]ath hit on leohte;
      and thaet
  [.g][=e] on [=e]are [.g]e.h[=i]erath, bodiath uppan hr[=o]fum. H[=i]e
      scufon [=u]t
  hiera s[.c]ipu, and [.g]e.w[e,]ndon him be.[.g]eondan s[=ae].

  Healdath and d[=o]th sw[=a] hwaet sw[=a] h[=i]e s[e,][.c][.g]ath; and ne
      d[=o]
  [.g][=e] n[=a], aefter hiera weorcum: h[=i]e s[e,][.c][.g]ath, and ne
      d[=o]th. Eall  140
  hiera weorc h[=i]e d[=o]th thaet m[e,]nn h[=i]e [.g]e.s[=e]on. H[=i]e
      lufiath thaet
  {60}
  man h[=i]e gr[=e]te on str[=ae]tum. [=E]al[=a] [.g][=e] n[=ae]ddran and
      n[=ae]ddrena
  cynn, h[=u] fl[=e]o [.g][=e] fram h[e,]lle d[=o]me?

  W[=e] sind ealle cuman on thissum and-weardan l[=i]fe, and
  [=u]re eard nis n[=a] h[=e]r; ac w[=e] sind h[=e]r swelce
      we[.g]-f[=e]rende  145
  m[e,]nn: [=a]n cymth, [=o]ther faerth. Hwelc mann s[e,]lth his bearne
  n[=ae]ddran, [.g]if hit fisces bitt? [=Ae]lc th[=a]ra the bitt, h[=e]
      on.f[=e]hth;
  and s[=e] the s[=e][.c]th, h[=e] hit fint. Ne g[=ae]th [=ae]lc th[=a]ra
      on heofona
  r[=i][.c]e the cwithth t[=o] m[=e], 'Dryhten, Dryhten;' ac s[=e] the
      wyr[.c]th
  m[=i]nes Faeder willan the on heofonum is, s[=e] g[=ae]th on heofona  150
  r[=i][.c]e. Nis hit n[=a] g[=o]d th[=ae]t man nime bearna hl[=a]f and
      hundum
  weorpe. Ic haebbe the[.g]nas under m[=e]: and ic cwethe t[=o]
  thissum, 'g[=a],' and h[=e] g[=ae]th; and t[=o] [=o]thrum, 'cum,' and
      h[=e]
  cymth, and t[=o] m[=i]num th[=e]owe, 'wyr[.c] this,' and h[=e] wyr[.c]th.

  Se H[=ae]lend [.g]e.nam th[=a] f[=i]f hl[=a]fas, and bl[=e]tsode, and
      t[=o].braec,  155
  and t[=o].d[=ae]lde be.twix th[=ae]m sittendum; sw[=a] [.g]e.l[=i]ce
      [=e]ac
  th[=a] fiscas t[=o].d[=ae]lde; and h[=i]e ealle [.g]e.n[=o]g haefdon.
      Th[=a] the
  th[=ae]r [=ae]ton w[=ae]ron f[=e]ower th[=u]send manna, b[=u]tan
      [.c]ildum and
  w[=i]fum. H[=i]e c[=o]mon t[=o] him, and t[=o] him [.g]eb[=ae]don, and
      thus
  cw[=ae]don: 'S[=o]thl[=i]ce th[=u] eart Godes sunu.' Ne w[=e]ne [.g][=e]
      thaet  160
  ic c[=o]me sibbe on eorthan to s[e,]ndenne: ne c[=o]m ic sibbe t[=o]
  s[e,]ndenne, ac sweord. H[=e] be.b[=e]ad thaet h[=i]e s[=ae]ten ofer
      th[=ae]re
  eorthan. H[=e] sae[.g]de thaet North-manna land w[=ae]re sw[=i]the lang
  and sw[=i]the smael.

  H[=i]e ealle on thone cyning w[=ae]ron feohtende, oth thaet h[=i]e  165
  hine ofslae[.g]enne haefdon. [=Ae]lc mann the [=o]thre m[e,]nn for.sihth
  bith fram Gode for.sewen. S[=e] the [=e]aran haebbe t[=o]
      [.g]e.hi[=e]renne,
  [.g]e.h[=i]ere. G[=o]d is [=u]s h[=e]r t[=o] b[=e]onne.

  God cwaeth t[=o] [=a]num w[=i]tegan, s[=e] waes Ionas [.g]e.h[=a]ten:
 'Far t[=o] th[=ae]re byri[.g], and boda th[=ae]r th[=a] word the ic th[=e]
     s[e,][.c][.g]e.'  170
  {61}
  Lufiath [=e]owre f[=i]end, and d[=o]th wel th[=ae]m the [=e]ow yfel
      d[=o]th.
  Lufa Dryhten th[=i]nne God on ealre th[=i]nre heortan, and on
  ealre th[=i]nre sawle, and on eallum th[=i]num m[=o]de. S[=e] the ne
  lufath his br[=o]thor, thone the h[=e] [.g]e.sihth, h[=u] mae[.g] h[=e]
      lufian God,
  thone the h[=e] ne [.g]e.sihth l[=i]cham-l[=i]ce? S[e,][.g]e [=u]s hwonne
      th[=a]s  175
  thing [.g]e.weorthen, and hwelc t[=a]cen s[=i]e th[=i]nes t[=o]-cymes and
  worulde [.g]e.[e,]ndunge.

  Se H[=ae]lend cwaeth t[=o] [=a]num his leornung-cnihta, s[=e] waes
  h[=a]ten Philippus: 'Mid hw[=ae]m magon w[=e] by[.c][.g]an hl[=a]f
      thissum
  folce?' Wel wiste Cr[=i]st hwaet h[=e] d[=o]n wolde, and h[=e] wiste  180
  thaet Philippus thaet nyste. God mae[.g] d[=o]n eall thing; w[=e]
  sculon wundrian his mihte, and [=e]ac [.g]e.l[=i]efan. Cr[=i]st
      [=a].r[=ae]rde
  Lazarum of d[=e]athe, and cwaeth t[=o] his leornung-cnihtum:
      'T[=o].l[=i]esath
  his b[e,]ndas, thaet h[=e] g[=a]n mae[.g]e.' God is aelmihti[.g],
  and mae[.g] d[=o]n eall thaet h[=e] wile. [.G][=e] nyton on hwelcre
      t[=i]de  185
  [=e]ower hl[=a]ford cuman wile. For th[=ae]m b[=e]o [.g][=e] [.g]earwe;
      for
  th[=ae]m the mannes Sunu wile cuman on th[=ae]re t[=i]de the [.g][=e]
      nyton.
  Se H[=ae]lend cwaeth be his Faeder: 'Ic hine cann, and [.g]if ic
  s[e,][.c][.g]e thaet ic hine ne cunne, thonne b[=e]o ic l[=e]as, [=e]ow
      [.g]e.l[=i]c.'

  Se d[=e]ofol cwaeth t[=o] Cr[=i]ste: '[.G]if th[=u] s[=i]e Godes sunu,
      cweth  190
  t[=o] thissum st[=a]num thaet h[=i]e b[=e]on [=a].w[e,]nde t[=o]
      hl[=a]fum.' Th[=a]
  and-wyrde se H[=ae]lend, and cwaeth: 'Hit is [=a].writen, "ne
  leofath se mann n[=a] be hl[=a]fe [=a]num, ac leofath be eallum th[=ae]m
  wordum the g[=a]th of Godes m[=u]the."' Se H[=ae]lend c[=o]m t[=o] him,
  th[=ae]r h[=i]e w[=ae]ron [.g]e.gadrode, and cwaeth: 'S[=i]e sibb be.twix
      195
  [=e]ow; ic hit eom; ne b[=e]o [.g][=e] n[=a] [=a].fyrhte.' Faeder [=u]re,
      th[=u] the
  eart on heofonum, s[=i]e th[=i]n nama [.g]e.h[=a]lgod. W[=e] syngodon,
  w[=e] dydon un-rihtl[=i]ce; s[e,]le [=u]s for.[.g]iefnesse: hwaet sculon
      w[=e]
  d[=o]n?

{62}

II.

FROM THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.

VII. 24-7.

  [=Ae]lc th[=a]ra the th[=a]s m[=i]n word [.g]e.h[=i]erth, and th[=a]
      wyr[.c]th, bith
  [.g]e.l[=i]c th[=ae]m w[=i]san were, s[=e] his h[=u]s ofer st[=a]n
      [.g]et.imbrode.
  Th[=a] c[=o]m th[=ae]r re[.g]en and mi[.c]el fl[=o]d, and th[=ae]r
      bl[=e]owon windas,
  and [=a].hruron on thaet h[=u]s, and hit n[=a] ne f[=e]oll:
      s[=o]thl[=i]ce hit
  waes ofer st[=a]n [.g]e.timbrod.                               5

  And [=ae]lc th[=a]ra the [.g]e.h[=i]erth th[=a]s m[=i]n word, and th[=a]
      ne wyr[.c]th,
  s[=e] bith [.g]e.l[=i]c th[=ae]m dysigan m[e,]nn, the [.g]e.timbrode his
      h[=u]s ofer
  sand-[.c]eosol. Th[=a] r[=i]nde hit, and th[=ae]r c[=o]m fl[=o]d, and
      bl[=e]owon
  windas, and [=a].hruron on th[=ae]t h[=u]s, and thaet h[=u]s f[=e]oll;
      and
  his hryre waes mi[.c]el.                                      10

XII. 18-21.

  H[=e]r is m[=i]n cnapa, thone ic [.g]e.[.c][=e]as; m[=i]n [.g]e.corena,
      on th[=ae]m
  wel [.g]e.l[=i]code m[=i]nre s[=a]wle: ic [=a].s[e,]tte m[=i]nne g[=a]st
      ofer hine,
  and d[=o]m h[=e] bodath th[=e]odum. Ne fl[=i]tt h[=e], ne h[=e] ne
      hriemth,
  ne n[=a]n mann ne [.g]e.h[=i]erth his stefne on str[=ae]tum.
      T[=o].cw[=i]esed
  hr[=e]od h[=e] ne for.br[=i]ett, and sm[=e]ocende fleax h[=e] ne
      [=a].dw[=ae]scth,  15
  [=ae]r th[=ae]m the h[=e] [=a].weorpe d[=o]m t[=o] si[.g]e. And on his
      naman
  th[=e]oda [.g]e.hyhtath.

XIII. 3-8.

  S[=o]thl[=i]ce [=u]t [=e]ode se s[=a]were his s[=ae]d t[=o] s[=a]wenne.
      And th[=a]
  th[=a] h[=e] s[=e]ow, sumu h[=i]e f[=e]ollon with we[.g], and fuglas
      c[=o]mon
  and [=ae]ton th[=a]. S[=o]thl[=i]ce sumu f[=e]ollon on st[=ae]nihte,
      th[=ae]r hit  20
  {63}
  naefde mi[.c]le eorthan, and hraedl[=i]ce [=u]p sprungon, for th[=ae]m
      the
  h[=i]e naefdon p[=ae]re eorthan d[=i]epan; s[=o]thl[=i]ce, [=u]p
      sprungenre
  sunnan, h[=i]e [=a].dr[=u]godon and for.scruncon, for th[=ae]m the h[=i]e
  naefdon wyrtruman. S[=o]thl[=i]ce sumu f[=e]ollon on thornas, and
  th[=a] thornas w[=e]oxon, and for.thrysmdon th[=a]. Sumu s[=o]thl[=i]ce
      25
  f[=e]ollon on g[=o]de eorthan, and sealdon waestm, sum hund-fealdne,
  sum siexti[.g]-fealdne, sum thriti[.g]-fealdn[e,].

XIII. 24-30.

  Heofona r[=i][.c]e is [.g]e.worden th[=ae]m m[e,]nn [.g]e.l[=i]c the
      s[=e]ow g[=o]d
  s[=ae]d on his aecere. S[=o]thl[=i]ce, th[=a] th[=a] m[e,]nn sl[=e]pon,
      th[=a] c[=o]m his
  f[=e]onda sum, and ofer.s[=e]ow hit mid coccele on.middan th[=ae]m  30
  hw[=ae]te, and f[=e]rde thanon. S[=o]thl[=i]ce, th[=a] s[=e]o wyrt
      w[=e]ox, and
  thone waestm br[=o]hte, th[=a] aet.[=i]ewde se coccel hine. Th[=a]
      [=e]odon
  thaes hl[=a]fordes th[=e]owas and cw[=ae]don: 'Hl[=a]ford, h[=u], ne
      s[=e]owe
  th[=u] g[=o]d s[=ae]d on th[=i]num aecere? hwanon haefde h[=e] coccel?'
  Th[=a] cwaeth h[=e]: 'thaet dyde unhold mann.' Th[=a] cw[=ae]don th[=a]
      35
  th[=e]owas: 'Wilt th[=u], w[=e] g[=a]th and gadriath h[=i]e?' Th[=a]
      cwaep
  h[=e]: 'Nese: th[=y] l[=ae]s [.g][=e] thone hw[=ae]te [=a].wyrtwalien,
      thonne [.g][=e]
  thone coccel gadriath. L[=ae]tath [=ae][.g]ther weaxan oth
      r[=i]p-t[=i]man;
  and on p[=ae]m r[=i]pt[=i]man ic s[e,][.c][.g]e th[=ae]m r[=i]perum:
      "gadriath
  [=ae]rest thone coccel, and bindath s[.c][=e]af-m[=ae]lum t[=o]
      for.baernenne;  40
  and gadriath thone hw[=ae]te int[=o] m[=i]num b[e,]rne."'

XIII. 44-8.

  Heofona r[=i][.c]e is [.g]e.l[=i]c [.g]e.h[=y]ddum gold-horde on th[=ae]m
  aecere. Thone be.h[=y]tt se mann the hine fint, and for his blisse
  g[=ae]th, and s[e,]lth eall thaet h[=e] [=a]h, and [.g]e.by[.g]th thone
      aecer.

  Eft is heofona r[=i][.c]e [.g]e.l[=i]c th[=ae]m mangere the s[=o]hte
      thaet g[=o]de  45
  m[e,]re-grot. Th[=a] h[=e] funde thaet [=a]n d[=e]or-wierthe m[e,]regrot,
      th[=a]
  [=e]ode h[=e], and sealde eall thaet h[=e] [=a]hte, and bohte thaet
      m[e,]regrot.
  {64}

  Eft is heofona r[=i][.c]e [.g]e.l[=i]c [=a].s[e,]ndum n[e,]tte on th[=a]
      s[=ae], and of
  [=ae]lcum fisc-cynne gadriendum. Th[=a] h[=i]e th[=a] thaet n[e,]tt [=u]p
      50
  [=a].tugon, and s[=ae]ton be th[=ae]m strande, th[=a] [.g]e.curon h[=i]e
      th[=a]
  g[=o]dan on hiera fatu, and th[=a] yflan h[=i]e [=a].wurpon [=u]t.

XVIII. 12-14.

  [.G]if hwelc mann haefth hund s[.c][=e]apa, and him losath [=a]n of
  th[=ae]m, h[=u], ne for.l[=ae]tt h[=e] th[=a] nigon and hund.nigonti[.g]
      on th[=ae]m
  muntum, and g[=ae]th, and s[=e][.c]th thaet [=a]n the for.wearth? And
      [.g]if  55
  hit [.g]e.limpth thaet h[=e] hit fint, s[=o]thl[=i]ce ic [=e]ow
      s[e,][.c][.g]e thaet h[=e]
  sw[=i]thor [.g]e.blissath for th[=ae]m [=a]num thonne for th[=ae]m nigon
      and
  hund.nigontigum the n[=a] ne losodon.

XX. 1-16.

  Heofona r[=i][.c]e is [.g]e.l[=i]c th[=ae]m h[=i]redes ealdre, the on
      [=ae]rnemer[.g]en
  [=u]t [=e]ode [=a].h[=y]ran wyrhtan on his w[=i]n-[.g]eard.
      [.G]e.wordenre  60
  [.g]e.cwid-r[=ae]denne th[=ae]m wyrhtum, h[=e] sealde [=ae]lcum [=a]nne
  th[e,]ning with his dae[.g]es weorce, and [=a].s[e,]nde h[=i]e on his
      w[=i]n[.g]eard.
  And th[=a] h[=e] [=u]t [=e]ode ymbe undern-t[=i]d, h[=e] [.g]e.seah
  othre on str[=ae]te [=i]dle standan. Th[=a] cwaeth h[=e]: 'G[=a] [.g][=e]
      on
  m[=i]nne w[=i]n[.g]eard, and ic s[e,]lle [=e]ow thaet riht bith.' And
      h[=i]e th[=a]  65
  f[=e]rdon. Eft h[=e] [=u]t [=e]ode ymbe th[=a] siextan and nigothan
  t[=i]d, and dyde th[=ae]m sw[=a] [.g]e.l[=i]ce. Th[=a] ymbe th[=a]
      [e,]ndlyftan
  t[=i]d h[=e] [=u]t [=e]ode, and funde [=o]thre standende, and th[=a]
      sae[.g]de h[=e]:
 'Hw[=y] stande [.g][=e] h[=e]r ealne dae[.g] [=i]dle?' Th[=a] cw[=ae]don
     h[=i]e:
 'For th[=ae]m the [=u]s n[=a]n mann ne h[=y]rde.' Th[=a] cwaeth h[=e]:
     'And  70
  g[=a] [.g][=e] on m[=i]nne w[=i]n[.g]eard.'

  S[=o]thl[=i]ce th[=a] hit waes [=ae]fen [.g]e.worden, th[=a] sae[.g]de se
      w[=i]n[.g]eardes
  hl[=a]ford his [.g]e.r[=e]fan: 'Clipa th[=a] wyrhtan, and [=a].[.g]ief
      him
  hiera m[=e]de; on.[.g]inn fram th[=ae]m [=y]t.emestan oth thone
      fyrmestan.'
  Eornostl[=i]ce th[=a] th[=a] [.g]e.c[=o]mon the ymbe th[=a] [e,]ndlyftan
      75
  t[=i]d c[=o]mon, th[=a] on.f[=e]ngon h[=i]e [=ae]lc his p[e,]ning. And
      th[=a] the
  {65}
  th[=ae]r [=ae]rest c[=o]mon, w[=e]ndon thaet h[=i]e scolden m[=a]re
      on.f[=o]n; th[=a]
  on.f[=e]ngon h[=i]e syndri[.g]e th[e,]ningas. Tha on.gunnon h[=i]e
      murcnian
  on.[.g][=e]an thone h[=i]redes ealdor, and thus cw[=ae]don: 'Th[=a]s
  [=y]temestan worhton [=a]ne t[=i]d, and th[=u] dydest h[=i]e
      [.g]e.l[=i]ce [=u]s,  80
  the b[=ae]ron byrthenna on thisses dae[.g]es h[=ae]tan.' Th[=a] cwaeth
      h[=e]
  and-swariende hiera [=a]num: '[=E]al[=a] th[=u] fr[=e]ond, ne d[=o] ic
      th[=e]
  n[=a]nne t[=e]onan; h[=u], ne c[=o]me th[=u] t[=o] m[=e] t[=o]
      wyr[.c]enne with
  [=a]num p[e,]ninge? Nim thaet th[=i]n is, and g[=a]; ic wile thissum
  [=y]temestum s[e,]llan eall sw[=a] mi[.c]el sw[=a] th[=e]. Oththe ne
      m[=o]t ic  85
  d[=o]n thaet ic wile? Hwaether the th[=i]n [=e]age m[=a]nfull is for
      th[=ae]m
  the ic g[=o]d eom? Sw[=a] b[=e]oth tha fyrmestan [=y]temeste, and th[=a]
  [=y]temestan fyrmeste; s[=o]thl[=i]ce mani[.g]e sind [.g]e.clipode, and
  f[=e]a [.g]e.corene.'

XXII. 2-14.

  Heofona r[=i][.c]e is [.g]e.l[=i]c th[=ae]m cyninge the macode his suna
      90
  [.g]iefta, and s[e,]nde his th[=e]owas, and clipode th[=a] [.g]e.lathodan
      t[=o]
  th[=ae]m [.g]ieftum. Th[=a] noldon h[=i]e cuman. Th[=a] s[e,]nde h[=e]
      eft [=o]thre
  th[=e]owas, and sae[.g]de th[=ae]m [.g]e.lathodum: 'N[=u] ic
      [.g]e.[.g]earwode
  m[=i]ne feorme: m[=i]ne fearras and m[=i]ne fuglas sind of.slae[.g]ene,
  and eall m[=i]n thing sind [.g]earu; cumath t[=o] th[=ae]m [.g]ieftum.'
      Th[=a]  95
  for.g[=i]emdon h[=i]e thaet, and f[=e]rdon, sum t[=o] his t[=u]ne, sum
      t[=o]
  his mangunge. And th[=a] [=o]thre n[=a]mon his th[=e]owas, and mid
  t[=e]onan [.g]e.sw[e,]n[.c]ton, and of.sl[=o]gon. Th[=a] se cyning thaet
      [.g]e.hierde,
  th[=a] waes h[=e] ierre, and s[e,]nde his h[e,]re t[=o], and for.dyde
  th[=a] mann-slagan, and hiera burg for.baernde.              100

  Th[=a] cwaeth h[=e] t[=o] his th[=e]owum: 'Witodl[=i]ce th[=a]s [.g]iefta
      sind
  [.g]earwe, ac th[=a] the [.g]e.lathode w[=ae]ron ne sind wierthe. G[=a]th
      n[=u]
  t[=o] wega [.g]el[=ae]tum, and clipiath t[=o] thissum [.g]ieftum sw[=a]
      hwelce
  sw[=a] [.g][=e] [.g]e.m[=e]ten.' Th[=a] [=e]odon th[=a] th[=e]owas [=u]t
      on th[=a] wegas,
  and [.g]e.gadrodon ealle th[=a] the h[=i]e [.g]e.m[=e]tton, g[=o]de and
      yfle;  105
  th[=a] w[=ae]ron th[=a] [.g]ieft-h[=u]s mid sittendum mannum [.g]efyldu.

  Th[=a] [=e]ode se cyning inn, thaet h[=e] wolde [.g]e.s[=e]on th[=a] the
      th[=ae]r
  {66}
  s[=ae]ton, and th[=a] [.g]e.seah h[=e] th[=ae]r [=a]nne mann the naes mid
      [.g]ieftlicum
  r[=e]afe [.g]escr[=y]dd. Th[=a] cwaeth h[=e]: 'L[=a], fr[=e]ond,
      h[=u]meta
  [=e]odest th[=u] inn, and naefdest [.g]ieftlic r[=e]af?' Tha sw[=i]gode
      h[=e].  110
  And se cyning cwaeth t[=o] his the[.g]num: '[.G]e.bindath his handa
  and his f[=e]t, and weorpath hine on th[=a] [=y]terran th[=e]ostru;
      th[=ae]r bith
  w[=o]p and t[=o]tha gr[=i]st-b[=i]tung.' Witodl[=i]ce mani[.g]e sind
      [.g]e.lathode,
  and f[=e]a [.g]e.corene.

XXV. 1-13.

  Thonne bith heofona r[=i][.c]e [.g]e.l[=i]c th[=ae]m t[=i]en f[=ae]mnum,
      the th[=a]  115
  leoht-fatu n[=a]mon, and f[=e]rdon on.[.g][=e]an thone br[=y]d-guman and
  th[=a] br[=y]d. Hiera f[=i]f w[=ae]ron dysi[.g]e, and f[=i]f gl[=e]awe.
      And th[=a] f[=i]f
  dysigan n[=a]mon leohtfatu, and ne n[=a]mon n[=a]nne ele mid him;
  th[=a] gl[=e]awan n[=a]mon ele on hiera fatum mid th[=ae]m leohtfatum.
  Th[=a] se br[=y]dguma ielde, th[=a] hnappodon h[=i]e ealle, and
      sl[=e]pon.  120
  Witodl[=i]ce t[=o] middre nihte man hr[=i]emde, and cwaeth: 'N[=u] se
  br[=y]dguma cymth, farath him t[=o].[.g][=e]anes.' Th[=a] [=a].rison
      ealle th[=a]
  f[=ae]mnan, and gl[e,]n[.g]don hiera leohtfatu. Th[=a] cw[=ae]don th[=a]
  dysigan to p[=ae]m w[=i]sum: 'S[e,]llath [=u]s of [=e]owrum ele, for
      th[=ae]m
  [=u]re leohtfatu sind [=a].cw[e,]n[.c]tu.' Th[=a] and.swarodon th[=a]
      gl[=e]awan,  125
  and cw[=ae]don: 'Nese; th[=y] l[=ae]s the w[=e] and [.g][=e] naebben
      [.g]en[=o]g:
  g[=a]th t[=o] th[=ae]m [.c][=i]ependum, and by[.c][.g]ath [=e]ow ele.'
      Witodl[=i]ce,
  th[=a] h[=i]e f[=e]rdon, and woldon by[.c][.g]an, th[=a] c[=o]m se
      br[=y]dguma;
  and th[=a] the [.g]earwe w[=ae]ron [=e]odon inn mid him t[=o] th[=ae]m
  [.g]ieftum; and s[=e]o duru waes be.locen. Th[=a] aet n[=i]ehstan
      c[=o]mon  130
  tha [=o]thre f[=ae]mnan, and cw[=ae]don: 'Dryhten, Dryhten, l[=ae]t [=u]s
  inn.' Th[=a] and-swarode h[=e] him, and cwaeth: 'S[=o]th ic [=e]ow
  s[e,][.c][.g]e, ne cann ic [=e]ow.' Witodl[=i]ce, waciath, for th[=ae]m
      the [.g][=e]
  nyton ne thone dae[.g] ne th[=a] t[=i]d.

XXV. 14-30.

  Sum mann f[=e]rde on [e,]lth[=e]odi[.g]nesse, and clipode his  135
  {67}
  th[=e]owas, and be.t[=ae]hte him his [=ae]hta. And [=a]num h[=e] sealde
  f[=i]f pund, sumum tw[=a], sumum [=a]n: [=ae][.g]hwelcum be his [=a]gnum
  mae[.g]ne; and f[=e]rde s[=o]na.

  Th[=a] f[=e]rde s[=e] the th[=a] f[=i]f pund under.f[=e]ng, and
      [.g]e.str[=i]ende
  [=o]thru f[=i]f. And eall-sw[=a] s[=e] the th[=a] tw[=a] under.feng,
      [.g]e.str[=i]ende  140
  [=o]thru tw[=a]. Witodl[=i]ce s[=e] the thaet [=a]n under.f[=e]ng,
      f[=e]rde, and
  be.dealf hit on eorthan, and be.h[=y]dde his hl[=a]fordes feoh.

  Witodl[=i]ce aefter mi[.c]lum fierste c[=o]m th[=a]ra th[=e]owa
      hl[=a]ford,
  and dihte him [.g]e.rad. Th[=a] c[=o]m s[=e] the th[=a] f[=i]f pund
      under.f[=e]ng,
  and br[=o]hte [=o]thru f[=i]f, and cwaeth: 'Hl[=a]ford, f[=i]f pund
      th[=u] sealdest  145
  m[=e]; n[=u] ic [.g]e.str[=i]ende [=o]thru f[=i]f.' Th[=a] cwaep his
      hl[=a]ford t[=o]
  him: 'B[=e]o bl[=i]the, th[=u] g[=o]da th[=e]ow and [.g]e.tr[=e]owa: for
      th[=ae]m
  the th[=u] w[=ae]re [.g]e.tr[=e]owe ofer l[=y]tlu thing, ic
      [.]ge.s[e,]tte th[=e] ofer
  mi[.c]lu; g[=a] int[=o] th[=i]nes hl[=a]fordes blisse.' Th[=a] c[=o]m
      s[=e] the th[=a]
  tw[=a] pund under.f[=e]ng, and cwaeth: 'Hl[=a]ford, tw[=a] pund th[=u]
      150
  m[=e] sealdest; n[=u] ic haebbe [.g]e.str[=i]ened [=o]thru tw[=a].'
      Th[=a] cwaeth
  his hl[=a]ford t[=o] him: '[.G]e.blissa, th[=u] g[=o]da th[=e]ow and
      [.g]etr[=e]owa:
  for th[=ae]m the th[=u] w[=ae]re [.g]e.tr[=e]owe ofer f[=e]a, ofer fela
      ic th[=e]
  [.g]e.s[e,]tte; g[=a] on th[=i]nes hl[=a]fordes [.g]e.f[=e]an.' Th[=a]
      c[=o]m s[=e] the thaet
  [=a]n pund under.f[=e]ng, and cwaeth: 'Hl[=a]ford, ic w[=a]t thaet  155
  th[=u] eart heard mann: th[=u] r[=i]pst th[=ae]r th[=u] ne s[=e]owe, and
  gaderast th[=ae]r th[=u] ne spr[e,]n[.g]dest. And ic f[=e]rde
      of.dr[=ae]dd,
  and be.h[=y]dde th[=i]n pund on eorthan; h[=e]r th[=u] haefst thaet
      th[=i]n
  is.' Th[=a] andswarode his hl[=a]ford him, and cwaeth: 'th[=u] yfla
  th[=e]ow and sl[=a]wa, th[=u] wistest thaet ic r[=i]pe th[=ae]r ic ne
      s[=e]owe,  160
  and ic gadri[.g]e th[=ae]r ic ne str[=e]dde: hit [.g]e.byrede thaet
      th[=u]
  be.faeste m[=i]n feoh myneterum, and ic n[=a]me, thonne ic c[=o]me,
  thaet m[=i]n is, mid th[=ae]m gafole. [=A].nimath thaet pund aet him, and
  s[e,]llath th[=ae]m the m[=e] th[=a] t[=i]en pund br[=o]hte. Witodl[=i]ce
      [=ae]lcum
  th[=a]ra the haefth man s[e,]lth, and h[=e] haefth [.g]e.n[=o]g; th[=ae]m
      the naefth,  165
  thaet him thyn[.c]th thaet h[=e] haebbe, thaet him bith aet.brogden. And
  weorpath thone un.nyttan th[=e]ow on th[=a] [=y]terran th[=e]ostru;
      th[=ae]r
  bith w[=o]p and t[=o]tha grist.b[=i]tung.'

{68}

III.

OLD TESTAMENT PIECES.

I.

  Aefter th[=ae]m s[=o]thl[=i]ce ealle m[e,]nn spr[=ae]con [=a]ne
      spr[=ae][.c]e. Th[=a]
  th[=a] h[=i]e f[=e]rdon fram [=E]ast-d[=ae]le, h[=i]e fundon [=a]nne feld
      on
  Senna[=a]r-lande, and wunodon th[=ae]r-on.

  Th[=a] cw[=ae]don h[=i]e him be.tw[=e]onan: 'Uton wyr[.c]an [=u]s
      ti[.g]elan,
  and [=ae]lan h[=i]e on f[=y]re!' Witodl[=i]ce h[=i]e haefdon ti[.g]elan
      for  5
  st[=a]n and tierwan for weal-l[=i]m. And h[=i]e cw[=ae]don: 'Uton
  timbrian [=u]s [.c]eastre, and st[=i]epel oth heofon h[=e]anne! uton
  weorthian [=u]rne naman, [=ae]r th[ae]m the w[=e] s[=i]en t[=o].d[=ae]lde
      [.g]eond
  ealle eorthan!'

  Witodl[=i]ce Dryhten [=a].st[=a]g nither, t[=o] th[=ae]m thaet h[=e]
      [.g]e.s[=a]we  10
  th[=a] burg and thone st[=i]epel, the Ad[=a]mes bearn [.g]e.timbrodon.
  And h[=e] cwaeth: 'this is [=a]n folc, and ealle h[=i]e sprecath [=a]n
  laeden, and h[=i]e be.gunnon this t[=o] wyr[.c]enne: ne [.g]e.sw[=i]cath
      h[=i]e
  [=ae]r th[=ae]m the hit [.g]earu s[=i]e; s[=o]thl[=i]ce uton cuman and
      t[=o].d[=ae]lan
  hiera spr[=ae][.c]e!'                                         15

  Sw[=a] Dryhten h[=i]e t[=o].d[=ae]lde of th[=ae]re st[=o]we [.g]eond
      ealle eorthan.
  And for th[=ae]m man n[e,]mnde th[=a] st[=o]we Bab[=e]l for th[=ae]m the
      th[=ae]r
  w[=ae]ron t[=o].d[=ae]lde ealle spr[=ae][.c]a.

II.

  God wolde p[=a] fandian Abrah[=a]mes [.g]e.h[=i]ersumnesse, and
  clipode his naman, and cwaeth him thus t[=o]: 'Nim th[=i]nne  20
  [=a]n-c[e,]nnedan sunu Isa[=a]c, the th[=u] lufast, and far t[=o]
      th[=ae]m
  {69}
  lande Visionis hrathe, and [.g]e.offra hine th[=ae]r uppan [=a]nre
  d[=u]ne.'

  Abrah[=a]m th[=a] [=a].r[=a]s on th[=ae]re ilcan nihte, and f[=e]rde mid
  tw[=ae]m cnapum t[=o] th[=ae]m fierlenum lande, and Isa[=a]c samod,  25
  on assum r[=i]dende.

  Th[=a] on th[=ae]m thriddan dae[.g]e, th[=a] h[=i]e th[=a] d[=u]ne
      [.g]e.s[=a]won, th[=ae]r
  th[=ae]r h[=i]e t[=o] scoldon t[=o] of.sl[=e]anne Isa[=a]c, th[=a] cwaeth
      Abrah[=a]m
  t[=o] th[=ae]m tw[=ae]m cnapum thus: 'Andb[=i]diath [=e]ow h[=e]r mid
      th[=ae]m
  assum sume hw[=i]le! ic and th[=ae]t [.c]ild g[=a]th unc t[=o]
      [.g]e.biddenne,  30
  and wit siththan cumath s[=o]na eft t[=o] [=e]ow.'

  Abrah[=a]m th[=a] h[=e]t Isa[=a]c beran thone wudu t[=o] th[=ae]re
      st[=o]we,
  and h[=e] self baer his sweord and f[=y]r. Isa[=a]c tha [=a]scode
      Abrah[=a]m
  his faeder: 'Faeder m[=i]n, ic [=a]sci[.g]e hw[=ae]r s[=e]o offrung
      s[=i]e;
  h[=e]r is wudu and f[=y]r.' Him andwyrde se faeder: 'God
      fores[.c][=e]awath,  35
  m[=i]n sunu, him self th[=a] offrunge.'

  H[=i]e c[=o]mon th[=a] t[=o] th[=ae]re st[=o]we the him [.g]e.sweotolode
      God;
  and h[=e] th[=ae]r weofod [=a].r[=ae]rde on th[=a] ealdan w[=i]san, and
      thone
  wudu [.g]e.l[=o]gode sw[=a] sw[=a] h[=e] hit wolde habban t[=o] his suna
  baernette, siththan h[=e] of.slae[.g]en wurde. H[=e] [.g]e.band th[=a]
      his  40
  sunu, and his sweord [=a].t[=e]ah, thaet h[=e] hine [.g]e.offrode on
      th[=a]
  ealdan w[=i]san.

  Mid th[=ae]m the h[=e] wolde th[=ae]t weorc be.[.g]innan, th[=a] clipode
  Godes [e,]n[.g]el arodl[=i]ce of heofonum: 'Abrah[=a]m!' H[=e] andwyrde
  s[=o]na. Se [e,]n[.g]el him cwaeth t[=o]: 'Ne [=a].cw[e,]le th[=u]  45
  thaet [.c]ild, ne th[=i]ne hand ne [=a].str[e,][.c]e ofer his sw[=e]oran!
      N[=u] ic
  on.cn[=e]ow s[=o]thl[=i]ce thaet p[=u] on.dr[=ae]tst sw[=i]the God, n[=u]
      p[=u] p[=i]nne
  [=a]n-c[e,]nnedan sunu woldest of.sl[=e]an for him.'

  Th[=a] be.seah Abrah[=a]m s[=o]na under baec, and [.g]e.seah th[=ae]r
  [=a]nne ramm be.twix th[=ae]m br[=e]mlum be th[=ae]m hornum
      [.g]e.haeftne,  50
  and h[=e] haefde thone ramm t[=o] th[=ae]re offrunge, and hine th[=ae]r
  of.sn[=a]th Gode t[=o] l[=a]ce for his sunu Isa[=a]c. H[=e] h[=e]t th[=a]
      st[=o]we
  _Dominus videt_, thaet is 'God [.g]e.sihth,' and [.g]iet is
      [.g]e.sae[.g]d
  sw[=a], _In monte Dominus videbit_, thaet is, 'God [.g]e.sihth on
      d[=u]ne.'
  {70}

  Eft clipode se [e,]n[.g]el Abrah[=a]m, and cwaeth: 'Ic sae[.g]de  55
  thurh m[=e] selfne, sae[.g]de se Aelmihtiga, n[=u] th[=u] noldest
      [=a]rian
  th[=i]num [=a]nc[e,]nnedum suna, ac th[=e] waes m[=i]n [e,][.g]e m[=a]re
      thonne
  his l[=i]f, ic th[=e] n[=u] bl[=e]tsi[.g]e, and th[=i]nne of-spring
      ge.mani[.g]-fielde
  sw[=a] sw[=a] steorran on heofonum, and sw[=a] sw[=a] sand-[.c]eosol
  on s[=ae]; th[=i]n ofspring s[.c]eal [=a]gan hiera f[=e]onda [.g]eatu.
      And on  60
  th[=i]num s[=ae]de b[=e]oth ealle th[=e]oda [.g]e.bl[=e]tsode, for
      th[=ae]m the th[=u]
  [.g]e.h[=i]ersumodest m[=i]nre h[=ae]se thus.'

  Abrah[=a]m th[=a] [.g]e.[.c]ierde s[=o]na t[=o] his cnapum, and f[=e]rdon
      him
  h[=a]m s[=o]na mid heofonlicre bl[=e]tsunge.

III.

  Sum cw[=e]n waes on s[=u]th-d[=ae]le, Saba [.g]e.h[=a]ten, snotor and  65
  w[=i]s. Th[=a] [.g]e.h[=i]erde h[=e]o Salomones hl[=i]san, and c[=o]m
      fram
  th[=ae]m s[=u]thernum [.g]e.m[=ae]rum to Salomone binnan Hierusal[=e]m
  mid mi[.c]elre fare, and hiere olfendas b[=ae]ron s[=u]therne wyrta,
  and d[=e]or-wierthe [.g]imm-st[=a]nas, and un-[.g]er[=i]m gold. S[=e]o
      cw[=e]n
  th[=a] haefde spr[=ae][.c]e with Salomon, and sae[.g]de him sw[=a] hwaet
      70
  sw[=a] h[=e]o on hiere heortan [.g]e.th[=o]hte. Salomon th[=a] h[=i]e
      l[=ae]rde,
  and hiere sae[.g]de ealra th[=a]ra worda and[.g]iet the h[=e]o hine
      [=a]scode.
  Th[=a] [.g]e.seah s[=e]o cw[=e]n Salomones w[=i]sd[=o]m, and thaet
      m[=ae]re
  tempel the h[=e] [.g]e.timbrod haefde, and th[=a] l[=a]c the man Gode
  offrode, and thaes cyninges mani[.g]-fealde the[.g]nunga, and waes  75
  t[=o] th[=ae]m sw[=i]the of.wundrod thaet h[=e]o naefde furthor n[=a]nne
      g[=a]st,
  for th[=ae]m the h[=e]o ne mihte n[=a] furthor sm[=e]an. H[=e]o cwaeth
      th[=a]
  t[=o] th[=ae]m cyninge: 'S[=o]th is thaet word the ic [.g]e.h[=i]erde on
  m[=i]num earde be th[=e] and be th[=i]num w[=i]sd[=o]me, ac ic nolde
  [.g]e.l[=i]efan [=ae]r th[=ae]m the ic self hit [.g]e.s[=a]we. N[=u]
      haebbe ic [=a].fandod  80
  thaet m[=e] naes be healfum d[=ae]le th[=i]n m[=ae]rtho [.g]e.c[=y]ped.
      M[=a]re
  is th[=i]n w[=i]sd[=o]m and th[=i]n weorc thonne se hl[=i]sa w[=ae]re the
      ic
  [.g]e.h[=i]erde. [=E]adige sind th[=i]ne the[.g]nas and th[=i]ne
      th[=e]owas, the
  simle aet.foran th[=e] standath, and th[=i]nne w[=i]sd[=o]m
      [.g]e.h[=i]erath.
  [.G]e.bl[=e]tsod s[=i]e se aelmihtiga God, the th[=e] [.g]e.[.c][=e]as
      and [.g]e.s[e,]tte  85
  {71}
  ofer Israh[=e]la r[=i][.c]e, thaet th[=u] d[=o]mas s[e,]tte and
      riht-w[=i]snesse,'
  H[=e]o for.[.g]eaf th[=ae]em cyninge th[=a] hund.tw[e,]lfti[.g] punda
      goldes,
  and un[.g]er[=i]m d[=e]orwierthra wyrta and d[=e]orwierthra
      [.g]immst[=a]na.
  Salomon [=e]ac for.[.g]eaf th[=ae]re cw[=e]ne sw[=a] hwaes sw[=a] h[=e]o
      [.g]iernde
  aet him; and h[=e]o [.g]e.w[e,]nde on.[.g]e[=a]n t[=o] hiere [=e]thle mid
      hiere  90
  the[.g]num. Salomon th[=a] waes [.g]e.m[=ae]rsod ofer eallum eorthlicum
  cyningum, and ealle th[=e]oda [.g]e.wilnodon thaet h[=i]e hine
      [.g]e.s[=a]wen,
  and his w[=i]sd[=o]m [.g]e.h[=i]erden, and h[=i]e him mani[.g]feald
      l[=a]c
  br[=o]hton.

  S[=e]o cw[=e]n haefde [.g]e.t[=a]cnunge th[=ae]re h[=a]lgan
      [.g]e.lathunge ealles  95
  cr[=i]stenes folces, the c[=o]m t[=o] th[=ae]m [.g]e.sibbsuman Cr[=i]ste
      t[=o]
  [.g]e.h[=i]erenne his w[=i]sd[=o]m and th[=a] god-spellican l[=a]re tha
      h[=e]
  [=a].stealde, and be on.liehtunge thaes s[=o]than [.g]e.l[=e]afan, and be
  th[=ae]m t[=o]weardan d[=o]me, be [=u]rre s[=a]wle un-d[=e]adlicnesse,
      and be
  hyhte and wuldre thaes [.g]e.m[=ae]nelican [=ae]ristes.      100

  S[=e]o cw[=e]n c[=o]m t[=o] Salomone mid mi[.c]lum l[=a]cum on golde
  and on d[=e]orwierthum [.g]immst[=a]num and wyrt-br[=ae]thum; and
  thaet b[=ae]ron olfendas. S[=e]o [.g]e.l[=e]affulle [.g]e.lathung, the
      cymth
  of [=ae]lcum earde t[=o] Cr[=i]ste, bringth him th[=a]s fore-sae[.g]dan
      l[=a]c
  aefter g[=a]stlicum and[.g]iete. H[=e]o offrath him gold thurh s[=o]thne
      105
  [.g]e.l[=e]afan, and wyrtbr[=ae]thas thurh [.g]e.bedu, and d[=e]orwierthe
  [.g]immas thurh fae[.g]ernesse g[=o]dra th[=e]awa and h[=a]li[.g]ra
      mae[.g]na.
  Be thisse [.g]e.lathunge cwaeth se w[=i]tega t[=o] Gode: _Adstitit_
  _regina a dextris tuis, in vestitu deaurato, circumdata varietate_,
  thaet is, 's[=e]o cw[=e]n st[e,]nt aet th[=i]nre sw[=i]thran, on
      ofergyldum  110
  [.g]ierlan, ymb.scr[=y]dd mid mani[.g]fealdre f[=a]gnesse.' S[=e]o
      g[=a]stlice
  cw[=e]n, Godes [.g]e.lathung, is [.g]e.gl[e,]n[.g]ed mid d[=e]orwierthre
  fraetwunge and mani[.g]fealdum bl[=e]o g[=o]dra drohtnunga and
  mihta.

  H[=e]o sae[.g]de Salomone ealle hiere d[=i]egolnessa, and s[=e]o  115
  [.g]e.lathung [.g]e.openath Cr[=i]ste hiere inn-[.g]ehy[.g]d and tha
      d[=i]eglan
  [.g]e.th[=o]htas on s[=o]thre andetnesse.

  Olfendas b[=ae]ron th[=a] d[=e]orwierthan l[=a]c mid th[=ae]re cw[=e]ne
  {72}
  int[=o] Hierusal[=e]m; for th[=ae]m the th[=a] h[=ae]thnan, the [=ae]r
      w[=ae]ron
  [.g]e.hoferode thurh [.g][=i]tsunge and atollice thurh leahtras,
      b[=ae]ron,  120
  thurh hiera [.g]e.[.c]ierrednesse and [.g]e.l[=e]afan, th[=a]
      g[=a]stlican l[=a]c
  t[=o] Cr[=i]stes handum.

  S[=e]o cw[=e]n wundrode Salomones w[=i]sd[=o]mes, and his
      [.g]e.timbrunga,
  and the[.g]nunga; and s[=e]o [.g]e.lathung wundrath Cr[=i]stes
  w[=i]sd[=o]mes, for th[=ae]m the h[=e] is s[=o]th w[=i]sd[=o]m, and eall
      w[=i]sd[=o]m is  125
  of him. H[=e] [.g]e.timbrode th[=a] h[=e]alican heofonas and ealne
  middan[.g]eard, and ealle [.g]e.sceafta [.g]e.s[e,]tte on thrim thingum,
  _in mensura, et pondere, et numero_, thaet is, on [.g]e.mete, and
  on h[e,]fe, and on [.g]e.tele. Cr[=i]stes the[.g]nung is [=u]re h[=ae]lo
      and
  folca [=a].l[=i]esednes, and th[=a] sind [.g]e.s[=ae]li[.g]e the him
      the[.g]niath t[=o]  130
  [.g]e.cw[=e]mednesse on th[=ae]m g[=a]stlicum [.g]e.r[=y]num.

  S[=e]o cw[=e]n sae[.g]de thaet hiere n[=ae]re be healfum d[=ae]le
      [.g]e.sae[.g]d
  be Salomones m[=ae]rtho, and s[=e]o g[=a]stlice cw[=e]n, Godes
      [.g]e.lathung,
  oththe [.g]e.hwelc h[=a]li[.g] s[=a]wol, thonne h[=e]o cymth t[=o]
      th[=ae]re heofonlican
  Hierusal[=e]m, thonne [.g]e.sihth h[=e]o mi[.c]le m[=a]ran m[=ae]rtho
      135
  and wuldor thonne hiere [=ae]r on l[=i]fe thurh w[=i]tegan oththe
      apostolas
  [.g]e.c[=y]dd w[=ae]re. Ne mae[.g] n[=a]n [=e]age on thissum l[=i]fe
  [.g]e.s[=e]on, ne n[=a]n [=e]are [.g]e.h[=i]eran, ne n[=a]nes mannes
      heorte
  [=a].sm[=e]an th[=a] thing the God [.g]earcath th[=ae]m the hine lufiath.
      Th[=a]
  thing w[=e] magon be.[.g]ietan, ac w[=e] ne magon h[=i]e [=a].sm[=e]an,
      140
  ne [=u]s n[=ae]fre ne [=a].thr[=i]ett th[=a]ra g[=o]da [.g]e.nyhtsumnes.

  Cr[=i]st is ealra cyninga cyning, and sw[=a] sw[=a] ealle th[=e]oda
  woldon [.g]e.s[=e]on thone [.g]e.sibbsuman Salomon, and his w[=i]sd[=o]m
  [.g]e.h[=i]eran, and him mislicu l[=a]c br[=o]hton, sw[=a] [=e]ac n[=u]
      of eallum
  th[=e]odum [.g]e.wilniath m[e,]nn t[=o] [.g]e.s[=e]onne thone
      [.g]e-sibbsuman  145
  Cr[=i]st thurh [.g]e.l[=e]afan, and thone godspellican w[=i]sd[=o]m
      [.g]e.h[=i]eran,
  and h[=i]e him dae[.g]-hw[=ae]ml[=i]ce th[=a] g[=a]stlican l[=a]c
      [.g]e.offriath on
  mani[.g]fealdum [.g]e.metum.

IV.

  On C[=y]res dagum cyninges wr[=e][.g]don th[=a] Babil[=o]niscan thone
  {73}
  w[=i]tegan Dani[=e]l, for th[=ae]m the h[=e] t[=o].wearp hiera
      d[=e]ofol-[.g]ield,  150
  and cw[=ae]don [=a]n-m[=o]dl[=i]ce t[=o] th[=ae]m fore-sae[.g]dan cyninge
      C[=y]rum:
 'Bet[=ae][.c] [=u]s Dani[=e]l, the [=u]rne god B[=e]l t[=o].wearp, and
     thone dracan
  [=a].cwealde the w[=e] on be.l[=i]efdon; [.g]if th[=u] hine
      for.st[e,]ntst, w[=e]
  for.dilgiath th[=e] and th[=i]nne h[=i]red.'

  Th[=a] [.g]e.seah se cyning thaet h[=i]e [=a]n-m[=o]de w[=ae]ron, and
      n[=i]edunga  155
  thone w[=i]tegan him t[=o] handum [=a].s[.c][=e]af. H[=i]e th[=a] hine
  [=a].wurpon int[=o] [=a]num s[=e]athe, on th[=ae]m w[=ae]ron seofon
      l[=e]on, th[=ae]m
  man sealde dae[.g]hw[=ae]ml[=i]ce tw[=a] hr[=i]theru and tw[=a]
      s[.c][=e]ap, ac him
  waes th[=a] of.togen [=ae]lces f[=o]dan siex dagas, thaet h[=i]e thone
      Godes
  mann [=a].b[=i]tan scolden.                                  160

  On th[=ae]re t[=i]de waes sum [=o]ther w[=i]tega on J[=u]d[=e]a-lande,
      his
  nama waes Abacuc, s[=e] baer his rifterum m[e,]te t[=o] aecere. Th[=a]
  c[=o]m him t[=o] Godes [e,]n[.g]el, and cwaeth: 'Abacuc, ber thone
  m[e,]te t[=o] Babil[=o]ne, and s[e,]le Dani[=e]le, s[=e] the sitt on
      th[=a]ra l[=e]ona
  s[=e]athe.' Abacuc andwyrde th[=ae]m [e,]n[.g]le: 'L[=a] l[=e]of, ne
      [.g]e.seah  165
  ic n[=ae]fre th[=a] burg, ne ic thone s[=e]ath n[=a]t.'

  Th[=a] se [e,]n[.g]el [.g]e.l[=ae]hte hine be th[=ae]m feaxe, and hine
      baer
  t[=o] Babil[=o]ne, and hine s[e,]tte bufan th[=ae]m s[=e]athe. Th[=a]
      clipode se
  Abacuc: 'th[=u] Godes th[=e]ow, Dani[=e]l, nim th[=a]s l[=a]c the th[=e]
      God
  s[e,]nde!' Dani[=e]l cwaeth: 'M[=i]n Dryhten H[=ae]lend, s[=i]e th[=e]
      lof  170
  and weorth-mynd thaet th[=u] m[=e] [.g]e.mundest.' And h[=e] th[=a]
      th[=ae]re
  sande br[=e]ac. Witodl[=i]ce Godes [e,]n[.g]el th[=ae]r-rihte mid swiftum
  flyhte [.g]e.br[=o]hte thone disc-the[.g]n, Abacuc, th[=ae]r h[=e] hine
  [=ae]r [.g]e.nam.

  Se cyning th[=a] C[=y]rus on th[=ae]m seofothan dae[.g]e [=e]ode
      dr[=e]ori[.g]  175
  t[=o] th[=a]ra l[=e]ona s[=e]athe, and inn be.seah, and efne th[=a]
      Dani[=e]l
  sittende waes [.g]e.sundfull on.middan th[=ae]m l[=e]onum. Th[=a] clipode
  se cyning mid mi[.c]elre stefne: 'M[=ae]re is se God the Dani[=e]l
  on be.l[=i]efth.' And h[=e] th[=a] mid th[=ae]m worde hine [=a].t[=e]ah
      of th[=ae]m
  scraefe, and h[=e]t inn weorpan th[=a] the hine [=ae]r for.d[=o]n woldon.
      180
  Thaes cyninges h[=ae]s wearth hraedl[=i]ce [.g]e.fr[e,]mmed, and thaes
  w[=i]tegan [=e]hteras wurdon [=a].scofene be.twix th[=a] l[=e]on, and
      h[=i]e
  {74}
  th[=ae]r-rihte mid gr[=ae]digum [.c]eaflum h[=i]e ealle t[=o].t[=ae]ron.
      Th[=a]
  cwaeth se cyning: 'Forhtien and on.dr[=ae]den ealle eorth-b[=u]end
  Dani[=e]les God, for th[=ae]m the h[=e] is [=A].l[=i]esend and
      H[=ae]lend,  185
  wyr[.c]ende t[=a]cnu and wundru on heofonan and on eorthan.'

V.

  Nabochodonosor, se h[=ae]thena cyning, [.g]e.h[e,]rgode on Godes
  folce, on J[=u]d[=e]a-lande, and for hiera m[=a]n-d[=ae]dum God thaet
  [.g]e.thafode. Th[=a] [.g]e.nam h[=e] th[=a] m[=a]thm-fatu, gyldenu and
      silfrenu,
  binnan Godes temple, and t[=o] his lande mid him             190
  [.g]e.l[=ae]dde. Hit [.g]e.lamp eft siththan thaet h[=e] on swefne [=a]ne
  [.g]e.sihthe be him selfum [.g]e.seah, sw[=a] sw[=a] him siththan
      [=a].[=e]ode.

  Aefter thissum ymb twelf m[=o]nath, [=e]ode se cyning binnan
  his healle mid orm[=ae]tre [=u]p-[=a]hafennesse, h[e,]riende his weorc
  and his miht, and cwaeth: 'H[=u], ne is this s[=e]o mi[.c]le Babil[=o]n,
      195
  the ic self [.g]e.timbrode t[=o] cyne-st[=o]le and t[=o] thrymme, m[=e]
  selfum to wlite and wuldre, mid m[=i]num [=a]gnum mae[.g]ne
  and str[e,]n[.g]tho?' Ac him clipode th[=ae]rrihte t[=o] sw[=i]the
      [e,][.g]eslic
  stefn of heofonum, thus cwethende: 'Th[=u] Nabochodonosor,
  th[=i]n r[=i][.c]e [.g]e.w[=i]tt fram th[=e], and th[=u] bist fram mannum
      [=a].worpen,  200
  and th[=i]n wunung bith mid wild[=e]orum, and th[=u] itst gaers, sw[=a]
  sw[=a] oxa, seofon [.g][=e]ar, oth thaet th[=u] wite thaet se h[=e]alica
  God [.g]e.wielt manna r[=i][.c]a, and thaet h[=e] for.[.g]iefth
      r[=i][.c]e th[=ae]m
  the h[=e] wile.'

  Witodl[=i]ce on th[=ae]re ilcan t[=i]de waes th[=e]os spr[=ae][.c]
      [.g]e.fylled  205
  ofer Nabochodonosor, and h[=e] arn t[=o] wuda, and wunode mid
  wild[=e]orum, leofode be gaerse, sw[=a] sw[=a] n[=i]eten, oth thaet his
  feax w[=e]ox sw[=a] sw[=a] w[=i]f-manna, and his nae[.g]las sw[=a] sw[=a]
  earnes clawa.

  Eft siththan him for.[.g]eaf se aelmihtiga Wealdend his [.g]e.witt,  210
  and h[=e] cwaeth: 'Ic Nabochodonosor [=a].h[=o]f m[=i]n [=e]agan [=u]p
      t[=o]
  heofonum, and m[=i]n and[.g]iet m[=e] wearth for.[.g]iefen, and ic th[=a]
  bl[=e]tsode thone h[=i]ehstan God, and ic h[e,]rede and wuldrode
  {75}
  thone the leofath on [=e][.c]nesse, for th[=ae]m the his miht is
      [=e][.c]e, and
  his r[=i][.c]e st[e,]nt on m[=ae][.g]the and on m[=ae][.g]the. Ealle
      eorth-b[=u]end  215
  sind t[=o] n[=a]hte [.g]e.tealde on his with.metennesse. Aefter his
  willan h[=e] d[=e]th [=ae][.g]ther [.g]e on heofone [.g]e on eorthan, and
      nis
  n[=a]n thing the his mihte with.stande, oththe him t[=o] cwethe 'hw[=y]
  d[=e]st th[=u] sw[=a]?' On th[=ae]re t[=i]de m[=i]n and[.g]iet
      [.g]e.w[e,]nde t[=o] m[=e],
  and ic be.c[=o]m t[=o] weorth-mynde m[=i]nes cyne-r[=i][.c]es, and m[=i]n
      220
  m[e,]nnisce h[=i]w m[=e] be.c[=o]m. M[=i]ne witan m[=e] s[=o]hton, and
      m[=i]n
  m[=ae]rtho wearth [.g]e.[=e]acnod. N[=u] eornostl[=i]ce ic m[=ae]rsi[.g]e
      and
  wuldri[.g]e thone heofonlican cyning, for th[=ae]m the eall his weorc
  sind s[=o]th, and his wegas riht-w[=i]se, and h[=e] mae[.g]
      [.g]e.[=e]ath-m[=e]dan
  th[=a] the on m[=o]di[.g]nesse farath.'                      225

  Thus [.g]e.[=e]athm[=e]dde se aelmihtiga God thone m[=o]digan cyning
  Nabochodonosor.

{76}

IV.

SAMSON.

  [=A]n mann waes eardiende on Israh[=e]la th[=e]ode, Manu[=e]
  [.g]e.h[=a]ten, of th[=ae]re m[=ae][.g]the Dan; his w[=i]f waes
      un-t[=i]emend, and
  h[=i]e wunodon b[=u]tan [.c]ilde. Him c[=o]m th[=a] gangende t[=o] Godes
  [e,]n[.g]el, and cwaeth thaet h[=i]e scolden habban sunu him
  [.g]e.m[=ae]nne; 'ne h[=e] ealu ne drince n[=ae]fre oththe w[=i]n, ne
      n[=a]ht  5
  f[=u]les ne thi[.c][.g]e; s[=e] bith Gode h[=a]li[.g] fram his
      [.c]ildh[=a]de; and
  man ne m[=o]t hine [e,]fsian oththe be.s[.c]ieran, for th[=ae]m the h[=e]
  on.[.g]inth t[=o] [=a].l[=i]esenne his folc, Israh[=e]la th[=e]ode, of
      Philist[=e]a
  th[=e]owte.'

  H[=e]o [=a].c[e,]nde th[=a] sunu, sw[=a] sw[=a] hiere sae[.g]de se
      [e,]n[.g]el, and  10
  h[=e]t hine Samson; and h[=e] sw[=i]the w[=e]ox; and God hine
      bl[=e]tsode,
  and Godes g[=a]st waes on him. H[=e] wearth th[=a] mihti[.g] on
  mi[.c]elre str[e,]n[.g]tho, sw[=a] thaet h[=e] [.g]e.l[=ae]hte [=a]ne
      l[=e]on be we[.g]e, the
  hine [=a].b[=i]tan wolde, and t[=o].brae[.g]d h[=i]e t[=o] sty[.c][.c]um,
      swelce he
  t[=o].t[=ae]re sum [=e]athelic ti[.c][.c]en.                  15

  H[=e] be.gann th[=a] t[=o] winnenne with th[=a] Philist[=e]os, and hiera
  fela of.sl[=o]g and t[=o] scame t[=u]code, th[=e]ah the h[=i]e onweald
      haefden
  ofer h[=i]s l[=e]ode. Th[=a] f[=e]rdon th[=a] Philist[=e]i forth aefter
      Samsone,
  and h[=e]ton his l[=e]ode thaet h[=i]e hine [=a].[.g][=e]afen t[=o] hiera
      onwealde,
  thaet h[=i]e wrecan mihten hiera t[=e]on-r[=ae]denne mid tintregum  20
  on him. H[=i]e th[=a] hine [.g]e.bundon mid tw[=ae]m baestenum r[=a]pum
  and hine [.g]e.l[=ae]ddon t[=o] th[=ae]m folce. And th[=a]
      Philist[=e]iscan thaes
  fae[.g]nodon sw[=i]the; urnon him t[=o].[.g][=e]anes ealle hl[=y]dende;
      woldon
  hine tintre[.g]ian for hiera t[=e]onr[=ae]denne. Th[=a] t[=o].brae[.g]d
  Samson b[=e][.g]en his earmas, thaet th[=a] r[=a]pas t[=o]-burston the
      h[=e] mid  25
  {77}
  [.g]e.bunden waes. And h[=e] [.g]e.l[=ae]hte th[= a] s[=o]na sumes assan
  [.c]inn-b[=a]n the h[=e] th[=ae]r funde, and [.g]e.feaht with h[=i]e, and
      of.sl[=o][.g]
  [=a]n th[=u]send mid thaes assan [.c]innb[=a]ne. H[=e] wearth th[=a]
      sw[=i]the
  of.thyrst for th[=ae]m wundorlican sl[e,][.g]e, and baed thone
      heofonlican
  God thaet h[=e] him [=a].s[e,]nde drincan, for th[=ae]m the on th[=ae]re
      30
  n[=e]awiste naes n[=a]n waeters[.c]ipe. Th[=a] arn of th[=ae]n
      [.c]innb[=a]ne
  of [=a]num t[=e]th waeter; and Samson th[=a] dranc, and his Dryhtne
  thancode.

  Aefter thissum h[=e] f[=e]rde t[=o] Philist[=e]a lande, int[=o] [=a]nre
      byri[.g]
  on hiera onwealde, Gaza [.g]e.h[=a]ten. And h[=i]e thaes fae[.g]nodon;
      35
  be.s[e,]tton th[=a] th[=ae]t h[=u]s the h[=e] inne wunode; woldon hine
  [.g]e.niman mid th[=ae]m the h[=e] [=u]t [=e]ode on [=ae]rne-mer[.g]en,
      and hine
  of.sl[=e]an. Hwaet th[=a] Samson hiera sierwunga under.[.g]eat; and
  [=a].r[=a]s on middre nihte t[=o].middes his f[=e]ondum, and [.g]e.nam
  th[=a] burg-[.g]eatu, and [.g]e.baer on his hry[.c][.g]e mid th[=ae]m
      postum,  40
  sw[=a] sw[=a] h[=i]e be.locenu w[=ae]ron, [=u]p t[=o] [=a]nre d[=u]ne
      t[=o] ufeweardum
  th[=ae]m cnolle; and [=e]ode sw[=a] or-sorg of hiera [.g]e.sihthum.

  Hine be.sw[=a]c sw[=a].th[=e]ah siththan [=a]n w[=i]f, Dalila
      [.g]e.h[=a]ten, of
  th[=ae]m h[=ae]thnan folce, sw[=a] thaet h[=e] hiere sae[.g]de, thurh
      hiere sw[=i]cd[=o]m  45
  be.p[=ae]ht, on hw[=ae]m his str[e,]n[.g]tho waes and his wundorlicu
  miht. Th[=a] h[=ae]thnan Philist[=e]i be.h[=e]ton hiere s[.c]eattas with
      th[=ae]m
  the h[=e]o be.swice Samson thone strangan. Th[=a] [=a]scode h[=e]o
  hine [.g]eorne mid hiere [=o]l[=ae][.c]unge on hw[=ae]m his miht
      w[=ae]re;
  and h[=e] hiere andwyrde: '[.G]if ic b[=e]o [.g]e.bunden mid seofon  50
  r[=a]pum, of sinum [.g]eworhte, s[=o]na ic b[=e]o [.g]e.wield.' Thaet
  swicole w[=i]f th[=a] be.[.g]eat th[=a] seofon r[=a]pas, and h[=e] thurh
      sierwunge
  sw[=a] wearth [.g]e.bunden. And him man c[=y]thde thaet
  th[=ae]r c[=o]mon his f[=i]end; th[=a] t[=o].braec h[=e] s[=o]na th[=a]
      r[=a]pas, sw[=a]
  sw[=a] h[e,]fel-thr[=ae]das; and thaet w[=i]f nyste on hw[=ae]m his miht
      55
  waes. H[=e] wearth eft [.g]e.bunden mid eall-n[=i]wum r[=a]pum; and
  h[=e] th[=a] t[=o].braec, sw[=a] sw[=a] th[=a] [=o]thre.

  H[=e]o be.sw[=a]c hine sw[=a].th[=e]ah, thaet h[=e] hiere sae[.g]de aet
  {78}
  n[=i]ehstan: 'Ic eom Gode [.g]e.h[=a]lgod fram m[=i]num [.c]ildh[=a]de;
      and
  ic naes n[=ae]fre [.g]e.[e,]fsod, ne n[=ae]fre be.scoren; and [.g]if ic
      b[=e]o  60
  be.scoren, thonne b[=e]o ic un-mihti[.g], [=o]thrum mannum [.g]e.l[=i]c;'
  and h[=e]o l[=e]t th[=a] sw[=a].

  H[=e]o th[=a] on sumum dae[.g]e, th[=a] th[=a] h[=e] on sl[=ae]pe
      lae[.g], for.[.c]earf
  his seofon loccas, and [=a].weahte hine siththan; th[=a] waes
  h[=e] sw[=a] unmihti[.g] sw[=a] sw[=a] [=o]thre m[e,]nn. And th[=a]
      Philist[=e]i  65
  [.g]e.f[=e]ngon hine s[=o]na, sw[=a] sw[=a] h[=e]o hine be.l[=ae]wde, and
      [.g]e.l[=ae]ddon
  hine on.we[.g]; and h[=e]o haefde thone s[.c]eatt, sw[=a] sw[=a]
  him [.g]e.wearth.

  H[=i]e th[=a] hine [=a].bl[e,]ndon, and [.g]e.bundenne l[=ae]ddon on
  heardum racent[=e]agum h[=a]m t[=o] hiera byri[.g], and on cwearterne  70
  be.lucon t[=o] langre fierste: h[=e]ton hine grindan aet
  hiera hand-cweorne. Th[=a] w[=e]oxon his loccas and his miht
  eft on him. And th[=a] Philist[=e]i full.bl[=i]the w[=ae]ron: thancodon
  hiera Gode, Dagon [.g]e.h[=a]ten, swelce h[=i]e thurh his fultum
  hiera f[=e]ond [.g]e.wielden.                                 75

  Th[=a] Philist[=e]i th[=a] mi[.c]le feorme [.g]e.worhton, and
      [.g]e.samnodon
  h[=i]e on sumre [=u]p-fl[=o]ra, ealle th[=a] h[=e]afod-m[e,]nn, and
  [=e]ac swelce w[=i]f-m[e,]nn, thr[=e]o th[=u]send manna on mi[.c]elre
      blisse.
  And th[=a] th[=a] h[=i]e bl[=i]thost w[=ae]ron, th[=a] b[=ae]don h[=i]e
      sume thaet Samson
  m[=o]ste him macian sum gamen; and hine man s[=o]na           80
  [.g]e.f[e,]tte mid sw[=i]thlicre w[=a]funge, and h[=e]ton hine standan
  be.twix tw[=ae]m st[=ae]nenum sw[=e]orum. On th[=ae]m tw[=ae]m sw[=e]orum
  st[=o]d thaet h[=u]s eall [.g]e.worht. And Samson th[=a] plegode
  sw[=i]the him aet.foran; and [.g]e.l[=ae]hte th[=a] sw[=e]oras mid
      sw[=i]thlicre
  mihte, and sl[=o]g h[=i]e t[=o].gaedre thaet h[=i]e s[=o]na
      t[=o].burston; and  85
  thaet h[=u]s th[=a] [=a].f[=e]oll eall, th[=ae]m folce t[=o] d[=e]athe,
      and Samson
  forth mid, sw[=a] thaet h[=e] mi[.c]le m[=a] on his d[=e]athe
      [=a].cwealde
  thonne h[=e] [=ae]r cwic dyde.

{79}

V.

FROM THE CHRONICLE.

  Breten [=i]e[.g]-land is eahta hund m[=i]la lang, and tw[=a] hund
  m[=i]la br[=a]d; and h[=e]r sind on th[=ae]m [=i]e[.g]lande f[=i]f
      [.g]e.th[=e]odu:
  [E,]n[.g]lisc, Brettisc, Scyttisc, Pihtisc, and B[=o]c-laeden.

  [=Ae]rest w[=ae]ron b[=u]end thisses landes Brettas. Th[=a] c[=o]mon
  of Armenia, and [.g]e.s[=ae]ton s[=u]than-wearde Bretene [=ae]rest.
      Th[=a]  5
  [.g]e.lamp hit thaet Peohtas c[=o]mon s[=u]than of Scithian mid
  langum s[.c]ipum, n[=a] manigum; and th[=a] c[=o]mon [=ae]rest on
  North-ibernian [=u]p; and th[=ae]r b[=ae]don Scottas thaet h[=i]e
      th[=ae]r
  m[=o]sten wunian. Ac h[=i]e noldon him l[=i]efan, for th[=ae]m the h[=i]e
  cw[=ae]don thaet h[=i]e ne mihten ealle aet.gaedre [.g]e.wunian th[=ae]r.
      10
  And th[=a] cw[=ae]don th[=a] Scottas: 'W[=e] magon [=e]ow hwaethre
      r[=ae]d
  [.g]e.l[=ae]ran: w[=e] witon [=o]ther [=i]e[.g]land h[=e]r-be.[=e]astan;
      th[=ae]r [.g][=e]
  magon eardian, [.g]if [.g][=e] willath; and [.g]if hw[=a] [=e]ow
      with.st[e,]nt,
  w[=e] [=e]ow fultumiath thaet [.g][=e] hit mae[.g]en [.g]e.g[=a]n.'

  Th[=a] f[=e]rdon th[=a] Peohtas, and [.g]ef[=e]rdon this land
      northan-weard;  15
  s[=u]than-weard hit haefdon Brettas, sw[=a] sw[=a] w[=e] [=ae]r
      cw[=ae]don.
  And th[=a] Peohtas him [=a].b[=ae]don w[=i]f aet Scottum on th[=a]
      [.g]e.r[=a]d
  thaet h[=i]e [.g]e.curen hiera cyne-cynn [=a] on th[=a] w[=i]f-healfe.
      Thaet
  h[=i]e h[=e]oldon sw[=a] lange siththan.

  And th[=a] [.g]e.lamp ymbe [.g][=e]ara ryne thaet Scotta sum d[=ae]l  20
  [.g]e.w[=a]t of Ibernian on Bretene, and thaes landes sumne d[=ae]l
  [.g]e.[=e]odon; and waes hiera h[e,]re-toga R[=e]oda [.g]e.h[=a]ten: fram
  thaem h[=i]e sind [.g]e.n[e,]mnede D[=a]lr[=e]odi.
  {80}

  Anno 449. H[=e]r Marti[=a]nus and Valent[=i]nus on.f[=e]ngon r[=i][.c]e,
  and r[=i][.c]sodon seofon winter.                             25

  And on hiera dagum, H[e,]n[.g]est and Horsa, fram Wyrt[.g]eorne
  [.g]e.lathode, Bretta cyninge, [.g]e.s[=o]hton Bretene on th[=ae]m
  st[e,]de the is [.g]e.n[e,]mned Ypwines-fl[=e]ot, [=ae]rest Brettum t[=o]
      fultume,
  ac h[=i]e eft on h[=i]e fuhton.

  Se cyning h[=e]t h[=i]e feohtan on.[.g][=e]an Peohtas; and h[=i]e sw[=a]
      30
  dydon, and si[.g]e haefdon sw[=a] hw[=ae]r sw[=a] h[=i]e c[=o]mon.

  H[=i]e th[=a] s[e,]ndon t[=o] Angle, and h[=e]ton him s[e,]ndan m[=a]ran
  fultum; and h[=e]ton him s[e,][.c][.g]an Bret-w[=e]ala n[=a]htnesse and
      thaes
  landes cysta. H[=i]e th[=a] s[e,]ndon him m[=a]ran fultum. Th[=a]
      c[=o]mon
  th[=a] m[e,]nn of thrim m[=ae][.g]thum [.G]erm[=a]nie: of Eald-seaxum, of
      35
  [E,]n[.g]lum, of [=I]otum.

  Of [=I]otum c[=o]mon Cant-ware and Wiht-ware--thaet is s[=e]o
  m[=ae][.g]th the n[=u] eardath on Wiht--and thaet cynn on West-seaxum
  the man n[=u].[.g]iet h[=ae]tt '[=I]otena cynn.' Of Eald-seaxum
  c[=o]mon [=E]ast-seaxe, and S[=u]th-seaxe, and West-seaxe.    40
  Of Angle c[=o]mon--s[=e] [=a] siththan st[=o]d w[=e]ste be.twix [=I]otum
      and
  Seaxum--[=E]ast-[e,]n[.g]le, Middel-[e,]n[.g]le, Mier[.c]e, and ealle
      Northhymbre.

  455. H[=e]r H[e,]n[.g]est and Horsa fuhton with Wyrt[.g]eorne
  th[=ae]m cyninge in th[=ae]re st[=o]we the is [.g]e.cweden
      Ae[.g]les-threp;  45
  and his br[=o]thor Horsan man of.sl[=o]g. And aefter th[=ae]m
      H[e,]n[.g]est
  f[=e]ng t[=o] r[=i][.c]e, and Aesc his sunu.

  457. H[=e]r H[e,]n[.g]est and Aesc fuhton with Brettas in th[=ae]re
  st[=o]we the is [.g]e.cweden Cr[e,][.c][.g]an-ford, and th[=ae]r
      of.sl[=o]gon
  f[=e]ower th[=u]send wera. And th[=a] Brettas th[=a] for.l[=e]ton
      C[e,]nt-land,  50
  and mid mi[.c]le [e,][.g]e flugon t[=o] Lunden-byri[.g].

  473. H[=e]r Hen[.g]est and Aesc [.g]e.fuhton with W[=e]alas, and
  [.g]e.n[=a]mon un-[=a]r[=i]medlicu h[e,]re-r[=e]af, and th[=a] W[=e]alas
      flugon
  th[=a] [E,]n[.g]le sw[=a] sw[=a] f[=y]r.

  787. H[=e]r nam Beorht-r[=i][.c] cyning Offan dohtor [=E]ad-burge.  55
  And on his dagum c[=o]mon [=ae]rest thr[=e]o s[.c]ipu; and th[=a] se
  {81}
  [.g]e.r[=e]fa th[=ae]r t[=o] r[=a]d, and h[=i]e wolde dr[=i]fan t[=o]
      thaes cyninges
  t[=u]ne, th[=y] h[=e] nyste hwaet h[=i]e w[=ae]ron; and hine man
      of.sl[=o]g.
  Thaet w[=ae]ron th[=a] [=ae]restan s[.c]ipu D[e,]niscra manna the
      Angel-cynnes
  land [.g]e.s[=o]hton.                                         60

  851. H[=e]r [.C]eorl ealdor-mann [.g]e.feaht with h[=ae]thne m[e,]nn
  mid Defena-s[.c][=i]re aet Wi[.c][.g]an-beorge, and th[=ae]r mi[.c]el
      wael
  [.g]e.sl[=o]gon, and si[.g]e n[=a]mon.

  And th[=y] ilcan [.g][=e]are Aethelst[=a]n cyning and Ealhh[e,]re dux
  mi[.c]elne h[e,]re of.sl[=o]gon aet Sand-w[=i]c on C[e,]nt; and nigon  65
  s[.c]ipu [.g]e.f[=e]ngon, and th[=a] [=o]thru [.g]e.fl[=i]emdon; and
      h[=ae]thne m[e,]nn
  [=ae]rest ofer winter s[=ae]ton.

  And th[=y] ilcan [.g][=e]are c[=o]m f[=e]orthe healf hund s[.c]ipa on
  T[e,]mese-m[=u]than, and br[=ae]con Cantwara-burg, and Lunden-burg,
  and [.g]e.fl[=i]emdon Beorhtwulf Mier[.c]na cyning mid his    70
  fierde; and f[=e]rdon th[=a] s[=u]th ofer T[e,]mese on S[=u]thri[.g]e;
      and
  him [.g]e.feaht with Aethelwulf cyning and Aethelbeald his
  sunu aet [=A]c-l[=e]a mid West-seaxna fierde, and th[=ae]r thaet
      m[=ae]ste
  wael [.g]e.sl[=o]gon on h[=ae]thnum h[e,]re the w[=e] s[e,][.c][.g]an
      h[=i]erdon oth
  thisne andweardan dae[.g], and th[=ae]r si[.g]e n[=a]mon.     75

  867. H[=e]r f[=o]r se h[e,]re of [=E]ast-[e,]n[.g]lum ofer
      Humbre-m[=u]than
  t[=o] Eoforw[=i]c-[.c]eastre on North-hymbre. And th[=ae]r waes mi[.c]el
  un-[.g]ethw[=ae]rnes th[=ae]re th[=e]ode be.twix him selfum, and h[=i]e
  haefdon hiera cyning [=a].worpenne [=O]sbryht, and un-[.g]ecyndne
  cyning under.f[=e]ngon Aellan. And h[=i]e late on [.g][=e]are t[=o]
      th[=ae]m  80
  [.g]e.[.c]ierdon thaet h[=i]e with thone h[e,]re winnende w[=ae]ron; and
      h[=i]e
  th[=e]ah mi[.c]le fierd [.g]e.gadrodon, and thone h[e,]re s[=o]hton aet
  Eoforw[=i]c-[.c]eastre; and on th[=a] [.c]eastre br[=ae]con, and h[=i]e
      sume
  inne wurdon; and th[=ae]r waes un-[.g]emetlic wael ge.slae[.g]en
      Northanhymbra,
  sume binnan, sume b[=u]tan, and th[=a] cyningas               85
  b[=e][.g]en ofslae[.g]ene; and s[=e]o l[=a]f with thone h[e,]re frith
      nam.

{82}

VI.

KING EDMUND.

  Sum sw[=i]the [.g]e.l[=ae]red munuc c[=o]m s[=u]than ofer s[=ae] fram
      sancte
  Benedictes st[=o]we, on Aethelredes cyninges dae[.g]e, to D[=u]nst[=a]ne
  aer[.c]e-biscope, thrim [.g][=e]arum [=ae]r th[=ae]m the h[=e]
      forth.f[=e]rde,
  and se munuc h[=a]tte Abbo. Th[=a] wurdon h[=i]e aet spr[=ae][.c]e, oth
  thaet D[=u]nst[=a]n reahte be sancte [=E]admunde, sw[=a] sw[=a]
      [=E]admundes  5
  sweord-bora hit reahte Aethelst[=a]ne cyninge, th[=a] th[=a]
  D[=u]nst[=a]n [.g][=e]ong mann waes, and se sweord-bora waes for.ealdod
  mann. Th[=a] [.g]e.s[e,]tte se munuc ealle th[=a], [.g]e.r[e,][.c]ednesse
      on
  [=a]nre b[=e]c, and eft, th[=a] th[=a] s[=e]o b[=o]c c[=o]m t[=o] [=u]s,
      binnan f[=e]am
  [.g][=e]arum, th[=a] [=a].w[e,]ndon w[=e] hit on [E,]n[.g]lisc, sw[=a]
      sw[=a] hit h[=e]r.aefter  10
  st[e,]nt. Se munuc th[=a] Abbo binnan tw[=ae]m [.g][=e]arum
      [.g]e.w[e,]nde
  h[=a]m t[=o] his mynstre, and wearth s[=o]na t[=o] abbode
  [.g]e.s[e,]tt on th[=ae]m ilcan mynstre.

  [=E]admund se [=e]adiga, [=E]ast-[e,]n[.g]la cyning, waes snotor and
  weorthfull, and weorthode simle mid aethelum th[=e]awum thone  15
  aelmihtigan God. H[=e] waes [=e]ath-m[=o]d and [.g]e.thungen, and
  sw[=a] [=a]n-r[=ae]d thurh.wunode thaet h[=e] nolde [=a].b[=u]gan t[=o]
      bismerfullum
  leahtrum, ne on n[=a]wthre healfe h[=e] ne [=a].hielde his
  th[=e]awas, ac waes simle [.g]e.myndi[.g] th[=ae]re s[=o]than l[=a]re:
      '[.G]if th[=u]
  eart t[=o] h[=e]afod-m[e,]nn [.g]e.s[e,]tt, ne [=a].h[e,]fe th[=u]
      th[=e], ac b[=e]o be.twix  20
  mannum sw[=a] sw[=a] [=a]n mann of him.' H[=e] waes
  cysti[.g] w[=ae]dlum and widewum sw[=a] sw[=a] faeder, and mid
  wel-willendnesse [.g]e.wissode his folc simle t[=o] riht-w[=i]snesse,
  and th[=ae]m r[=e]thum st[=i]erde, and [.g]e.s[=ae]li[.g]l[=i]ce leofode
      on s[=o]thum
  [.g]e.l[=e]afan.                                              25
  {83}

  Hit [.g]e.lamp th[=a] aet n[=i]ehstan thaet th[=a] D[e,]niscan l[=e]ode
      f[=e]rdon
  mid s[.c]ip-h[e,]re, h[e,]rgiende and sl[=e]ande w[=i]de [.g]eond land,
      sw[=a]
  sw[=a] hiera [.g]e.wuna is. On th[=ae]m flotan w[=ae]ron th[=a] fyrmestan
  h[=e]afod-m[e,]nn, Hinguar and Hubba, [.g]e.[=a]nl[=ae]hte thurh
      d[=e]ofol,
  and h[=i]e on Northhymbra-lande [.g]e.l[e,]ndon mid aescum, and  30
  [=a].w[=e]ston thaet land, and th[=a] l[=e]ode of.sl[=o]gon. Th[=a]
      [.g]e.w[e,]nde
  Hinguar [=e]ast mid his s[.c]ipum, and Hubba be.l[=a]f on
      Northhymbra-lande,
  [.g]e.wunnenum si[.g]e mid wael-hr[=e]ownesse.
  Hinguar th[=a] be.c[=o]m t[=o] [=E]ast-[e,]n[.g]lum r[=o]wende on
      th[=ae]m [.g][=e]are
  the Aelfred aetheling [=a]n and tw[e,]nti[.g] [.g][=e]ara waes, s[=e] the
      West-seaxna  35
  cyning siththan wearth m[=ae]re. And se fore-sae[.g]da
  Hinguar f[=ae]rl[=i]ce, sw[=a] sw[=a] wulf, on lande be.stealcode, and
  th[=a] l[=e]ode sl[=o]g, weras and w[=i]f, and th[=a] un[.g]ewittigan
      [.c][=i]ld,
  and to bismere t[=u]code th[=a] bilew[=i]tan Cr[=i]stenan. H[=e] s[e,]nde
  th[=a] siththan s[=o]na t[=o] th[=ae]m cyninge b[=e]otlic [=ae]rende,
      thaet h[=e]  40
  [=a].b[=u]gan scolde t[=o] his mann-r[=ae]denne, [.g]if h[=e] his
      f[=e]ores r[=o]hte.
  Se [=ae]rend-raca c[=o]m th[=a] t[=o] [=E]admunde cyninge, and Hinguares
  [=ae]rende him arodl[=i]ce [=a].b[=e]ad: 'Hinguar [=u]re cyning, c[=e]ne
  and si[.g]efaest on s[=ae] and on lande, haefth fela th[=e]oda
      [.g]e.weald,
  and c[=o]m n[=u] mid fierde f[=ae]rl[=i]ce h[=e]r t[=o] lande, thaet  45
  h[=e] h[=e]r winter-setl mid his werode haebbe. N[=u] h[=ae]tt h[=e]
      th[=e]
  d[=ae]lan th[=i]ne d[=i]eglan gold-hordas and th[=i]nra ieldrena
      [.g]e.str[=e]on
  arodl[=i]ce with hine, and th[=u] b[=e]o his under-cyning, [.g]if th[=u]
  cwic b[=e]on wilt, for th[=ae]m the th[=u] naefst th[=a] miht thaet
      th[=u] mae[.g]e
  him with.standan.'                                            50

  Hwaet th[=a] [=E]admund cyning clipode [=a]nne biscop the him
  th[=a] [.g]e.h[e,]ndost waes, and with hine sm[=e]ade h[=u] h[=e]
      th[=ae]m
  r[=e]than Hinguare andwyrdan scolde. Th[=a] forhtode se biscop
  for th[=ae]m f[=ae]rlican [.g]e.limpe, and for thaes cyninges l[=i]fe,
  and cwaeth thaet him r[=ae]d th[=u]hte thaet h[=e] t[=o] th[=ae]m
      [.g]e.buge the  55
  him b[=e]ad Hinguar. Th[=a] sw[=i]gode se cyning, and be.seah
  t[=o] th[=ae]re eorthan, and cwaeth th[=a] aet n[=i]ehstan cynel[=i]ce
      him
  t[=o]: '[=E]al[=a] th[=u] biscop, t[=o] bismere sind [.g]e.t[=a]wode
      th[=a]s earman
  {84}
  land-l[=e]ode, and m[=e] n[=u] l[=e]ofre w[=ae]re thaet ic on
      [.g]e.feohte
  f[=e]olle with th[=ae]m the m[=i]n folc m[=o]ste hiera eardes br[=u]can.'
      60
  And se biscop cwaeth: '[=E]al[=a] th[=u] l[=e]ofa cyning, th[=i]n folc
  l[=i]th of.slae[.g]en, and th[=u] naefst thone fultum thaet th[=u]
      feohtan
  mae[.g]e, and th[=a]s flot-m[e,]nn cumath, and th[=e] cwicne
      [.g]e.bindath,
  b[=u]tan th[=u] mid fl[=e]ame th[=i]num f[=e]ore [.g]e.beorge, oththe
      th[=u] th[=e] sw[=a]
  [.g]e.beorge thaet th[=u] b[=u]ge t[=o] him.' Th[=a] cwaeth [=E]admund
      cyning,  65
  sw[=a] sw[=a] h[=e] full.c[=e]ne waes: 'thaes ic [.g]e.wilni[.g]e and
      [.g]e.w[=y]s[.c]e
  mid m[=o]de thaet ic [=a]na ne be.l[=i]fe aefter m[=i]num l[=e]ofum
      the[.g]num,
  the on hiera b[e,]ddum wurdon mid bearnum and w[=i]fum f[=ae]rl[=i]ce
  of.slae[.g]ene fram thissum flot-mannum. Naes m[=e] n[=ae]fre
      [.g]e.wunelic
  thaet ic worhte fl[=e]ames, ac ic wolde sw[=i]thor sweltan,   70
  [.g]if ic thorfte, for m[=i]num [=a]gnum earde, and se aelmihtiga God
  w[=a]t thaet ic nyle [=a].b[=u]gan fram his b[=i]-g[e,]n[.g]um [=ae]fre,
      ne fram
  his s[=o]thre lufe, swelte ic, libbe ic.'

  Aefter thissum wordum h[=e] [.g]e.w[e,]nde t[=o] th[=ae]m [=ae]rend-racan
      the
  Hinguar him t[=o] s[e,]nde, and sae[.g]de him un.forht: 'Witodl[=i]ce  75
  th[=u] w[=ae]re n[=u] wierthe sl[e,][.g]es, ac ic nyle [=a].f[=y]lan on
      th[=i]num f[=u]lum
  bl[=o]de m[=i]ne cl[=ae]nan handa, for th[=ae]m the ic Cr[=i]ste
      folgi[.g]e, the
  [=u]s sw[=a] [.g]e.b[=y]snode; ac ic bl[=i]thel[=i]ce wile b[=e]on
      of.slae[.g]en
  thurh [=e]ow, [.g]if hit sw[=a] God fore-s[.c][=e]awath. Far n[=u]
      sw[=i]the hrathe,
  and s[e,][.g]e th[=i]num r[=e]than hl[=a]forde, "ne [=a].b[=y]hth
      n[=ae]fre [=E]admund  80
  Hinguare on l[=i]fe, h[=ae]thnum h[e,]re-togan, b[=u]tan h[=e] to
      H[=ae]lende
  Cr[=i]ste [=ae]rest mid [.g]e.l[=e]afan on thissum lande [.g]e.b[=u]ge."'

  Th[=a] [.g]e.w[e,]nde se [=ae]rend-raca arodl[=i]ce on.we[.g], and
      [.g]e.m[=e]tte
  be we[.g]e thone wael-hr[=e]owan Hinguar mid ealre his fierde
  f[=u]se to [=E]admunde, and sae[.g]de th[=ae]m [=a]rleasan h[=u] him
      [.g]e.andwyrd  85
  waes. Hinguar beb[=e]ad th[=a] mid bieldo th[=ae]m s[.c]ip-h[e,]re
  thaet h[=i]e thaes cyninges [=a]nes ealle c[=e]pan scolden, the his
      h[=ae]se
  for.seah, and hine s[=o]na bindan.

  Hwaet th[=a] [=E]admund cyning, mid th[=ae]m the Hinguar c[=o]m,
  st[=o]d innan his healle, thaes H[=ae]lendes [.g]e.myndi[.g], and
      [=a].wearp  90
  his w[=ae]pnu: wolde [.g]e.efenl[=ae][.c]an Cr[=i]stes
      [.g]e.b[=y]snungum, the
  {85}
  for.b[=e]ad Petre mid w[=ae]pnum t[=o] winnenne with th[=a]
      waelhr[=e]owan
  I[=u]d[=e]iscan. Hwaet th[=a] [=a]rl[=e]asan th[=a] [=E]admund
      [.g]e.bundon, and
  [.g]e.bismrodon huxl[=i]ce, and b[=e]oton mid s[=a]glum, and sw[=a]
  siththan l[=ae]ddon thone [.g]e.l[=e]affullan cyning t[=o] [=a]num
      eorth-faestan  95
  tr[=e]owe, and t[=i]e[.g]don hine th[=ae]r-t[=o] mid heardum b[e,]ndum,
  and hine eft swungon langl[=i]ce mid swipum; and h[=e]
  simle clipode be.twix th[=ae]m swinglum mid s[=o]thum [.g]e.l[=e]afan
      t[=o]
  H[=ae]lende Cr[=i]ste; and th[=a] h[=ae]thnan th[=a] for his
      [.g]e.l[=e]afan wurdon
  w[=o]dl[=i]ce ierre, for th[=ae]m the h[=e] clipode Cr[=i]st him t[=o]
      fultume:  100
  h[=i]e scuton th[=a] mid gafelocum him t[=o], swelce him to gamene,
  oth thaet h[=e] eall waes be.s[e,]tt mid hiera scotungum, swelce [=i]les
  byrsta, sw[=a] sw[=a] Sebasti[=a]nus waes. Th[=a] [.g]e.seah Hinguar, se
  [=a]rl[=e]asa flotmann, thaet se aethela cyning nolde Cr[=i]ste
      with.sacan,
  ac mid [=a]nr[=ae]dum [.g]e.l[=e]afan hine [=ae]fre clipode: h[=e]t hine
      th[=a]  105
  be.h[=e]afdian, and th[=a] h[=ae]thnan sw[=a] dydon. Be.twix th[=ae]m the
      h[=e]
  clipode t[=o] Cr[=i]ste th[=a].[.g]iet, th[=a] tugon th[=a] h[=ae]thnan
      thone h[=a]lgan
  t[=o] sl[e,][.g]e, and mid [=a]num sw[e,]n[.g]e sl[=o]gon him of thaet
      h[=e]afod,
  and his s[=a]wol s[=i]thode [.g]e.s[=ae]li[.g] t[=o] Cr[=i]ste. Th[=ae]r
      waes sum
  mann [.g]e.h[e,]nde [.g]e.healden, thurh God be.h[=y]dd th[=ae]m
      h[=ae]thnum,  110
  the this [.g]e.h[=i]erde eall, and hit eft sae[.g]de, sw[=a] sw[=a] w[=e]
      hit
  s[e,][.c][.g]ath h[=e]r.

  Hwaet th[=a] se flot-h[e,]re f[=e]rde eft t[=o] s[.c]ipe, and
      be.h[=y]ddon thaet
  h[=e]afod thaes h[=a]lgan [=E]admundes on th[=ae]m thi[.c][.c]um
      br[=e]mlum,
  thaet hit be.byr[.g]ed ne wurde. Th[=a] aefter fierste siththan h[=i]e
      115
  [=a].farene w[=ae]ron, c[=o]m thaet land-folc t[=o], the th[=ae]r t[=o]
      l[=a]fe waes,
  th[=ae]r hiera hl[=a]fordes l[=i]c lae[.g] b[=u]tan h[=e]afde, and wurdon
      swithe
  s[=a]ri[.g]e for his sl[e,][.g]e on m[=o]de, and h[=u]ru thaet h[=i]e
      naefden thaet
  h[=e]afod t[=o] th[=ae]m bodi[.g]e. Th[=a] sae[.g]de se s[.c][=e]awere
      the hit [=ae]r
  [.g]e.seah, thaet th[=a] flotm[e,]nn haefden thaet h[=e]afod mid him; and
      120
  waes him [.g]e.th[=u]ht, sw[=a] sw[=a] hit waes full.s[=o]th, thaet
      h[=i]e beh[=y]dden
  thaet h[=e]afod on th[=ae]m holte for.hwega.

  H[=i]e [=e]odon th[=a] [e,]ndemes ealle t[=o] th[=ae]m wuda,
      s[=e][.c]ende [.g]e.hw[=ae]r,
  [.g]eond th[=y]flas and br[=e]mlas, [.g]if h[=i]e [=a]-hw[=ae]r mihten
  {86}
  [.g]e.m[=e]tan thaet h[=e]afod. Waes [=e]ac mi[.c]el wundor thaet [=a]n
      wulf  125
  wearth [=a].s[e,]nd, thurh Godes wissunge, t[=o] be.w[e,]rienne thaet
  h[=e]afod with th[=a] [=o]thru d[=e]or ofer dae[.g] and niht. H[=i]e
      [=e]odon th[=a]
  s[=e][.c]ende and simle clipiende, sw[=a] sw[=a] hit [.g]e.wunelic is
      th[=ae]m
  the on wuda g[=a]th oft, 'hw[=ae]r eart th[=u] n[=u], [.g]e.f[=e]ra?' And
      him
  andwyrde thaet h[=e]afod, 'h[=e]r, h[=e]r, h[=e]r;' and sw[=a]
      [.g]e.l[=o]me  130
  clipode andswariende him eallum, sw[=a] oft sw[=a] hiera [=ae]ni[.g]
  clipode, oth thaet h[=i]e ealle be.c[=o]mon thurh th[=a] clipunge him
      t[=o].
  Th[=a] lae[.g] se gr[=ae]ga wulf the be.wiste thaet h[=e]afod, and mid
      his
  tw[=ae]m f[=o]tum haefde thaet h[=e]afod be.clypped, gr[=ae]di[.g] and
      hungri[.g],
  and for Gode ne dorste thaes h[=e]afdes on.byr[.g]an, ac     135
  h[=e]old hit with d[=e]or. Th[=a] wurdon h[=i]e of.wundrode thaes
  wulfes hierd-r[=ae]denne, and thaet h[=a]li[.g]e h[=e]afod h[=a]m
      f[e,]redon
  mid him, thanciende th[=ae]m Aelmihtigan ealra his wundra.
  Ac se wulf folgode forth mid th[=ae]m h[=e]afde, oth thaet h[=i]e t[=o]
  t[=u]ne c[=o]mon, swelce h[=e] tam waere, and [.g]e.w[e,]nde eft siththan
      140
  t[=o] wuda on.[.g][=e]an.

  Th[=a] land-l[=e]ode th[=a] siththan l[e,][.g]don thaet h[=e]afod t[=o]
      th[=ae]m h[=a]lgan
  bodi[.g]e, and be.byri[.g]don sw[=a] h[=i]e s[=e]lest mihton on swelcre
  hraedunge, and [.c]iri[.c]an [=a].r[=ae]rdon s[=o]na him on.uppan. Eft
  th[=a] on fierste, aefter fela [.g][=e]arum, th[=a] s[=e]o h[e,]rgung
      [.g]e.sw[=a]c,  145
  and sibb wearth for.[.g]iefen th[=ae]m [.g]e.sw[e,]n[.c]tan folce, th[=a]
      f[=e]ngon
  h[=i]e t[=o].gaedre, and worhton [=a]ne [.c]iri[.c]an weorthl[=i]ce
      th[=ae]m h[=a]lgan,
  for th[=ae]m the ge.l[=o]me wundru wurdon aet his byr[.g]enne, aet
  th[=ae]m [.g]e.bed-h[=u]se th[=ae]r h[=e] be.byr[.g]ed waes. H[=i]e
      woldon th[=a]
  f[e,]rian mid folclicre weorthmynde thone h[=a]lgan l[=i]chaman, and  150
  l[e,][.c][.g]an innan th[=ae]re [.c]iri[.c]an. Th[=a] waes mi[.c]el
      wundor thaet h[=e]
  waes eall sw[=a] [.g]e.h[=a]l swelce h[=e] cwic w[=ae]re, mid cl[=ae]num
      l[=i]chaman,
  and his sw[=e]ora waes [.g]e.h[=ae]led, the [=ae]r waes for.slae[.g]en,
      and
  waes swelce [=a]n seolcen thr[=ae]d ymbe his sw[=e]oran, mannum t[=o]
  sweotolunge h[=u] h[=e] ofs.lae[.g]en waes. [=E]ac swelce th[=a] wunda,
      155
  the th[=a] waelhr[=e]owan h[=ae]thnan mid [.g]e.l[=o]mum scotungum on his
  l[=i]ce macodon, w[=ae]ron [.g]e.h[=ae]lde thurh thone heofonlican God;
  {87}
  and h[=e]; l[=i]th sw[=a] onsund oth thisne and-weardan dae[.g],
      and-b[=i]diende
  [=ae]ristes and thaes [=e][.c]an wuldres. His l[=i]chama [=u]s
  c[=y]thth, the l[=i]th un-formolsnod, thaet h[=e] b[=u]tan for.li[.g]re
      h[=e]r on  160
  worulde leofode, and mid cl[=ae]num l[=i]fe t[=o]; Cr[=i]ste s[=i]thode.

  Sum widewe wunode, [=O]swyn [.g]e.h[=a]ten, aet thaes h[=a]lgan
  byr[.g]enne, on [.g]e.bedum and faestennum manigu [.g][=e]ar siththan.
  S[=e]o wolde [e,]fsian [=ae]lce [.g][=e]are thone sanct, and his
      nae[.g]las
  [.c]eorfan s[=i]eferl[=i]ce mid lufe, and on scr[=i]ne healdan t[=o]
      h[=a]li[.g]-d[=o]me  165
  on weofode. Tha weorthode thaet land-folc mid [.g]e.l[=e]afan thone
  sanct, and Th[=e]odred biscop thearle mid [.g]iefum on golde and
  on seolfre, th[=ae]m sancte t[=o] weorthmynde.

  Th[=a] c[=o]mon on sumne s[=ae]l un-[.g]es[=ae]lige th[=e]ofas eahta on
  [=a]nre nihte t[=o] th[=ae]m [=a]r-weorthan h[=a]lgan: woldon stelan
      th[=a]  170
  m[=a]thmas the m[e,]nn thider br[=o]hton, and cunnodon mid craefte
  h[=u] h[=i]e inn cuman mihten. Sum sl[=o]g mid sl[e,][.c][.g]e sw[=i]the
      th[=a]
  haespan, sum hiera mid f[=e]olan f[=e]olode ymb.[=u]tan, sum [=e]ac
  under.dealf th[=a] duru mid spadan, sum hiera mid hl[=ae]ddre wolde
  on.l[=u]can th[=ae]t [=e]ag-th[=y]rel; ac h[=i]e swuncon on [=i]del, and
      earml[=i]ce  175
  f[=e]rdon, sw[=a] thaet se h[=a]lga wer h[=i]e wundorl[=i]ce [.g]e.band,
  [=ae]lcne sw[=a] h[=e] st[=o]d str[=u]tiendne mid t[=o]le, thaet hiera
      n[=a]n ne
  mihte thaet morth [.g]e.fr[e,]mman ne h[=i]e thanon [=a].styrian; ac
  st[=o]don sw[=a] oth mer[.g]en. M[e,]nn th[=a] thaes wundrodon, h[=u]
      th[=a]
  weargas hangodon, sum on hl[=ae]ddre, sum l[=e]at t[=o] [.g]e.delfe,  180
  and [=ae]lc on his weorce waes faeste [.g]e.bunden. H[=i]e wurdon
  th[=a] [.g]e.br[=o]hte t[=o] th[=ae]m biscope ealle, and h[=e] h[=e]t
      h[=i]e [=a].h[=o]n on
  h[=e]am [.g]ealgum ealle; ac h[=e] naes n[=a] [.g]e.myndi[.g] h[=u] se
      mildheorta
  God clipode thurh his w[=i]tegan th[=a]s word the h[=e]r standath:
  _Eos qui ducuntur ad mortem eruere ne cesses_, 'th[=a] the man l[=ae]tt
      185
  t[=o] d[=e]athe [=a].l[=i]es h[=i]e [=u]t simle.' And [=e]ac th[=a]
      h[=a]lgan can[=o]nes
  b[=e]c [.g]e.h[=a]dodum for.b[=e]odath [.g]e biscopum [.g]e pr[=e]ostum
      t[=o]
  b[=e]onne ymbe th[=e]ofas, for th[=ae]m the hit ne [.g]e.byreth th[=ae]m
      the
  b[=e]op [.g]e.corene Gode to the[.g]nienne thaet h[=i]e
      [.g]e.thw[=ae]rl[=ae][.c]an
  scylen on [=ae]ni[.g]es mannes d[=e]athe, [.g]if h[=i]e b[=e]oth Dryhtnes
      190
  {88}
  the[.g]nas. Eft th[=a] Th[=e]odred biscop s[.c][=e]awode his b[=e]c,
      h[=e] siththan
  be.hr[=e]owsode mid [.g][=e]omrunge thaet h[=e] sw[=a] r[=e]thne d[=o]m
      s[e,]tte
  th[=ae]m un[.g]es[=ae]ligum th[=e]ofum, and hit be.s[=a]rgode [=ae]fre
      oth his
  l[=i]fes [e,]nde, and th[=a] l[=e]ode baed [.g]eorne thaet h[=i]e him mid
      faesten
  full[=i]ce thr[=i]e dagas, biddende thone Aelmihtigan thaet h[=e] him
      195
  [=a]rian scolde.

  On th[=ae]m lande waes sum mann, L[=e]ofst[=a]n [.g]e.h[=a]ten,
      r[=i][.c]e
  for worulde, un-[.g]ewitti[.g] for Gode; s[=e] r[=a]d t[=o] th[=ae]m
      h[=a]lgan
  mid r[=i][.c]etere sw[=i]the, and h[=e]t him aet.[=i]ewan orgell[=i]ce
      sw[=i]the
  thone h[=a]lgan sanct, hwaether h[=e] [.g]e.sund w[=ae]re; ac sw[=a]
      hrathe  200
  sw[=a] h[=e] [.g]e.seah thaes sanctes l[=i]chaman, th[=a] [=a].w[=e]dde
      h[=e] s[=o]na,
  and wael-hr[=e]owl[=i]ce grymetode, and earml[=i]ce [.g]e.[e,]ndode yflum
  d[=e]athe. This is th[=ae]m [.g]e.l[=i]c the se [.g]e.l[=e]affulla
      p[=a]pa Greg[=o]rius
  sae[.g]de on his [.g]es[e,]tnesse be th[=ae]m h[=a]lgan Laurentie, the
      l[=i]th on
  R[=o]me-byri[.g], thaet m[e,]nn wolden s[.c][=e]awian h[=u] h[=e]
      l[=ae][.g]e [.g]e  205
  g[=o]de [.g]e yfle; ac God h[=i]e [.g]e.stilde sw[=a] thaet th[=ae]r
      swulton
  on th[=ae]re s[.c][=e]awunge seofon m[e,]nn aet.gaedre; th[=a]
      [.g]eswicon
  th[=a] [=o]thre t[=o] s[.c][=e]awienne thone martyr mid m[e,]nniscum
      [.g]e.dwylde.

  Fela wundra w[=e] [.g]e.h[=i]erdon on folclicre spr[=ae][.c]e be th[=ae]m
      210
  h[=a]lgan [=E]admunde, the w[=e] h[=e]r nyllath on [.g]e.write s[e,]ttan,
      ac h[=i]e
  w[=a]t [.g]e.hw[=a]. On thissum h[=a]lgan is sweotol, and on swelcum
  [=o]thrum, thaet God aelmihti[.g] mae[.g] thone mann [=a].r[=ae]ran eft
      on
  d[=o]mes dae[.g]e onsundne of eorthan, s[=e] the hielt [=E]admund
      h[=a]lne
  his l[=i]chaman oth thone m[=i][.c]lan dae[.g], th[=e]ah the h[=e] on
      moldan c[=o]me.  215
  Wierthe w[=ae]re s[=e]o st[=o]w for th[=ae]m weorthfullan h[=a]lgan thaet
      h[=i]e
  man weorthode and wel [.g]e.l[=o]gode mid cl[=ae]num Godes th[=e]owum
  t[=o] Cr[=i]stes th[=e]owd[=o]me; for th[=ae]m the se h[=a]lga is
      m[=ae]rra thonne
  m[e,]nn mae[.g]en [=a].sm[=e]an. Nis Angel-cynn be.d[=ae]led Dryhtnes
  h[=a]lgena, thonne on [E,]n[.g]la-lande li[.c][.g]ath swelce h[=a]lgan
      swelce  220
  thes h[=a]lga cyning, and C[=u]thberht se [=e]adiga and sancte
  Aethelthr[=y]th on [=E]li[.g], and [=e]ac hiere sweostor, onsund on
      l[=i]chaman,
  [.g]e.l[=e]afan t[=o] trymmunge. Sind [=e]ac fela [=o]thre on
  {89}
  Angel-cynne h[=a]lgan, the fela wundra wyr[.c]ath, sw[=a] sw[=a] hit
  w[=i]de is c[=u]th, th[=ae]m Aelmihtigan t[=o] lofe, the h[=i]e on
      [.g]e.l[=i]efdon.  225
  Cr[=i]st [.g]e.sweotolath mannum thurh his m[=ae]re h[=a]lgan thaet h[=e]
      is
  aelmihti[.g] God the wyr[.c]th swelc wundru, th[=e]ah the th[=a] earman
  I[=u]d[=e]iscan hine eallunga with.s[=o]cen, for th[=ae]m the h[=i]e sind
  [=a].wier[.g]de, sw[=a] sw[=a] h[=i]e w[=y]s[.c]ton him selfum. Ne
      b[=e]oth n[=a]n
  wundru [.g]e.worht aet hiera byr[.g]ennum, for th[=ae]m the h[=i]e ne
      230
  [.g]e.l[=i]efath on thone lifiendan Cr[=i]st; ac Cr[=i]st
      [.g]e.sweotolath
  mannum hw[=ae]r se g[=o]da [.g]e.l[=e]afa is, thonne h[=e] swelc wundru
  wyr[.c]th thurh his h[=a]lgan w[=i]de [.g]eond th[=a]s eorthan, thaes him
      s[=i]e
  wuldor and lof [=a] mid his heofonlicum Faeder and th[=ae]m H[=a]lgan
  G[=a]ste, [=a] b[=u]tan [e,]nde.                             235

{91}

NOTES.

The references marked 'Gr.' are to the pages and paragraphs of the grammar;
paragraph-references in ( ) are to the numbered paragraphs in the grammar.

I. SENTENCES.

Line 2. s[=e]. Gr. 21. 1.

this sind. Gr. 45. 2.

l. 6. s[e,]lth. Gr. 45. 5.

l. 7. s[=e]o aelmesse. Gr. 44. 3.

l. 12. [.g]eworhte. Gr. 46. (3).

l. 16. hiera. Gr. 41. 3.

n[=ae]fre ... ne ... n[=a]nes. Gr. 52. 2. _ne waes_ is usually contracted
into _naes_; the full form is used here because the _waes_ is emphatic.

l. 17. h[=e]t ofsl[=e]an. Gr. 50. 4.

l. 23. Aethelred cyning. Gr. 42. 6.

l. 24. Aesces-d[=u]n, _sf._ Ashdown, literally 'hill (or down) of the
ashtree.'

l. 27. wile here denotes _repetition_, = 'is in the habit of.' Cp. l. 52.

l. 28. thonne is correlative with _gif_ (l. 26), Gr. 52. 3.

l. 37. aelmihtiga. Gr. 43. (4).

l. 43. [=e]ower se heofonlica Faeder. This insertion of the definite
article between a possessive pronoun and an adjective is frequent.

l. 50. b[=e]o. Gr. 48. (6).

l. 52. t[=o], for.

l. 56. tw[e,]nti[.g] wintra. Gr. 18.

l. 58. D[=e]ofol. Gr. 44. 1.

l. 60. scortan. Gr. 43. (2).

l. 61. fisca. Gr. 41. 3.

l. 63. p[=ae]m, those.

hider on land, lit. hither on to land, = to this land.

l. 74. bl[=e]tsian. The older form of this word is _bledsian_. It is a
derivative of _bl[=o]d_, like _r[=i][.c]sian_ from _r[=i][.c]e_, with
mutation of the root vowel. Its original meaning was to 'sprinkle with
blood,' and hence, in heathen times, to 'consecrate,' especially to
consecrate an altar by sprinkling it with the blood of the victim.

l. 80. godspell. The original form of this word was probably _g[=o]dspell_
= 'good tidings,' a literal translation of the Greek _euaggelion_. {92}
Afterwards the first vowel was shortened before the following
consonant-group, or else _god_ was directly substituted for _g[=o]d_, as
giving a more evident meaning, the result being that the word was taken in
the sense of 'God's tidings.' In this form it was adopted into Icelandic
(gudhspiall) and Old High German (gotespel), having been introduced by the
Old English missionaries.

bith. Gr. 45. 5.

l. 82. h[=i]e. Gr. 19.

l. 89. him on [=ae]lce healfe, lit. 'to (for) themselves on each side,' =
on every side (of themselves).

l. 92. rihtne. Gr. 42. 5.

l. 93. Aethelwulf-ing. Gr. 38.

l. 101. fare [.g][=e]. Gr. 22. 7.

l. 106. fors[=a]won. A plural verb after a singular noun of multitude is
common in O. E., as in other languages.

l. 107. [.g]if se blinda blindne l[=ae]tt. _[.g]if_ here takes the indic.,
instead of the subj. (Gr. 48. 6), because the case is not assumed to be
unreal. So also in V. 13, where the opposition (withst[e,]nt) is assumed as
certain, and VI. 19.

l. 114. cw[=ae]de. Gr. 48. (5).

l. 118. mae[.g]e. Compare Gr. 47. (B. 1).

l. 119. s[=i]e. Gr. 47. (A).

l. 120. Scotland is here used in its older sense of 'Ireland.' Compare the
first extract from the Chronicle, p. 79 below.

l. 121. his. Gr. 41. 3.

l. 123. healden. Gr. 48. (2).

l. 124. w[=ae]re. Gr. 47. (B. 1).

l. 132. s[=e] the. Gr. 21.

l. 135. thaet. Gr. 21; 52. 3.

l. 137. on [=e]are. Gr. 51. 2.

l. 138. [.g]ew[e,]ndon him, lit. 'they went for-themselves'; a reflexive
pronoun in the dative, Gr. 40. (1), is often added to verbs of motion.

l. 139. d[=o] [.g][=e]. Gr. 22.

l. 142. gr[=e]te. Compare Gr. 49. (8).

l. 145. swelce, adverb, 'as it were.'

l. 151. nime. Gr. 49. (7).

l. 161. c[=o]me. Compare _mae[.g]e_, l. 118 above.

l. 166. ofslae[.g]enne. Gr. 46. 5.

l. 176. [.g]eweorthan. Gr. 47. (B. 1.)

l. 180. wolde. Gr. 45. 5.

l. 191. b[=e]on. Gr. 48. (2). {93}

II. FROM THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.

l. 1. th[=a]s m[=i]n word. Gr. 43. 8.

l. 16. [=a]weorpe. Gr. 49. (8).

l. 20. hit refers back to _s[=ae]d_, l. 18.

l. 22. [=u]p sprungenre sunnan. Gr. 41. 2.

l. 28. is [.g]eworden. An over-literal rendering of the Latin _factum est_.

l. 32. hine, reflexive, Gr. 19.

l. 40. t[=o] forbaernenne. We see here how out of the active 'in order to
burn it' may be developed the passive 'in order that it may be burnt,' as
in the modern E. 'a house to let.' Compare Gr. 50. 4, (1).

l. 52. on hiera fatu. Compare l. 137.

l. 60. [.g]ewordenre [.g]ecwidr[=ae]enne th[=ae]m wyrhtum. A very stiff
adaptation of the ablative absolute of the original, 'conventione autem
facta cum operariis.' _th[=ae]m wyrhtum_ is to be taken as a dative of the
person affected (Gr. 41).

l. 67. dyde th[=ae]m sw[=a] [.g]el[=i]ce. The Latin has simply 'fecit
similiter.' The sense is 'did like to it' (like his former proceeding), the
_sw[=a]_ being pleonastic.

l. 86. thaet. Gr. 21.

l. 90. suna, dative, 'for his son.'

l. 106. [.g]iefth[=u]s. _h[=u]s_ must here be taken in the sense of 'hall,'
'chamber.' In Icelandic the plural _h[=u]s_ is regularly used to denote the
group of buildings (often detached) constituting a house or homestead, the
kitchen, for instance, which was originally detached, being still called
_eldh[=u]s_ (fire-house).

l. 107. thaet h[=e] wolde ges[=e]on. This clause is due to a confusion of
two constructions, (1) _h[=e] wolde [.g]es[=e]on_, (2) _thaet_ (in order
that) _h[=e] [.g]e.s[=a]we_.

III. OLD TESTAMENT PIECES.

The first two pieces are taken from Aelfric's translation of the
Heptateuch, first published by Thwaites in his Heptateuchus, and afterwards
by Grein as vol. i. of his _Bibliothek der angelsaechsischen
Prosa_--Genesis xi. and xxii. The other three are from Aelfric's Homilies
(edited by Thorpe)--ii. 584 foll., i. 570, ii. 432.

l. 4. him betw[=e]onan. Gr. 51. 5.

l. 13. laeden. This word is the Latin _latina_ (= _lingua latina_) used
first in the sense of 'Latin language,' then of language generally. {94}

l. 17. for th[=ae]m ... for th[=ae]m the, correlative, the first
demonstrative, the second relative.

l. 28. t[=o] scoldon. This use of _s[.c]eal_ with a verb of motion
understood is very common.

l. 36. him self. _him_ is the reflexive dative of interest referring to
_God_--literally, 'God him-self will appoint for him-self.' In such
constructions we see the origin of the modern _himself_, _themselves_.

ll. 46, 47. n[=u] ... n[=u], correlative, = now ... now that, the second
_n[=u]_ being almost causal (since).

l. 51. haefde ... t[=o], took ... for.

l. 52. Gode t[=o] l[=a]ce. Gr. 40. (1).

l. 57. m[=i]n [e,][.g]e, objective genitive, 'the fear of me.'

m[=a]re, neut. 'a greater thing,' 'something more important.'

l. 81. m[=a]re. Cp. l. 57.

l. 82. w[=ae]re. Gr. 49. (7).

l. 89. hwaes is governed by _[.g]iernde_, by 'attraction.'

l. 135. mi[.c]le, adverb.

l. 137. w[=ae]re. Gr, 49. (7).

l. 153. bel[=i]efan is a later form for _[.g]el[=i]efan_.

l. 156. t[=o] handum. Cp. l. 122 above.

l. 174. [=ae]r [.g]enam. Gr. 46. 6.

l. 200. fram mannum. _fram_ here, as usual, denotes the agent 'by' in
passive constructions.

l. 202. wite. Compare Gr. 48. (3) and 49. (8).

IV. SAMSON.

From Aelfric's translation of the Book of Judges in Thwaites' Heptateuch.

l. 8. on[.g]inth t[=o] [=a]l[=i]esenne, will release, _on[.g]innan_ is
often used pleonastically in this way.

l. 35. Gaza [.g]eh[=a]ten. When a name together with _[.g]eh[=a]ten_ is put
in apposition to another noun it is left undeclined, contrary to the
general principle (Gr. 42. 6).

l. 41. sw[=a] sw[=a] h[=i]e belocenu w[=ae]ron, locked as they were.

ufeweardum th[=ae]m cnolle. Gr. 43. 2.

l. 46. waes, consisted.

l. 51. [.g]eworhte. We should expect _[.g]eworhtum_ (Gr. 42. 5). Perhaps
the nom. is due to confusion with the construction with a relative
clause--_the of sinum [.g]eworhte sind_. {95}

l. 74. Dagon [.g]eh[=a]ten. Compare l. 35. swelce, 'on the ground
that'--'because (as they said).'

l. 81. h[=e]ton. Compare l. 106.

l. 87. forth is often used pleonastically in this way with _mid_.

V. FROM THE CHRONICLE.

l. 2. h[=e]r sind, there are here. _h[=e]r_ is here used analogously to
_th[=ae]r_, as in II. 3 and the modern E. _there are_. Cp. also l. 12
below.

[.g]eth[=e]odu, languages as the test of nationality. It is believed that
Latin was still spoken as a living language by the Romanized Britons at the
time of the venerable Bede (eighth century), from whose Church History this
section was taken by the compilers of the Chronicle.

l. 5. Armenia is an error for _Armorica_.

l. 6. Scithie, Scythia.

l. 8. Northibernie, North of Ireland.

l. 24. h[=e]r, at this date--at this place in the series of entries which
constitute the Chronicle.

l. 26. Wyrt[.g]eorn is the regular development of an earlier *_Wurtigern_
from the British _Vortigern_.

l. 28. Ypwinesfl[=e]ot has not been identified; some say Ebbsfleet.

l. 45. Ae[.g]lesthrep, Aylesthorpe, a village near Aylesford.

l. 49. Cr[e,][.c][.g]anford, Crayford.

l. 52. The diction of this passage, with its alliteration and simile, shows
that it is taken from some old poem.

l. 61. h[=ae]thne m[e,]nn, Danes.

l. 62. mid Defena-s[.c][=i]re, literally 'together with Devonshire,' that
is 'with a force of Devonshire men.'

l. 64. dux is here written instead of _ealdormann_. So also we find _rex_
for _cyning_.

l. 65. Sandw[=i]c, Sandwich.

l. 68. f[=e]orthe healf hund, fourth half = three and a half. This is the
regular way of expressing fractional numbers, as in the German
_viertehalb_.

l. 71. S[=u]thri[.g]e, Surrey.

l. 73. [=A]cl[=e]a, Ockley.

l. 76. se h[e,]re, the Danish army. _h[e,]re_ got a bad sense, through its
association with _h[e,]rgian_ (to harry), and hence is applied only to a
plundering, marauding body of men. In the Laws _h[e,]re_ is defined as {96}
a gang of thieves more than thirty-five in number. The national English
army (militia) is called _fierd_, l. 71, 3 above.

Humbrem[=u]tha, mouth of the Humber.

l. 77. Eoforw[=i]c, York; a corruption of _Eboracum_.

l. 84. inne wurdon, got in.

l. 85. sume. Compare IV. 51.

VI. KING EDMUND.

From Aelfric's Lives of the Saints, now published for the Early English
Text Society by Prof. Skeat. The present life has been printed only by
Thorpe, in his _Analecta Anglosaxonica_ from a very late MS. It is here
given from the older MS., Cott. Jul. E. 7.

It will be observed that the present piece is in alliterative prose, that
is, with the letter-rime of poetry, but without its metrical form. The
alliteration is easily discernible:--c[=o]m _s_[=u]than ofer s[=ae] fram
_s_ancte Benedictes _s_t[=o]we; _d_ae[.g]e, t[=o] _D_[=u]nst[=a]ne, &c.

l. 1. sancte is an English modification of the Latin genitive _sancti_.

l. 5. sancte is here the E. dative inflection, _sanct_ having been made
into a substantive.

l. 39. bilew[=i]t = _*bile-hw[=i]t_ (with the regular change of _hw_ into
_w_ between vowels) literally 'white (=tender) of bill,' originally, no
doubt, applied to young birds, and then used metaphorically in the sense of
'gentle,' 'simple.'

l. 70. worhte fl[=e]ames. This construction of _wyrcan_ with a genitive is
frequent.

l. 76. w[=ae]re, subj. Gr. 48. (6).

l. 85. f[=u]se. The correct reading is probably _f[=u]sne_, but the plural
_f[=u]se_ may be taken to refer to Hinguar and his men collectively.

l. 149. [.g]ebedh[=u]s. The Welsh _bettws_, as in Bettws-y-coed = 'chapel
in the wood,' still preserves the O. E. form nearly unchanged.

l. 176. sw[=a] thaet does not denote result here, but is
explanatory--'namely by being bound....'

l. 178. h[=i]e, reflexive.

l. 179. thaes ... h[=u], correlative.

l. 185. The reference is apparently to Proverbs xxiv. 11, which (in the
Vulgate) runs thus: 'Erue eos qui ducuntur ad mortem.'

l. 200. hwaether, (that he might see) whether ...

l. 215. l[=i]chaman, instrumental dative (Gr. 41) of defining.

l. 222. [=E]li[.g] = _[=ae]l-[=i]eg_ 'eel-island.' {97}

GLOSSARY.

The order is strictly alphabetical (th following _t_) except that words
with the prefix _ge_ are put in the order of the letter that follows the
_ge_ (_gebed_ under _b_, &c.).

The following abbreviations are used :--

  _sm._, _sn._, _sf._ masc., neut., fem. substantive.
  _sv._ strong verb.
  _wv._ weak verb.
  _swv._ strong-weak verb (preterito-present).

The others require no explanation.

The numbers after _sv._ refer to the classes of strong verbs in the
grammar.

Words in [ ] are Latin (and Greek) originals or cognate Old E. words. The
latter are only referred to when the connection can be proved by the
phonetic laws given in the grammar.

  [=A], _av._ ever, always.
  abbod, _sm._ abbot [_Latin_ abbatem].
  [=a]-.b[=e]odan, _sv. 7_, _w. dat._ (offer), announce.
  [=a]-.biddan, _sv. 5_, ask for, demand.
  [=a]-.b[=i]tan, _sv. 6_, devour.
  [=a]-.bl[e,]ndan, _wv._ blind [blind].
  [=a]-.brecan, _sv. 4_, break into, take (city).
  [=a]-.b[=u]gan, _sv. 7_, bend; swerve, turn.
  ac, _cj._ but.
  [=a]-.c[e,]nnan, _wv._ bring forth, bear (child).
  [=a]-.cw[e,]llan, _wv._ kill.
  [=a]-.cw[e,]n[.c]an, _wv._ extinguish.
  [=a]-.dr[=u]gian, _wv._ dry up, _intr._ [dr[=y][.g]e].
  [=a]-.dw[=ae]s[.c]an, _wv._ extinguish.
  aecer, _sm._ field.
  aethele, _aj._ noble, excellent.
  aetheling, _sm._ prince.
  [=ae]fen, _sm._ evening.
  [=ae]fre, _av._ ever, always.
  aefter, _av._, _prep. w. dat._ after--aefter th[=ae]em, after that,
      afterwards; according to, by.
  [=ae][.g]-hwelc, _prn._ each.
  [=ae][.g]ther, _prn._ either, each--_cj._ [=ae][.g]ther [.g]e ... [.g]e,
      both ... and [ = [=ae][.g] hwaether].
  [=ae]ht, _sf._ property [[=a]hte, [=a]gan].
  [=ae]lan, _wv._ burn.
  [=ae]l[.c], _aj._ each.
  aelmesse, _sf._ alms, charity [_Greek_ ele[=e]mosun[=e]].
  ael-mihti[g.], _aj._ almighty.
  [=ae]ni[.g], _aj._ any [[=a]n].
  [=ae]r, _prep. w. dat._ before (of time), [=ae]r th[=ae]m the, _cj._
      before.
  [=ae]r, _av._ formerly, before; _superl._ [=ae]rest, _adj. and adv._,
      first.
  aer[.c]e-biscop, _sm._ archbishop [_Latin_ archiepiscopus].
  [=ae]rende, _sn._ errand, message.
  {98}
  [=ae]rend-raca, _sm._ messenger.
  [=ae]-rist, _sfm._ (rising again), resurrection [[=a]r[=i]san].
  [=ae]rne-mergen, _sm._ early morning.
  aesc, _sm._ (ash-tree); war-ship.
  aet, _prp. w. dat._ at; _deprivation_, from; _origin_,
      _source_--[=a]b[=ae]don w[=i]f aet him, 'asked for wives from them;'
      _specification_, _defining_--wurdon aet spr[=ae][.c]e, 'fell into
      conversation.'
  aet-.bre[.g]dan, _sv. 3_ (snatch away), deprive of.
  aet-.foran, _prp. w. dat._ before.
  aet-.gaedre, _av._ together.
  aet-[=i]ewan, _wv. w. dat._ show.
  [=ae]ton, _see_ etan.
  [=a]-.fandian,  _wv._ experience, find out [findan].
  [=a]-.faran, _sv. 2_, go away, depart.
  [=a]-.feallan, _sv. 1_, fall.
  [=a]-.f[=e]dan, _wv._ feed.
  [=a]-.f[=y]lan, _wv._ defile [f[=u]l].
  [=a]-fyrht, _aj._ frightened [_past partic. of_ [=a].fyrhtan _from_
      forht].
  [=a]gan, _swv._ possess.
  [=a]-.g[=a]n, _sv._ happen.
  [=a]gen, _aj._ own [_originally past partic. of_ [=a]gan].
  [=a]-.[.g]iefan, _sv. 5_, _w. dat._ give, render.
  [=a]h, _see_ [=a]gan.
  [=a]-.h[e,]bban, _sv. 2_, raise, exalt.
  [=a]-.hieldan, _wv._ incline.
  [=a]-.h[=o]n, _sv. 1_, hang, _trans._
  [=a]-.hr[=e]osan, _sv. 7_, fall.
  [=a]hte, _see_ [=a]gan.
  [=a]-hw[=ae]r, _av._ anywhere.
  [=a]-.h[=y]ran, _wv._ hire.
  [=a]-.l[=i]esan, _wv._ (loosen), release; redeem [l[=e]as].
  [=a]-.l[=i]esed-nes, _sf._ redemption.
  [=a]-l[=i]esend, _sm._ redeemer.
  [=a]n, _aj._ one (_always strong_); a certain one, certain; alone
      (_generally weak_); _gen. pl._ [=a]nra _in_ [=a]nra ge-hwel[.c],
      'each one.'
  [=a]n-c[e,]nned, _aj._ (_past partic._) (only-born), only (child).
  and, _cj._ and.
  and-b[=i]dian, _wv. w. gen._ wait, expect [b[=i]dan].
  andet-nes, _sf._ confession.
  andettan, _wv._ confess.
  and-[.g]iet, _sn._ sense, meaning; understanding, intelligence.
  and-swarian, _wv. w. dat._ answer [andswaru].
  and-swaru, _sf._ answer [sw[e,]rian].
  and-weard, _aj._ present.
  and-wyrdan, _wv. w. dat._ answer [word].
  Angel, _sm._ Anglen (a district in Slesvig).
  Angel-cynn, _sn._ English nation, England.
  [=a]-.niman, _sv. 4_, take away.
  [=a]n-l[=ae][.c]an, _wv._ unite.
  [=a]n-m[=o]d, _aj._ unanimous.
  [=a]n-m[=o]d-l[=i]ce, _av._ unanimously.
  [=a]n-r[=ae]d, _aj._ (of one counsel) constant, firm, resolute.
  apostol, _sm._ apostle.
  [=a]r, _sf._ mercy; honour.
  [=a]-.r[=ae]ran, _wv._ raise, build [[=a]r[=i]san].
  [=a]rian, _wv. w. dat._ honour; spare, have mercy on [[=a]r].
  [=a]-.r[=i]san, _sv. 6_, arise.
  [=a]r-l[=e]as, _aj._ wicked.
  arn, _see_ iernan.
  arod, _aj._ quick, bold.
  arod-l[=i]ce, _av._ quickly, readily, boldly.
  [=a]r-weorth, _adj._ worthy of honour, venerable.
  [=a]scian, _wv._ ask.
  [=a]-.sc[=u]fan, _sv. 7_, thrust.
  [=a]-.s[e,]ndan, _wv._ send.
  [=a]-.s[e,]ttan, _wv._ set, place.
  [=a]-.sm[=e]an, _wv._ consider, think of, conceive.
  assa, _sm._ ass.
  [=a]-.st[e,]llan, _wv._ institute.
  [=a]-.st[=i]gan, _sv. 6_, ascend, descend.
  [=a]-.str[e,][.c][.c]an, _wv._ stretch out, extend.
  [=a]-.styrian, _wv._ stir, move.
  [=a]-.t[=e]on, _sv. 7_, draw out, draw, take.
  atol-lic, _aj._ deformed.
  [=a]-.thr[=e]otan, _sv. 7_, fail, run short.
  {99}
  [=a]-.w[e,][.c][.c]an, _wv._ awake, arouse [wacian].
  [=a]-.w[=e]dan, _wv._ go mad [w[=o]d].
  [=a]-.w[e,]ndan, _wv._ turn; translate.
  [=a]-.weorpan, _sv. 3_, throw, throw away; depose (king).
  [=a]-.w[=e]stan, _wv._ lay waste, ravage.
  [=a]-.wier[.g]ed, _aj._ cursed, accursed, [_past. partic. of_
      [=a]wier[.g]an, _from_ wearg].
  [=a]-wiht, _prn._ aught, anything.
  [=a]-.wr[=i]tan, _sv. 6_, write.
  [=a]-.wyrtwalian, _wv._ root up.

              B.

  Baec, _sn._ back--under baec, behind.
  baed, _see_ biddan.
  b[=ae]don, _see_ biddan.
  baernan, _wv._ burn, _trans._ [beornan].
  baernett, _sn._ burning.
  b[=ae]ron, _see_ beran.
  baest, _sm._ bast.
  baesten, _aj._ of bast.
  be, _prep. w. dat._ by;   about, concerning.
  beald, _aj._ bold.
  bearn, _sn._ child [beran].
  b[=e]atan, _sv. 1_, beat.
  be-.b[=e]odan, _sv. 7_, _w. dat._ bid, command.
  be-.byr[.g]an, _wv._ bury.
  b[=e][.c], _see_ b[=o]c.
  be-.clyppan, _wv._ embrace, encompass, hold.
  be-.cuman, _sv. 4_, come.
  _[.g]e_.bed, _sn._ prayer [biddan].
  be-.d[=ae]lan, _wv. w. gen._ deprive of [d[=ae]l].
  b[e,]dd, _sn._ bed.
  be-.delfan, _sv. 3_; (hide by digging), bury.
  _[.g]e_.bed-h[=u]s, _sn._ oratory, chapel.
  be-.faestan, _wv._ (make fast); _w. dat._ commit, entrust to.
  be-.foran, _prp. w. dat._ before.
  b[=e][.g]en, _prn._ both.
  be-.[.g]eondan, _prp. w. acc._ beyond.
  be-.[.g]ietan, _sv. 5_, get, obtain.
  be-.[.g]innan, _sv. 3_, begin.
  be-.h[=a]tan, _sv. 1_, _w. dat._ promise.
  be-.h[=e]afdian, _wv._ behead [h[=e]afod].
  be-.healdan, _sv. 1_, behold.
  be-.h[=o]fian, _wv. w. gen._ require.
  be-.hr[=e]owsian, _wv._ repent [hr[=e]owan].
  be-.h[=y]dan, _wv._ hide.
  be-.l[=ae]wan, _wv._ betray.
  be-.l[=i]efan, _wv._ believe.
  be-.l[=i]fan, _sv. 6_, remain [l[=a]f].
  be-.l[=u]can, _sv. 7_, lock, close.
  b[e,]nd, _smfn._ bond [bindan].
  b[=e]odan, _sv. 7_, _w. dat._ offer.
  b[=e]on, _v._ be--b[=e]on ymbe, have to do with.
  beorg, _sm._ hill, mountain.
  _[.g]e_beorgan, _sv. 3_, _w. dat._ save, protect.
  beornan, _sv. 3_, burn, _intrans_.
  b[=e]ot-lic, _aj._ boastful.
  be-.p[=ae][.c]an, _wv._ deceive.
  beran, _sv. 4_, bear, carry; ([.g]eberan, bring forth).
  b[e,]rn, _sn._ barn.
  berstan, _sv. 3_, burst.
  be-.s[=a]rgian, _wv._ lament [s[=a]ri[.g]].
  be-.s[.c]ieran, _sv. 4_, shear, cut hair.
  be-.s[=e]on, _sv. 5_, see, look.
  be-.s[e,]ttan, _wv._ set about, surround, cover.
  be-.stealcian, _wv._ go stealthily, steal.
  be-.sw[=i]can, _sv. 6_, deceive, circumvent, betray.
  be-.t[=ae][.c]an, _wv._ commit, entrust, give up.
  b[e,]tera, b[e,]tst, _see_ g[=o]d.
  be.tw[=e]onan, _prp. w. dat._ between, among.
  be-.twix, _prep. w. acc. and dat._ between, among; _of time_,
      during--betwix th[=ae]m the, _cj._ while.
  be-.w[e,]rian, _wv._ defend.
  be-.witan, _swv._ watch over, have charge of.
  b[=i]dan, _sv. 6_, wait.
  biddan, _sv. 5_, ask, beg.
  _[.g]e_.biddan, _sv. 5_, _refl._ pray.
  {100}
  bieldo, _sf._ (boldness), arrogance [beald].
  b[=i]-g[e,]ng, _sm._ worship [bi, by, _and_ g[e,]n[.g] _from_ g[=a]n].
  bile-w[=i]t, _aj._ simple, innocent.
  bindan, _sv. 3_, bind.
  binnan, _av._ inside; _prp. w. dat._ within, in [ = be-innan].
  biscop, _sm._ bishop [_Latin_ episcopus].
  bi-smer, _snm._ insult, ignominy.
  bismer-full, _aj._ ignominious, shameful.
  bismerian, _wv._ treat with ignominy, insult [bismer].
  b[=i]tan, _sv. 6_, bite.
  bith, _see_ b[=e]on.
  bl[=a]wan, _sv. 1_, blow.
  bleoh, _sn._ colour.
  bl[=e]ow, _see_ bl[=a]wan.
  bl[=e]tsian, _wv._ bless.
  blind, _aj._ blind.
  bliss, _sf._ merriment, joy.
  blissian, _wv._ rejoice.
  bl[=i]the, _aj._ glad, merry.
  bl[=i]the-l[=i]ce, _av._ gladly.
  bl[=o]d, _sn._ blood.
  b[=o]c, _sf._ book, scripture.
  B[=o]c-laeden, _sn._ book Latin, Latin.
  bodian, _wv._ announce, preach [b[=e]odan].
  bodi[.g], _sm._ body.
  bohte, _see_ by[.c][.g]an.
  br[=a]d, _aj._ broad.
  br[=ae]th, _sm._ vapour, odour.
  brecan, _sv. 4_, break; take (city).
  bre[.g]dan, _sv. 3_, pull.
  br[=e]mel, _sm._ bramble.
  Breten, _sf._ Britain.
  Brettas, _smpl._ the British.
  Brettisc, _aj._ British [Brettas].
  bringan, _wv._ bring.
  br[=o]hte, _see_ bringan.
  br[=o]thor, _sm._ brother.
  br[=u]can, _sv. 7_, _w. gen._ enjoy, partake of.
  br[=y]d, _sf._ bride.
  br[=y]d-guma, _sm._ bridegroom [_literally_ bride-man].
  b[=u]an, _wv._ dwell.
  b[=u]end, _smpl._ dwellers [_pres. partic. of_ b[=u]an].
  bufan, _prp. w. dat. and acc._ over, above, on.
  b[=u]gan, _sv. 7_, bend, incline.
  bundon, _see_ bindan.
  burg, _sf._ city.
  burg-[.g]eat, _sn._ city-gate.
  b[=u]tan, _av._ outs[=i]de; _prp. w. dat._ without, except, besides [ =
      be-[=u]tan].
  b[=u]tan, _cj._ unless, except.
  by[.c][.g]an, _wv._ buy.
  byrthen, _sf._ burden [beran].
  byr[.g]en, _sf._ tomb [bebyr[.g]an].
  _[.g]e_byrian, _wf._ be due, befit.
  byri[.g], _see_ burg.
  byrst, _sf._ bristle.
  _[.g]e_.b[=y]snian, _wv._ give example, illustrate.
  _[.g]e_.b[=y]snung, _sf._ example.

              C.

  Cann, _see_ cunnan.
  can[=o]n, _sm._ canon; can[=o]nes b[=e]c, canonical books.
  Cantwara-burg, _sf._ Canterbury [Cantwara, _gen. of_ Cantware].
  Cant-ware, _pl._ Kent-dwellers, men of Kent [_Lat._ Cantia _and_ ware].
  c[=a]sere, _sm._ emperor [_Latin_ Caesar].
  [.c]eaflas, _smpl._ jaws.
  [.c]eald, _aj._ cold.
  [.c]ealf, _sn._ calf.
  [.c][=e]ap, _sn._ purchase.
  [.c][=e]as, _see_ [.c][=e]osan.
  [.c]easter, _sf._ city [_Latin_ castra].
  c[=e]ne, _aj._ brave, bold.
  c[e,]nnan, _wv._ bring forth, bear child.
  C[e,]nt, _sf._ Kent [Cantia].
  C[e,]nt-land, _sn._ Kent.
  [.c]eorfan, _sv. 3_, cut.
  [.c][=e]osan, _sv. 7_, choose.
  c[=e]pan, _wv. w. gen._ attend, look out for.
  [.c][=i]epan, _wv._ trade, sell [[.c][=e]ap].
  [.c][=i]epend, _sm._ seller [_pres. partic. of_ [.c][=i]epan].
  [.c]ierr, _sm._ turn.
  {101}
  [.c]ierran, _wv._ turn, return, go--[.c]ierran t[=o], take to.
  _[.g]e_.[.c]ierred-nes, _sf._ conversion.
  [.c]ild, _sn._ child.
  [.c]ild-h[=a]d, _sm._ childhood.
  [.c]inn-b[=a]n, _sn._ jawbone.
  [.c]iri[.c]e, _sf._ church.
  cl[=ae]ne, _aj._ clean, pure.
  clawu, _sf._ claw.
  clipian, _wv._ call, summon.
  clipung, _sf._ calling.
  clyppan, _wv._ clip, embrace.
  cnapa, _sm._ (boy, youth), servant.
  cnoll, _sm._ top, summit.
  coccel, _sm._ corn-cockle.
  c[=o]m, _see_ cuman.
  coren, _see_ [.c][=e]osan.
  craeft, _sm._ skill, cunning.
  cr[=i]sten, _aj._ Christian.
  cuma, _sm._ stranger [cuman].
  cuman, _sv. 4_, come; cuman [=u]p, land.
  cunnan, _swv._ know.
  cunnian, _wv._ try [cunnan].
  curon, _see_ [.c][=e]osan.
  c[=u]th, _aj._ known [_originally past partic. of_ cunnan].
  cw[=ae]don, _see_ cwethan.
  cwaeth, _see_ cwethan.
  cweartern, _sn._ prison.
  cw[=e]man, _wv._ please, gratify.
  _[.g]e_.cw[=e]mednes, _sf._ pleasing.
  cw[=e]n, _sf._ queen.
  cwethan, _sv. 5_, say, speak; name, call.
  cwic, _aj._ alive.
  cwide, _sm._ speech, address [cwethan].
  _[.g]e_cw[=i]d-r[=ae]den, _sf._ agreement.
  cwithth, _see_ cwethan.
  cymth, _see_ cuman.
  cyne-cynn, _sn._ royal family.
  cyne-l[=i]c, _aj._ royal.
  cyne-l[=i]ce, _av._ like a king, royally.
  cyne-st[=o]l, _sm._ throne.
  cyning, _sm._ king.
  cynn, _sn._ race, kind.
  cyst, _sf._ excellence [[.c][=e]osan].
  cysti[.g], _aj._ (excellent), charitable.
  c[=y]than, _wv._ make known, tell [c[=u]th].

              D.

  D[=ae]d, _sf._ deed.
  dae[.g], _sm._ day.
  dae[.g]-hw[=ae]m-l[=i]ce, _av._ daily.
  d[=ae]l, _sm._ part--be healfum d[=ae]le, by half.
  d[=ae]lan, _wv._ divide, share.
  d[=e]ad, _aj._ dead.
  d[=e]ath, _sm._ death.
  Defena-s[.c][=i]r, _sf._ Devonshire [Devonia].
  dehter, _see_ dohtor.
  _[.g]e_delf, _sn._ digging.
  delfan, _sv. 3_, dig.
  D[e,]ne, _smpl._ Danes.
  D[e,]nisc, _aj._ Danish.
  d[=e]ofol, _sum._ devil [_Latin_ diabolus].
  d[=e]ofol-[.g]ield, _sn._ idol.
  d[=e]op, _aj._ deep.
  d[=e]or, _sn._ wild beast.
  d[=e]ore, _aj._ dear, precious.
  d[=e]or-wierthe, _aj._ precious.
  d[=i]egol, _aj._ hidden, secret.
  d[=i]egol-nes, _sf._ secret.
  d[=i]epe, _sf._ depth [d[=e]op].
  dihtan, _wv._ appoint [_Latin_ dictare].
  disc-the[.g]n, _sm._ (dish-thane), waiter.
  dohtor, _sf._ daughter.
  d[=o]m, _sm._ doom, judgment, sentence.
  d[=o]n, _sv._ do, act.
  dorste, _see_ durran.
  draca, _sm._ dragon.
  dranc, _see_ drincan.
  dr[=e]ori[.g], _aj._ sad.
  dr[=i]fan, _sv. 6_, drive.
  drinca, _sm._ drink.
  drincan, _sv. 3_, drink.
  drohtnian, _wv._ live, continue, behave.
  drohtnung, _sf._ conduct.
  dr[=y][.g]e, _aj._ dry.
  Dryhten, _sm._ Lord,
  d[=u]n, _sf._ hill, down.
  durran, _swv._ dare.
  duru, _sf._ door.
  d[=u]st, _sn._ dust.
  _[.g]e_.dwyld, _sn._ error.
  dyde, _see_ d[=o]n.
  dyppan, _wv._ dip.
  dysi[.g], _aj._ foolish.

  {102}
              E.

  [=E]ac, _av._ also; [=e]ac swelce, also.
  [=e]acnian, _wv._ increase.
  [=e]adi[.g], _aj._ (prosperous), blessed.
  [=e]age, _sn._ eye.
  [=e]ag-th[=y]rel, _sn._ (eye-hole), window.
  eahta, _num._ eight.
  [=e]a-l[=a], _interj._ oh!
  eald, _aj._ old--_cp._ ieldra.
  Eald-seaxe, _smpl._ Old Saxons.
  ealdor, _sm._ chief, master.
  ealdor-mann, _sm._ chief, officer.
  eall, _aj._ all.
  eall, _av._ quite ; eall sw[=a] mi[.c]el sw[=a], (quite) as much as.
  eall-n[=i]we, _aj._ quite new.
  eallunga, _av._ entirely.
  ealu, _sn._ ale.
  eard, _sm._ country, native land.
  eardian, _wv._ dwell.
  [=e]are, _sn._ ear.
  earm, _sm._ arm.
  earm, _aj._ poor, wretched, despicable.
  earm-lic, _aj._ miserable.
  earm-l[=i]ce, _av._ miserably, wretchedly.
  earn, _sm._ eagle.
  eart, _see_ wesan.
  [=e]ast, _av._ eastwards.
  [=e]ast-d[=ae]l, _sm._ east part, the East.
  [=E]ast-[e,]n[.g]le, _smpl._ East-Anglians.
  [=E]ast-seaxe, _smpl._ East-Saxons.
  [=e]athe-lic, _aj._ insignificant, weak.
  [=e]ath-m[=e]dan, _wv._ humble [[=e]athm[=o]d].
  [=e]ath-m[=o]d, _aj._ humble.
  [=e][.c]e, _aj._ eternal.
  [=e][.c]-nes, _sf._ eternity.
  efen, _aj._ even.
  _[.g]e_.efen-l[=ae][.c]an, _wv._ imitate.
  efne, _av._ behold, lo! [efen].
  [e,]fsian, _wv._ clip, shear.
  eft, _av._ again; afterwards, then; back.
  [e,][.g]e, _sm._ fear.
  [e,][.g]esa, _sm._ fear [e[.g]e].
  [e,][.g]es-lic, _aj._ fearful, awful.
  [=e]htere, _sm._ persecutor.
  ele, _sm._ oil.
  [e,]l-th[=e]odi[.g]-nes, _sf._ foreign land.
  [e,]nde, _sm._ end.
  [e,]ndemes, _av._ together.
  _[.g]e_.[e,]ndian, _wv._ end; die.
  [e,]ndlufon, _num._ eleven.
  [e,]ndlyfta, _aj._ eleventh.
  _[.g]e_.[e,]ndung, _sf._ ending, end.
  [e,]n[.g]el, _sm._ angel [_Latin_ angelus].
  [E,]n[.g]la-land, _sn._ England [[E,]n[.g]la _gen. pl. of_ [E,]n[.g]le].
  [E,]n[.g]le, _smpl._ the English [Angel].
  [E,]n[.g]lisc, _aj._ English--_sn._ English language [[E,]n[.g]le].
  [=e]ode, _see_ g[=a]n.
  eom, _see_ wesan.
  eorl, _sm._ earl.
  eorth-b[=u]end, _sm._ earth-dweller.
  eorthe, _sf._ earth.
  eorth-faest, _aj._ firm in the earth.
  eorth-lic, _aj._ earthly.
  eornost, _sf._ earnest.
  eornost-l[=i]ce, _av._ in truth, indeed.
  [=e]ow, _see_ th[=u].
  etan, _sv. 5_, eat.
  [=e]thel, _sm._ country, native land.

              F.

  Faeder, _sm._ father.
  fae[.g]en, _aj._ glad.
  fae[.g]er, _aj._ fair.
  fae[.g]er-nes, _sf._ fairness, beauty.
  fae[.g]nian, _wv. w. gen._ rejoice.
  f[=ae]mne, _sf._ virgin.
  f[=ae]r, _sf._ danger.
  f[=ae]r-lic, _aj._ sudden.
  f[=ae]r-l[=i]ce, _av._ suddenly.
  faest, _aj._ fast, firm.
  faestan, _wv._ fast.
  faesten, _sf._ fasting.
  faet, _sn._ vessel.
  f[=a]g-nes, _sf._ variegation, various colours.
  fandian, _wv. w. gen._ try, test, tempt [findan].
  faran, _sv. 2_, go.
  faru, _sf._ procession, retinue, pomp.
  f[=e]a, _aj. pl._ few.
  _[.g]e_.f[=e]a, _sm._ joy.
  feallan, _sv. 1_, fall.
  fearr, _sm._ bull; ox.
  feax, _sn._ hair of head.
  {103}
  f[=e]dan, _wv._ feed [f[=o]da].
  fela, _aj. pl. w. gen._ many.
  feld, _sm._ field.
  feoh, _sn._ money, property.
  _[.g]e_.feoht, _sn._ fight.
  feohtan, _sv. 3_, fight.
  f[=e]ole, _sf._ file.
  f[=e]olian, _wv._ file.
  f[=e]oll, _see_ feallan.
  f[=e]ond, _sm._ enemy.
  feorh, _snm._ life.
  feorm, _sf._ (food); feast, banquet.
  feorr, _av._ far.
  f[=e]ortha, _num._ fourth.
  f[=e]ower, _num._ four.
  _[.g]e_.f[=e]ra, _sm._ companion [f[=o]r].
  f[=e]ran, _wv._ go, fare [f[=o]r].
  _[.g]e_.f[=e]ran, _wv._ (go over), take possession of.
  f[e,]rian, _wv._ carry [faran].
  f[=e]t, _see_ f[=o]t.
  f[e,]tian, _wv._ fetch--_pret._ [.g]ef[e,]tte.
  _[.g]e_.f[e,]tte, _see_ f[e,]tian.
  f[=i]end, _see_ f[=e]ond.
  fierd, _sf._ army [faran].
  fierlen, _aj._ distant [feorr].
  fierst, _sm._ period, time.
  f[=i]f, _num._ five.
  findan, _sv. 3_ (_pret._ funde), find.
  fisc, _sm._ fish.
  fisc-cynn, _sn._ fish-kind.
  fl[=e]am, _sm._ flight [fl[=e]on].
  fleax, _sn._ flax.
  fl[=e]ogan, _sv. 7_, fly.
  fl[=e]on, _sv. 7_, flee.
  fl[=e]otan, _sv. 7_, float.
  fl[=i]tan, _sv. 6_, quarrel, dispute.
  _[.g]e_.fl[=i]eman, _wv._ put to flight [fl[=e]am].
  fl[=o]d, _sm._ flood.
  flota, _sm._ fleet [fl[=e]otan].
  flot-h[e,]re, _sm._ naval army, army of pirates.
  flot-mann, _sm._ sailor, pirate.
  fl[=o]wan, _sv. 1_, flow.
  flugon, _see_ fl[=e]on.
  flyht, _sm._ flight [fl[=e]ogan].
  f[=o]da, _sm._ food.
  folc, _sn._ people, nation.
  folc-lic, _aj._ popular.
  folgian, _wv. w. dat._ follow; obey.
  f[=o]n, _sv. 1_, seize, take, capture; f[=e]ng t[=o] r[=i][.c]e, came to
      the throne; t[=o]gaedre f[=e]ngon, joined together.
  for, _prep. w. dat._ before--r[=i][.c]e for worulde, in the eyes of the
      world; _causal_, for, because of, for the sake of--ne dorste for
      Gode, for the fear of God--for th[=ae]m, therefore, for th[=ae]em
      (the), because; _w. acc._, instead of, for.
  f[=o]r, _sf._ journey [faran].
  f[=o]r, _see_ faran.
  for-.baernan, _wv._ burn up, burn, _trans._
  for-.b[=e]odan, _sv. 7_, forbid.
  for-.br[=e]otan, _sv. 7_, break.
  for-.[.c]eorfan, _sv. 3_, cut off.
  for-.dilgian, _wv._ destroy.
  for-.d[=o]n, _sv._ destroy.
  for-.ealdod, _aj._ aged [_past partic. of_ forealdian, grow old].
  fore-s[.c][=e]awian, _wv._ pre-ordain, decree, appoint.
  fore-s[e,][.c][.g]an, _wv._ say before--se foresae[.g]da, the aforesaid.
  for-.[.g]iefan, _sv. 5_, _w. dat._ give, grant; forgive.
  for-.[.g]ief-nes, _sf._ forgiveness.
  for-.[.g][=i]eman, _wv._ neglect.
  for-.[.g]ietan, _sv._ forget.
  forht, _aj._ afraid.
  forhtian, _wv._ be afraid.
  for-.hwega, _av._ somewhere.
  for-.l[=ae]tan, _sv. 1_, leave, abandon.
  for-.l[=e]osan, _sv. 7_, lose.
  for-.li[.g]er, _sn._ wantonness, immorality.
  forma, _aj._ first--_superl._ fyrmest, first.
  for-.molsnian, _wv._ crumble, decay.
  for-.scrincan, _sv. 3_, shrink up.
  for-s[=e]on, _sv. 5_, despise.
  for-.sl[=e]an, _sv. 2_, cut through.
  for-.standan, _sv. 2_, (stand before), protect.
  forth, _av._ forth, forwards, on.
  forth-.f[=e]ran, _wv._ depart, die.
  for-.thrysman, _wv._ suffocate, choke.
  {104}
  for-.weorthan, _sv. 3_, perish.
  f[=o]t, _sm._ foot.
  fraetwian, _wv._ adorn.
  fraetwung, _sf._ ornament.
  fram, _prep. w. dat._ from; _agent. w. pass._ h[=i]e w[=ae]ron fram
      Wyrt[.g]eorne [.g]elathode, invited by.
  fr[e,]mman, _wv._ perform, do.
  fr[=e]ond, _sm._ friend.
  frith, _sm._ peace--frith niman, make peace.
  fugol, _sm._ bird.
  fuhton, _see_ feohtan.
  f[=u]l, _aj._ foul, impure.
  full, _aj._ full.
  full-.bl[=i]the, _aj._ very glad.
  full-.c[=e]ne, _aj._ very brave.
  ful-l[=i]ce, _av._ fully.
  full-.s[=o]th, _aj._ very true.
  fultum, _sm._ help; forces, troops.
  fultumian, _wv. w. dat._ help.
  funde, _see_ findan.
  furthor, _av._ further, more [forth].
  f[=u]s, _aj._ hastening.
  fyllan, _wv._ fill, fulfil [full].
  f[=y]r, _sn._ fire.
  fyrmest, _see_ forma.

              G.

  Gadrian, _wv._ gather.
  gaers, _sn._ grass.
  gafeloc, _sm._ missile, spear.
  gafol, _sn._ interest, profit.
  gamen, _sn._ sport.
  g[=a]n, _sv._ go.
  _[.g]e._g[=a]n, _sv._ gain, conquer.
  gangende, _see_ g[=a]n.
  g[=a]st, _sm._ spirit; se h[=a]lga g[=a]st, the Holy Ghost.
  g[=a]st-lic, _aj._ spiritual.
  [.g]e, _cj._ and--[.g]e ... [.g]e, both ... and.
  [.g][=e], _see_ th[=u].
  [.g]ealga, _sm._ gallows.
  [.g][=e]ar, _sn._ year.
  [.g]earcian, _wv._ prepare [[.g]earo].
  [.g]eard, _sm._ yard, court.
  [.g]earu, _aj._ ready.
  [.g]earwian, _wv._ prepare.
  [.g]eat, _sn._ gate.
  [.g][=e]oguth, _sf._ youth.
  [.g][=e]omrung, _sf._ lamentation.
  [.g]eond,  _prp. w. acc._ through, throughout.
  [.g][=e]ong, _aj._ young.
  [.g]eorn, _aj._ eager.
  [.g]eorne, _av._ eagerly, earnestly.
  [.g]iefan, _sv. 5_, give.
  [.g]iefta, _sfpl._ marriage, wedding [[.g]iefan].
  [.g]ieft-h[=u]s, _sn._ wedding-hall.
  [.g]ieft-lic, _aj._ wedding.
  [.g]iefu, _sf._ gift; grace (of God) [[.g]iefan].
  [.g]ierla, _sm._ dress [[.g]earu].
  [.g]iernan, _wv. w. gen._ yearn, desire; ask [[.g]eorn].
  [.g]iet, _av._ yet; further, besides.
  [.g]if, _cj._ if.
  [.g]imm, _sm._ gem, jewel [_Latin_ gemma].
  [.g]imm-st[=a]n, _sm._ gem, jewel.
  [.g]it, _see_ th[=u].
  [.g][=i]tsian, _wv._ covet.
  [.g][=i]tsung, _sf._ covetousness, avarice.
  glaed, _aj._ glad.
  glaed-l[=i]ce, _av._ gladly.
  gl[=e]aw, _aj._ prudent, wise.
  gl[e,]n[.g]an, _wv._ adorn; trim (lamp).
  god, _sm._ God.
  god-faeder, _sm._ godfather.
  god-spell, _sn._ gospel.
  godspel-lic, _aj._ evangelical.
  g[=o]d, _aj._ good--_compar._ b[e,]tera. _superl._ b[e,]tst.
  g[=o]d, _sn._ good thing, good.
  gold, _sn._ gold.
  gold-hord, _sn._ treasure.
  gr[=ae]di[.g]. _aj._ greedy.
  gr[=ae][.g], _aj._ grey.
  gr[=e]tan, _wv._ greet, salute.
  grindan, _sv. 3_, grind.
  gr[=i]st-b[=i]tung, _sf._ gnashing of teeth.
  grymetian, _wv._ grunt, roar.
  gyldan, _wv._ gild [gold].
  gylden, _aj._ golden [gold].

              H.

  Habban, _wv._ have; take.
  {105}
  h[=a]d, _sm._ rank, condition.
  _[.g]e_.h[=a]dod, _aj._ ordained, in orders, clerical [_past partic. of_
      h[=a]dian, ordain].
  haefde, haefth, _see_ habban.
  haeftan, _wv._ hold fast, hold [habban].
  h[=ae]lan, _wv._ heal [h[=a]l].
  h[=ae]lend, _sm._ Saviour [_pres. partic. of_ h[=ae]lan].
  h[=ae]lo, _sf._ salvation [h[=a]l].
  h[=ae]s, _sf._ command.
  haespe, _sf._ hasp.
  h[=ae]te, _sf._ heat [h[=a]t].
  h[=ae]th, _sf._ heath.
  h[=ae]then, _aj._ heathen [h[=ae]th].
  h[=a]l, _aj._ whole, sound.
  _[.g]e_.h[=a]l, _aj._ whole, uninjured.
  h[=a]lga, _sm._ saint.
  h[=a]l[.g]ian, _wv._ hallow, consecrate.
  h[=a]li[.g], _aj._ holy.
  h[=a]li[.g]-d[=o]m, _sm._ holy object, relic.
  h[=a]m, _av._ homewards, home.
  hand, _sf._ hand.
  hand-cweorn, _sf._ hand-mill.
  hangian, _wv._ hang, _intr._ [h[=o]n].
  h[=a]t, _aj._ hot.
  h[=a]tan, _sv. 1_, command, ask--_w. inf. in passive sense_, h[=e]ton him
      s[e,][.c][.g]an, bade them be told ; name--_passive_, h[=a]tte.
  hatian, _wv._ hate.
  h[=a]tte, _see_ h[=a]tan.
  h[=e], _prn_. he.
  h[=e]afod, _sn._ head.
  h[=e]afod-mann, _sm._ head-man, ruler, chief.
  h[=e]ah, _aj._ high--_superl._ h[=i]ehst.
  healdan, _sv. 1_, hold, keep; guard; preserve; observe, keep.
  healf, _aj._ half.
  healf, _sf._ side.
  h[=e]a-lic, _aj._ lofty [h[=e]ah].
  heall, _sf._ hall.
  heard, _aj._ hard ; strong; severe.
  h[e,]bban, _sv. 2_, raise.
  h[e,]fel-thr[=ae]d, _sm._ web-thread, thread.
  h[e,]fe, _sm._ weight [h[e,]bban].
  h[e,]fi[.g], _aj._ heavy [h[e,]fe].
  h[e,]ll, _sf._ hell.
  _[.g]e_.h[e,]nde, _aj. w. dat._ near [hand].
  h[=e]o, _see_ h[=e].
  heofon, _sm._ heaven--_often in plur._, heofona r[=i][.c]e.
  heofon-lic, _aj._ heavenly.
  h[=e]old, _see_ healdan.
  heord, _sf._ herd.
  heorte, _sf._ heart.
  h[=e]r, _av._ here; hither--h[=e]r.aefter, &c., hereafter.
  h[=e]r-be-.[=e]astan, _av._ east of this.
  h[e,]re, _sm._ army.
  h[e,]re-r[=e]af, _sn._ spoil.
  h[e,]re-toga, _sm._ army-leader, general, chief [toga _from_ t[=e]on].
  h[e,]rgian, _wv._ ravage, make war [h[e,]re].
  h[e,]rgung, _sf._ (ravaging), warfare, war.
  h[e,]rian, _wv._ praise.
  h[=e]t, _see_ h[=a]tan.
  hider, _av_. hither.
  h[=i]e, _see_ h[=e].
  h[=i]ehst, _see_ h[=e]ah.
  hiera, _see_ h[=e].
  _[.g]e_.h[=i]eran, _wv._ hear.
  hierde, _sm._ shepherd [heord].
  hierd-r[=ae]den, _sf._ guardianship.
  hiere, _see_ h[=e].
  _[.g]e_.h[=i]er-sum, _aj. w. dat._ obedient [h[=i]eran].
  _[.g]e_.h[=i]ersum-nes, _sf._ obedience.
  him, hine, _see_ h[=e].
  h[=i]red, _snm._ family, household.
  his, _see_ h[=e].
  hit, _see_ h[=e].
  h[=i]w, _sn._ hue, form.
  hl[=ae]dder, _sf._ ladder.
  hlaest, _sm._ load.
  hl[=a]f, _sm._ bread, loaf of bread.
  hl[=a]ford, _sm._ lord.
  hl[=i]sa, _sm._ fame.
  hl[=u]d, _aj._ loud.
  hl[=y]dan, _wv._ make a noise, shout [hl[=u]d].
  hnappian, _wv_. doze.
  _[.g]e_.hoferod, _aj._ (past partic.), hump-backed.
  holt, _sn._ wood.
  {106}
  h[=o]n, _sv. 1_, hang [hangian].
  horn, _sm._ horn.
  hraed-l[=i]ce, _av._ quickly.
  hraedung, _sf._ hurry.
  hrathe, _av._ quickly--sw[=a] hrathe sw[=a], as soon as.
  hr[=e]od, _sn._ reed.
  hr[=e]owan, _sv. 7_, rue, repent.
  hr[=i]eman, _wv._ cry, call.
  hr[=i]ther, _sn._ ox.
  hr[=o]f, _sn._ roof.
  hry[.c][.g], _sm._ back.
  hryre, _sm._ fall [hr[=e]osan].
  h[=u], _av._ how.
  h[=u]-meta, _av._ how.
  hund, _sn. w. gen._ hundred.
  hund, _sm._ dog.
  hund-feald, _aj._ hundredfold.
  hund-.nigonti[.g], _num._ ninety.
  hund-.tw[e,]lfti[.g], _num._ hundred and twenty.
  hungor, _sm._ hunger; famine.
  hungri[.g], _aj._ hungry.
  h[=u]ru, _av._ especially.
  h[=u]s, _sn._ house.
  hux-l[=i]ce, _av._ ignominiously.
  hw[=a], _prn._ who.
  [.g]e.hw[=a], _prn._ every one.
  hw[=ae]m, _see_ hw[=a].
  hw[=ae]r, _av._ where--sw[=a] hw[=ae]r sw[=a], wherever.
  [.g]e.hw[=ae]r, _av._ everywhere.
  hwaes, hwaet, _see_ hw[=a].
  hwaet, _interj._ what! lo! well.
  hw[=ae]te, _sm._ wheat.
  hwaether, _av. cj._ whether--hwaether the, _to introduce a direct
      question_.
  hwaethre, _av._ however.
  hwanon, _av._ whence.
  hwel[.c], _prn._ which; any one, any--sw[=a] hwel[.c] sw[=a], whoever.
  [.g]e.hwel[.c], _prn._ any, any one.
  hw[=i]l, _sf._ while, time.
  hwone, _see_ hw[=a].
  hwonne, _av._ when.
  hw[=y], _av._ why.
  h[=y]dan, _wv._ hide.
  hyht, _sf._ hope.
  _[.g]e_.hyhtan, _wv._ hope.
  h[=y]ran, _wv._ hire.

              I.

  I[.c], _prn._ I.
  [=i]del, _aj._ idle; useless, vain--on [=i]del, in vain.
  [=i]e[.g]-land, _sn._ island.
  ieldan, _wv._ delay [eald].
  ieldra, _see_ eald.
  ieldran, _smpl._ ancestors [_originally compar._ of eald].
  iernan, _sv. 3_, run; flow.
  ierre, _aj._ angry.
  [=i]l, _sm._ hedgehog.
  ilca, _prn._ same (always weak, and with the definite article).
  in, _prp. w. dat. and acc._ in, into.
  inc, _see_ th[=u].
  inn, _av._ in (of motion).
  innan, _prp. w. dat._ (_av._) within.
  inne, _av._ within, inside.
  inn-[.g]ehy[.g]d, _sn._ inner thoughts, mind.
  in-t[=o], _prp. w. dat._ into.
  [=I]otan, _smpl._ Jutes.
  [=I]r-land, _sn._ Ireland.
  I[=u]d[=e]isc, _aj._ Jewish--th[=a] I[=u]d[=e]iscan, the Jews.

              L.

  L[=a], _interj._ lo!--l[=a] l[=e]of! Sir!
  l[=a]c, _sn._ gift; offering, sacrifice.
  [.g]e.l[=ae][.c]an, _wv._ seize.
  l[=ae]dan, _wv._ lead; carry, bring, take.
  laeden, _sn._ Latin; language.
  lae[.g], _see_ li[.c][.g]an.
  l[=ae]ran, _wv. w. double acc._ teach; advise, suggest [l[=a]r].
  _[.g]e_.l[=ae]red, _aj._ learned [_past partic._ of l[=ae]ran].
  l[=ae]s, _av._ less--th[=y] l[=ae]s (the), _cj. w. subj._ lest.
  l[=ae]tan, _sv. 1_, let; leave--h[=e]o l[=e]t th[=a] sw[=a], she let the
      matter rest there.
  _[.g]e_.l[=ae]te, _sn._--wega [.g]el[=ae]tu, _pl._ meetings of the roads.
  l[=a]f, _sf._ remains--t[=o] l[=a]fe b[=e]on, remain over, be left
      [(be)l[=i]fan].
  {107}
  _[.g]e._lamp, _see_ _[.g]e_limpan.
  land, _sn._ land, country.
  land-folc, _sn._ people of the country.
  land-h[e,]re, _sm._ land-army.
  land-l[=e]ode, _smpl._ people of the country.
  lang, _aj._ long.
  lange, _av._ for a long time, long.
  lang-l[=i]ce, _av._ for a long time, long.
  l[=a]r, _sf._ teaching, doctrine.
  late, _av._ slowly, late--late on [.g][=e]are, late in the year.
  _[.g]e._lathian, _wv._ invite.
  _[.g]e._lathung, _sf._ congregation.
  l[=e]af, _sf._ leave.
  __[.g]e._l_[=e]afa, _sm._ belief, faith.
  _[.g]e._l[=e]af-full, _aj._ believing, pious.
  leahtor, _sm._ crime, vice.
  l[=e]as, _aj._ without (expers), _in compos._--less; false.
  l[=e]at, _see_ l[=u]tan.
  l[e,][.c][.g]an, _wv._ lay [li[.c][.g]an].
  _[.g]e._l[e,]ndan, _wv._ land [land].
  l[=e]o, _smf._ lion.
  l[=e]ode, _smpl._ people.
  l[=e]of, _aj._ dear, beloved; pleasant--m[=e] w[=ae]re l[=e]ofre, I would
      rather--[lufu].
  leofode, _see_ libban.
  leoht, _sn._ light.
  leoht-faet, _sn._ (light-vessel), lamp.
  leornian, _wv._ learn.
  leornung-cniht, _sm._ disciple.
  l[=e]t, _see_ l[=ae]tan.
  libban, _wv._ live.
  l[=i]c, _sn._ body, corpse.
  _[.g]e._l[=i]c, _aj. w. dat._ like.
  _[.g]e._l[=i]ce, _av._ in like manner, alike, equally.
  li[.c][.g]an, _sv. 5_, lie.
  l[=i]c-hama, _sm._ body.
  l[=i]cham-l[=i]ce, _av._ bodily.
  _[.g]e_l[=i]cian, _wv. w. dat._ please.
  l[=i]efan, _wv. w. dat._ allow [l[=e]af].
  _[.g]e._l[=i]efan, _wv._ believe [gel[=e]afa].
  l[=i]f, _sn._ l[=i]fe.
  lifiend, _see_ libban.
  lim, _sn._ limb, member.
  _[.g]e._limp, _sn._ event, emergency, calamity.
  _[.g]e_.limpan, _sv. 3_, happen.
  l[=i]th, _see_ li[.c][.g]an.
  locc, _sm._ lock of hair.
  lof, _sn._ praise; glory.
  _[.g]e_.l[=o]gian, place; occupy, furnish.
  _[.g]e_.l[=o]m, _aj._ frequent, repeated.
  _[.g]e_.l[=o]me, _av._ often, repeatedly.
  losian, _wv. w. dat._ be lost--him losath, he loses [(for)l[=e]osan].
  l[=u]can, _sv. 7_, close.
  lufian, _wv._ love.
  lufu, _sf._ love [l[=e]of].
  Lunden-burg, _sf._ London [Lundonia].
  l[=u]tan, _sv. 7_, stoop.
  l[=y]tel, _aj._ little.

              M.

  M[=a], _see_ micel.
  macian, _wv._ make.
  mae[.g], _swv._ can, be able.
  mae[.g]en, _sn._ strength, capacity; virtue [mae[.g]].
  m[=ae][.g]th, _sf._ family; tribe, nation; generation.
  _[.g]e_.m[=ae]ne, _aj._ common.
  _[.g]e_.m[=ae]nelic, _aj._ common, general.
  m[=ae]re, _aj._ famous, glorious, great (metaphorically).
  _[.g]e_.m[=ae]re, _sn._ boundary, territory.
  m[=ae]rsian, _wv._ extol, celebrate [m[=ae]re].
  m[=ae]rtho, _sf._ glory [m[=ae]re].
  maesse, _sf._ mass [_Latin_ missa].
  maesse-pr[=e]ost, _sm._ mass-priest.
  m[=ae]st, _see_ mi[.c]el.
  magon, _see_ mae[.g].
  man, _indef._ one [mann].
  m[=a]n, _sn._ wickedness.
  m[=a]n-d[=ae]d, _sf._ wicked deed.
  m[=a]n-full, _aj._ wicked.
  mangere, _sm._ merchant.
  mangung, _sf._ trade, business.
  mani[.g], _aj._ many.
  man[=i][.g]-feald, _aj._ manifold.
  mani[.g]-fieldan, _wv._ multiply [mani[.g]feald].
  mann, _sm._ man; person.
  mann-cynn, _sn._ mankind.
  {108}
  mann-r[=ae]den, _sf._ allegiance.
  mann-slaga, _sm._ manslayer, murderer [sl[=e]an, sl[e,][.g]e].
  m[=a]re, _see_ mi[.c]el.
  martyr, _sm._ martyr.
  m[=a]thm, _sm._ treasure.
  m[=a]thm-faet, _sn._ precious vessel.
  m[=e], _see_ ic.
  mearc, _sf._ boundary.
  m[=e]d, _sf._ reward, pay.
  m[=e]der, _see_ m[=o]dor.
  m[e,]nn, _see_ mann.
  m[e,]nnisc, _aj._ human [mann].
  m[e,]re-grot, _sr._ pearl [margarita].
  mer[.g]en, _sm._ morning [morgen].
  _[.g]e_.met, _sn._ measure; manner, way.
  metan, _sv. 5_, measure.
  _[.g]e_.m[=e]tan, _wv._ meet; find [[.g]em[=o]t].
  m[e,]te, _sm._ food--pl. m[e,]ttas.
  mi[.c]el, _aj._ great, much--_comp._ m[=a]re, m[=a] (_adv._, _sn._,
      _aj._), _sup._ m[=ae]st.
  mi[.c]le, _av._ greatly, much.
  mid, _prp. w. dat._ (_instr._) with--mid th[=ae]m the, _cj._ when.
  middan-[.g]eard, _sm._ world [_literally_ middle enclosure].
  midde, _aj._ mid, middle (only of time).
  middel, _sn._ middle.
  Middel-[e,]n[.g]le, _smpl._ Middle-Angles.
  Mier[.c]e, _smpl._ Mercians [mearc].
  miht, _sf._ might, strength; virtue [mae[.g]].
  mihte, _see_ mae[.g].
  mihti[.g], _aj._ mighty, strong.
  m[=i]l, _sf._ mile [_Latin_ milia (passuum)].
  mild-heort, _aj._ mild-hearted, merciful.
  _[.g]e_.miltsian, _wv. w. dat._ have mercy on, pity [milde].
  m[=i]n, _see_ ic.
  mis-l[=ae]dan, _wv._ mislead, lead astray.
  mis-lic, _aj._ various.
  m[=o]d, _sn._ heart, mind.
  m[=o]dig, _aj._ proud.
  m[=o]di[.g]-nes, _sf._ pride.
  m[=o]dor, _sf._ mother.
  molde, _sf._ mould, earth.
  m[=o]na, _sm._ moon.
  m[=o]nath, _sm._ month--_pl._ m[=o]nath [m[=o]na].
  morgen, _sm._ morning.
  morth, _sn._ (murder), crime.
  m[=o]ste, see m[=o]tan.
  _[.g]e._m[=o]t, _sn._ meeting.
  m[=o]tan, _swv._ may; ne m[=o]t, must not.
  _[.g]e._munan, _swv._ remember.
  munt, _sm._ mountain, hill [_Latin_ montem].
  munuc, _sm._ monk [_Latin_ monachus].
  murcnian, _wv._ grumble, complain.
  m[=u]th, _sm._ mouth.
  m[=u]tha, _sm._ mouth of a river [m[=u]th].
  _[.g]e._mynd, _sf._ memory, mind [[.g]emunan].
  _[.g]e._myndi[.g], _aj. w. gen._ mindful.
  mynet, _sf._ coin [_Latin_ moneta].
  mynetere, _sm._ money-changer.
  mynster, _sn._ monastery [_Latin_ monasterium].

              N.

  N[=a], _av._ not, no [ = ne [=a]].
  nabban = ne habban.
  n[=ae]ddre, _sf._ snake.
  naefde, naefst, = ne haefde, ne haefst.
  n[=ae]fre, _av._ never [ = ne [=ae]fre].
  nae[.g]el, _sm._ nail.
  naes = ne waes.
  n[=a]ht, _prn. w. gen._ naught, nothing [ = n[=a]n wiht].
  n[=a]ht-nes, _sf._ worthlessness, cowardice.
  nam, _see_ niman.
  nama, _sm._ name.
  n[=a]mon, _see_ niman.
  n[=a]n, _prn._ none, no [ = ne [=a]n].
  n[=a]t = ne w[=a]t.
  n[=a]wther, _prn._ neither [ = ne [=a]hwaether (either)].
  ne, _av._ not--ne ... ne, neither ... not.
  {109}
  n[=e]ah, _av._ near; _superl._ n[=i]ehst--aet n[=i]ehstan, next,
      immediately, afterwards.
  nearu, _aj._ narrow.
  n[=e]a-wist, _sfm._ neighbourhood [wesan].
  n[e,]mnan, _wv._ name [nama].
  neom = ne eom.
  nese, _av._ no.
  n[e,]tt, _sn._ net.
  n[=i]ed, _sf._ need.
  n[=i]edunga, _av._ needs, by necessity.
  n[=i]ehst, _see_ n[=e]ah.
  n[=i]eten, _sn._ animal.
  nigon, _num._ nine.
  nigotha, _aj._ ninth.
  niht, _sf._ night.
  niman, _sv. 4_, take, capture; take in marriage, marry.
  nis = ne is.
  nither, _av._ down.
  n[=i]we, _aj._ new.
  _[.g]e_.n[=o]g, _aj._ enough.
  nolde = ne wolde.
  north, _av._ north.
  Northhymbra-land, _sn._ Northumberland.
  North-hymbre, _smpl._ Northumbrians [Humbra].
  northan-weard, _aj._ northward.
  North-m[e,]nn, _pl._ Norwegians.
  n[=u], _av._ now, just now; _cj. causal_, now that, since.
  n[=u].[.g]iet, _av._ still.
  _[.g]e_.nyht-sum-nes, _sf._ sufficience, abundance.
  nyle, = ne wile.
  nyste, nyton = ne wiste, ne witon.

              O.

  Of, _prp. w. dat._ of, from _of place_, _origin_, _privation_, _release_,
      &c.; _partitive_, s[e,]llath [=u]s of [=e]owrum ele, some of your
      oil.
  of-.dr[=ae]dd, _aj._ afraid [_past partic. of_ ofdr[=ae]dan, dread].
  ofer, _prp. w. dat. and acc._ over; on; _of time_, during, throughout,
      over.
  ofer-gyld, _aj._ (past partic.), gilded over, covered with gold.
  ofer-.h[e,]rgian, _wv._ ravage, over-run.
  ofer-.s[=a]wan, _sv. 2_, sow over.
  offrian, _wv._ offer, sacrifice [_Latin_ offerre].
  offrung, _sf._ offering, sacrifice.
  of-.sl[=e]an, _sv. 2_, slay.
  of-.sn[=i]than, _sv. 6_, kill [sn[=i]than, cut].
  of-spring, _sm._ offspring [springan].
  oft, _av._ often.
  of-.t[=e]on, _sv. 7, w. dat. of pers. and gen. of thing_, deprive.
  of-.thyrst, _aj._ thirsty [_past partic. of_ ofthyrstan, _from_ thurst].
  of-.wundrian, _wv. w. gen._ wonder.
  [=o]-l[=ae][.c]ung, _sf._ flattery.
  olfend, _sm._ camel [_Latin_ elephas].
  on, _prp. w. dat. and acc._ on; in; _hostility_, against, on h[=i]e
      fuhton; _of time_, in.
  on-.byr[.g]an, _wv._ taste.
  on-.cn[=a]wan, _sv. 1_, know, recognize.
  on.dr[=ae]dan, _sv. 1_, _wv._ dread, fear.
  on-.f[=o]n, _sv. 1_, receive.
  on-.[.g][=e]an, _prp. w. dat. and acc._ towards; _hostility_, against.
  on-.[.g][=e]an, _av._ back--[.g]ew[e,]nde on-[.g][=e]an, returned.
  on-[.g]inn, _sn._ beginning.
  on-.[.g]innan, _sv. 3_, begin.
  on-.liehtan, _wv._ illuminate, enlighten [leoht].
  on.liehtung, _sf._ illumination, light.
  on-.l[=u]can, _sv. 7_, unlock.
  on-.middan, _prp. w. dat._ in the midst of.
  on-s[=i]en, _sf._ appearance, form.
  on-sund, _aj._ sound, whole.
  on-.uppan, _prp. w. dat._ upon.
  on-weald, _sm._ rule, authority, power; territory.
  on-.we[.g], _av._ away.
  open, _aj._ open.
  openian, _wv._ open, reveal, disclose.
  orgel-l[=i]ce, _av._ proudly.
  {110}
  or-m[=ae]te, _aj._ immense, boundless [metan].
  or-sorg, _aj._ unconcerned, careless.
  oth, _prp. w. acc._ until--oth thaet, _cj._ until; up to, as far as.
  [=o]ther, _prn._ (always strong), second; other.
  oththe, _cj._ or--oththe ... oththe, either ... or.
  oxa, _sm._ ox.

              P.

  P[=a]pa, _sm._ pope [_Latin_ papa].
  p[e,]ning, _sm._ penny.
  Peohtas, _smpl._ Picts.
  Philist[=e]isc, _aj._ Philistine.
  Pihtisc, _aj._ Pictish [Peohtas].
  plegian, _wv._ play.
  post, _sm._ post [_Latin_ postis].
  pr[=e]ost, _sm._ priest  [_Latin_ presbyter].
  pund, _sn._ pound [_Latin_ pondus].
  pytt, _sm._ pit [_Latin_ puteus].

              R.

  Racent[=e]ag, _ sf._ chains.
  r[=a]d, _see_ r[=i]dan.
  _[.g]e_.r[=a]d, _sn._ reckoning, account; on th[=a] [.g]er[=a]d thaet, on
      condition that.
  r[=ae]d, _sm._ advice; what is advisable, plan of action--him r[=ae]d
      th[=u]hte, it seemed advisable to him.
  ramm, _sm._ ram.
  r[=a]p, _sm._ rope.
  r[=e]af, _sn._ robe, dress.
  reahte, _see_ re[.c][.c]an.
  r[=e][.c]an, _wv. w. gen._ reck, care.
  r[e,][.c][.c]an, _wv._ tell, narrate.
  _[.g]e_.r[e,][.c]ednes, _sf._ narrative.
  _[.g]e_.r[=e]fa, _sm._ officer, reeve, bailiff.
  re[.g]en, _sm._ rain.
  r[=e]the, _aj._ fierce, cruel.
  r[=i][.c]e, _aj._ powerful, of high rank.
  r[=i][.c]e, _sn._ kingdom, sovereignty, government.
  r[=i][.c]etere, _sn._ (ambition), pomp.
  r[=i][.c]sian, _wv._ rule.
  r[=i]dan, _sv. 6_, ride.
  riftere, _sm._ reaper.
  riht, _aj._ right; righteous.
  riht-l[=i]ce, _av._ rightly, correctly.
  riht-w[=i]s, _aj._ righteous.
  riht-w[=i]snes, _sf._ righteousness.
  r[=i]m, _sm._ number.
  r[=i]man, _wv._ count.
  r[=i]nan, _wv._ rain [re[.g]en].
  r[=i]pan, _sv. 6_, reap.
  r[=i]pere, _sm._ reaper.
  r[=i]p-t[=i]ma, _sm._ reaping-time, harvest.
  r[=o]hte, _see_ r[=e][.c]an.
  R[=o]me-burg, _sf._ city of Rome.
  r[=o]wan, _sv. 1_, row.
  ryne, _sm._ course.
  _[.g]e_.r[=y]ne, _sn._ mystery.

              S.

  S[=ae], _sf._ sea--_dat._ s[=ae].
  s[=ae]d, _sn._ seed.
  sae[.g]de, _see_ s[e,][.c][.g]an.
  s[=ae]l, _sm._ time, occasion.
  _[.g]e_.s[=ae]li[.g], _aj._ happy, blessed.
  _[.g]e_.s[=ae]li[.g]-l[=i]ce, _av._ happily, blessedly.
  saet, s[=ae]ton, _see_ sittan.
  sagol, _sm._ rod, staff.
  [.g]e.samnian, _wv._ collect, assemble.
  samod, _av_. together, with.
  sanct, _sm._ saint [_Latin_ sanctus].
  sand, _sf._ dish of food [s[e,]ndan].
  sand-[.c]eosol, _sm._ sand (_literally_ sand-gravel).
  s[=a]r, _sn._ grief.
  s[=a]r, _aj._ grievous.
  s[=a]ri[.g], _aj._ sorry, sad.
  s[=a]wan, _sv. 1_, sow.
  s[=a]were, _sm._ sower.
  s[=a]wol, _sf._ soul.
  scamu, _sf._ shame.
  scand, _sf._ disgrace.
  scand-lic, _aj._ shameful.
  s[.c][=e]af, _sm._ sheaf [sc[=u]fan].
  s[.c][=e]af-m[=ae]lum, _av._ sheafwise.
  _[.g]e_.s[.c]eaft, _sf._ creature, created thing. s[.c]eal, _swv._ ought
      to, must; shall.
  s[.c][=e]ap, _sn._ sheep.
  s[.c]eatt, _sm._ (tribute); money.
  s[.c][=e]awere, _sm._ spy, witness.
  s[.c][=e]awian, _wv._ see; examine; read.
  s[.c][=e]awung, _sf._ seeing, examination.
  s[.c][=e]otan, _sv. 7_, shoot.
  {111}
  s[.c]ieppan, _sv. 2_, create.
  s[.c]ieran, _sv. 4_, shear.
  s[.c]ip, _sn._ ship.
  s[.c]ip-h[e,]re, _sm._ fleet.
  s[.c]ip-hlaest, _sm._ (shipload), crew.
  s[.c][=i]r, _sf._ shire.
  scolde, _see_ sceal.
  sc[=o]p, _see_ s[.c]ieppan.
  scort, _aj._ short.
  scotian, _wv._ shoot [s[.c][=e]otan].
  Scot-land, _sn._ Ireland.
  Scottas, _smpl._ the Irish.
  scotung, _sf._ shot.
  scraef, _sn._ cave.
  scr[=i]n, _sn._ shrine [_Latin_ scrinium].
  scrincan, _sv. 3_, shrink.
  scr[=u]d, _sn._ dress.
  scr[=y]dan, _wv._ clothe [scr[=u]d].
  sc[=u]fan, _sv. 7_, push--sc[=u]fan [=u]t, launch (ship).
  sculon, _see_ s[.c]eal.
  scuton, _see_ s[.c][=e]otan.
  scyld, _sf._ guilt [sculon, sceal].
  scyldig, _aj._ guilty.
  scylen, _see_ sceal.
  Scyttisc, _aj._ Scotch [Scottas].
  se, s[=e], _prn._ that; the; he; who.
  _[.g]e_seah, _see_ _[.g]e_s[=e]on.
  sealde, _see_ s[e,]llan.
  s[=e]ath, _sm._ pit.
  Seaxe, _smpl._ Saxons.
  s[=e][.c]an, _wv._ seek; visit, come to; attack.
  s[e,][.c][.g]an, _wv._ say.
  self, _prn._ self.
  s[e,]llan, _wv._ give; sell.
  s[=e]lest, _av. superl._ best.
  s[e,]ndan, _wv._ send, send message [sand].
  s[=e]o, _see_ se.
  seofon, _num._ seven.
  seofotha, _aj._ seventh.
  seolc, _sf._ silk.
  seolcen, _aj._ silken.
  seolfor, _sn._ silver.
  _[.g]e._s[=e]on, _sv. 5_, see.
  s[=e]ow, _see_ s[=a]wan.
  _[.g]e._s[e,]tnes, _sf._ narrative [s[e,]ttan].
  s[e,]ttan, _wv._ set; appoint, institute--d[=o]m s[e,]ttan _w. dat._ pass
      sentence on; compose, write; create [sittan].
  sibb, _sf._ peace.
  _[.g]e_.sibb-sum, _aj._ peaceful.
  s[=i]e, _see_ wesan.
  s[=i]efer-l[=i]ce, _av._ purely.
  s[=i]efre, _aj._ pure.
  sierwung, _sf._ stratagem.
  siex, _num._ six.
  siexta, _aj._ sixth.
  siexti[.g], _num._ sixty.
  siexti[.g]-feald, _aj._ sixtyfold.
  si[.g]e, _sm._ victory--si[.g]e niman, gain the victory.
  si[.g]e-faest, _aj._ victorious.
  _[.g]e_.sihth, _sf._ sight; vision, dream [[.g]es[=e]on].
  sifren, _aj._ silver.
  simle, _av._ always.
  sind, _see_ wesan.
  sinu, _sf_, sinew.
  sittan, _sv. 5_, sit; settle, stay.
  _[.g]e_.sittan, _sv. 5_, take possession of.
  s[=i]th, _sm._ journey.
  s[=i]thian, _wv._ journey, go.
  siththan, _av._ since, afterwards; cj. when.
  sl[=ae]p, _sm._ sleep.
  sl[=ae]pan, _sv. 1_, sleep,
  slaga, _sm._ slayer. [sl[=e]an, _past. partic._ [.g]eslae[.g]en].
  sl[=a]w, _aj._ slow, slothful, dull.
  sl[=e]an, _sv. 2_, strike; slay, kill.
  sl[e,][.c][.g], _sm._ hammer [slaga, sl[=e]an].
  sl[e,][.g]e, _sm._ killing [slaga, sl[=e]an].
  sl[=e]p, _see_ sl[=ae]pan.
  sl[=o]g, _see_ sl[=e]an.
  smael, _aj._ narrow.
  sm[=e]an, _wv._ consider, think; consult.
  sm[=e]ocan, _sv. 7_, smoke.
  sm[=e]the, _aj._ smooth.
  snotor, _aj._ wise, prudent.
  s[=o]na, _av._ soon; then.
  sorg, _sf._ sorrow.
  s[=o]th, _aj._ true.
  s[=o]th, _sn._ truth.
  s[=o]th-l[=i]ce, _av._ truly, indeed.
  spade, _wf._ spade [_Lati_n spatha].
  {112}
  spr[=ae][.c], _sf._ speech, language; conversation [sprecan].
  sprecan, _sv. 5_, speak.
  spr[e,]n[.g]an, _wv._ (scatter); sow [springan].
  springan, _sv. 3_, spring.
  sprungen, _see_ springan.
  st[=ae]nen, _aj._ of stone [st[=a]n].
  st[=ae]niht, _sn._ stony ground [_originally adj._ 'stony,' from
      st[=a]n].
  st[=a]n, _sm._ stone; brick.
  standan, _sv. 2_, stand.
  st[=e]ap, _aj._ steep.
  st[e,]de, _sm._ place.
  stefn, _sf._ voice.
  stelan, _sv. 4_, steal.
  st[e,]nt, _see_ standan.
  st[=e]or, _sf._ steering, rudder.
  steorra, _sm._ star.
  sticol, _aj._ rough.
  st[=i]epel, _sm._ steeple [st[=e]ap].
  st[=i]eran, _wv. w. dat._ restrain [st[=e]or].
  _[.g]e_.stillan, _wv._ stop, prevent.
  stille, _aj._ still, quiet.
  st[=o]d, _see_ standan.
  st[=o]l, _sm._ seat.
  st[=o]w, _sf._ place.
  str[=ae]t, _sf._ street, road [_Latin_ strata via].
  strand, _sm._ shore.
  strang, _aj._ strong.
  str[=e]dan, _wv._ (scatter), sow.
  str[e,]n[.g]tho, _sf._ strength [strang].
  [.g]e.str[=e]on, _sn._ possession.
  [.g]e.str[=i]enan, _wv._ gain [[.g]estr[=e]on].
  str[=u]tian, _wv._ strut.
  sty[.c][.c]e, _sn._ piece.
  sum, _prn._ some, a certain (one), one; a.
  _[.g]e_.sund, _aj._ sound, healthy.
  _[.g]e_.sund-full. _aj._ safe and sound.
  sundor, _av._ apart.
  sunne, _sf._ sun.
  sunu, _sm._ son.
  s[=u]th, _av._ south, southwards.
  s[=u]than, _av._ from the south.
  s[=u]than-weard, _aj._ southward.
  s[=u]th-d[=ae]l, _sm._ the South.
  s[=u]therne, _aj._ southern.
  S[=u]th-seaxe, _smpl._ South-Saxons.
  sw[=a], _av._ so; sw[=a], sw[=a], as, like--sw[=a] ... sw[=a], so ... as.
  sw[=a]c, _see_ sw[=i]can.
  sw[=a]-.th[=e]ah, _av._ however.
  swefn, _sn._ sleep; dream.
  swel[.c], _prn._ such.
  swel[.c]e, _av._ as if, as it were, as, like.
  sweltan, _sv. 3_, die.
  sw[e,]n[.c]an, _wv._ afflict, molest [swincan].
  sw[e,]n[.g], _sm._ stroke, blow [swingan].
  sw[=e]or, _sm._ pillar.
  sw[=e]ora, _sm._ neck.
  sweord, _sn._ sword.
  sweord-bora, _sm._ sword-bearer [beran].
  sweotol, _aj._ clear, evident.
  sweotolian, _wv._ display, show, indicate.
  sweotolung, _sf._ manifestation, sign.
  sw[e,]rian, _sv. 2_, swear.
  sw[=i]c, _sm._ deceit.
  _[.g]e_.sw[=i]can, _sv. 6_ (fail, fall short); cease (betray).
  sw[=i]c-d[=o]m, _sm._ deceit [sw[=i]can].
  swicol, _aj._ deceitful, treacherous.
  swicon, _see_ sw[=i]can.
  swift, _aj._ swift.
  sw[=i]gian, _wv._ be silent.
  swincan, _sv. 3_, labour, toil.
  swingan, _sv. 3_, beat.
  swingle, _sf._ stroke [swingan].
  swipe, _sm._ whip.
  sw[=i]the, _av._ very, much, greatly, violently--_cp._ sw[=i]thor,
      rather, more.
  sw[=i]th-lic, _aj._ excessive, great.
  sw[=i]thre, _sf._ right hand [_cp. of_ sw[=i]the _with_ hand
      _understood_].
  swulton, _see_ sweltan.
  swuncon, _see_ swincan.
  swungon, _see_ swingan.
  syndri[.g], _aj._ separate [sundor].
  syn-full, _aj._ sinful.
  syngian, _wv._ sin.
  synn, _sf._ sin.

  {113}
              T.

  T[=a]cen, _sn._ sign, token; miracle.
  t[=a]cnian, _wv._ signify.
  _[.g]e_.t[=a]cnung, _sf._ signification, type.
  t[=ae][.c]an, _wv. w. dat._ show; teach.
  talu, _sf._ number [getel].
  tam, _aj._ tame.
  t[=a]wian, _wv._ ill-treat.
  t[=e]am, _sm._ progeny [t[=e]on].
  _[.g]e_.tel, _sn._ number.
  t[e,]llan, _wv._ count, account--t[e,]llan t[=o] n[=a]hte, count as
      naught [talu].
  T[e,]mes, _sf._ Thames [Tamisia].
  tempel, _sn._ temple [_Latin_ templum].
  t[=e]on, _sv. 7_, pull, drag.
  t[=e]ona, _sm._ injury, insult.
  t[=e]on-r[=ae]den, _sf._ humiliation.
  t[=e]th, _see_ t[=o]th.
  ti[.c][.c]en, _sn._ kid.
  t[=i]d, _sf._ time; hour.
  t[=i]e[.g]an, _wv._ tie.
  t[=i]eman, _wv._ teem, bring forth [t[=e]am].
  t[=i]en, _num._ ten.
  tierwe, _sf._ tar.
  ti[.g]ele, _wf._ tile [_Latin_ tegula].
  t[=i]ma, _sm._ time.
  timbrian, _wv._ build.
  _[.g]e_.timbrung, _sf._ building.
  tintre[.g], _sn._ torture.
  tintregian, _wv._ torture.
  t[=o], _prp. w. dat._ (_av._) to--t[=o] abbode [.g]es[e,]tt, made abbot;
      _time_, at--t[=o] langum fierste, for a long time; _adverbial_, t[=o]
      scande, ignominiously; _fitness_, _purpose_, _for_--th[=ae]m folce
      (dat.) t[=o] d[=e]athe, to the death of the people, so that the
      people were killed; t[=o] th[=ae]m thaet, cj. in order that--t[=o]
      thaem (sw[=i]the) ... thaet, so (greatly) ... that.
  t[=o], _av._ too.
  t[=o]-.berstan, _sv. 3_, burst, break asunder.
  t[=o]-.brecan, _sv. 4_, break in pieces, break through.
  t[=o]-.bre[.g]dan, _sv. 3_, tear asunder.
  t[=o]-.cw[=i]esan, _wv._ crush, bruise.
  t[=o]-cyme, _sm._ coming [cuman].
  t[=o]-.dae[.g], _av._ to-day.
  t[=o]-.d[=ae]lan, _wv._ disperse; separate, divide.
  t[=o]-.gaedre, _av._ together.
  t[=o]-.[.g][=e]anes, _prp. w. dat._ towards--him t[=o][.g][=e]anes, to
      meet him.
  t[=o]l, _sn._ tool.
  t[=o]-.l[=i]esan, _wv._ loosen [l[=e]as].
  t[=o]-.middes, _prp. w. dat._ in the midst of.
  t[=o]-.teran, _sv. 4_, tear to pieces.
  t[=o]th, _sm._ tooth.
  t[=o]-weard, _aj._ future.
  t[=o]-.weorpan, _sv. 3_, overthrow, destroy.
  tr[=e]ow, _sn._ tree.
  _[.g]e_.tr[=e]owe, _aj._ true, faithful.
  trum, _aj._ strong.
  trymman, _wv._ strengthen [trum].
  trymmung, _sf._ strengthening, encouragement.
  t[=u]cian, _wv._ ill-treat.
  tugon, _see_ t[=e]on.
  t[=u]n, _sm._ village, town.
  tw[=a], tw[=ae]m, _see_ tw[=e][.g]en.
  tw[=e][.g]en, _num._ two.
  tw[e,]lf, _num._ twelve.
  tw[e,]nti[.g], _num. w. gen._ twenty.

              Th.

  Th[=a], _av. cj._ then; when--th[=a] th[=a], when, while--_correlative_
      th[=a] ... th[=a], when ... (then).
  th[=a], th[=ae]m, &c., _see_ se.
  th[=ae]r, _av._ there--th[=ae]rt[=o], &c. thereto, to it; where--th[=ae]r
      th[=ae]r, _correl._ where.
  th[=ae]re, _see_ se.
  th[=ae]r-rihte, _av._ immediately.
  thaes, _av._ therefore; wherefore.
  thaes, thaet, _see_ se.
  thaet, _cj._ that.
  _[.g]e_.thafian, _wv._ allow, permit.
  th[=a]-.[.g]iet, _av._ still, yet.
  thanc, _sm._ thought; thanks.
  thancian, _wv. w. gen. of thing and dat. of person_, thank.
  {114}
  thanon, _av._ thence, away.
  th[=a]s, _see_ this.
  the, _rel. prn._ who--s[=e] the, who; _av._ when.
  th[=e], _see_ th[=u].
  th[=e]ah, _av. cj._ though, yet, however--th[=e]ah the, although.
  thearf, _swv._ need.
  thearle, _av._ very, greatly.
  th[=e]aw, _sm._ custom, habit; th[=e]awas, virtues, morality.
  the[.g]en, _sm._ thane; servant.
  the[.g]nian, _wv. w. dat._ serve.
  the[.g]nung, _sf._ service, retinue.
  th[e,]n[.c]an, _wv._ think, expect [thanc].
  th[=e]od, _sf._ people, nation.
  _[.g]e_.th[=e]ode, _sn._ language.
  th[=e]of, _sm._ thief.
  th[=e]os, _see_ thes.
  th[=e]ostru, _spl._ darkness.
  th[=e]ow, _sm._ servant.
  th[=e]ow-d[=o]m, _sm._ service.
  th[=e]owian, _wv. w. dat._ serve.
  th[=e]owot, _sn._ servitude.
  thes, _prn._ this.
  thi[.c][.c]e, _aj._ thick.
  thi[.c][.g]an, _sv. 5_, take, receive; eat, drink.
  th[=i]n, _see_ th[=u].
  thing, _sn._ thing.
  this, thissum, &c., _see_ thes.
  _[.g]e_.p[=o]ht, _sm._ thought.
  th[=o]hte, _see_ th[e,]n[.c]an.
  thone, _see_ se.
  thonne, _av. cj._ then; when; because.
  thonne, _av._ than.
  thorfte, _see_ thearf.
  thorn, _sm._ thorn.
  thr[=ae]d, _sm._ thread.
  thr[=e]o, _see_ thr[=i]e.
  thridda, _aj._ third.
  thr[=i]e, _num._ three.
  thrim, _see_ thr[=i]e.
  thriti[.g], _num._ thirty.
  thriti[.g]-feald, _aj._ thirtyfold.
  thrymm, _sm._ glory.
  th[=u], _prn._ thou.
  th[=u]hte, _see_ thyn[.c]an.
  _[.g]e_.thungen, _aj._ excellent, distinguished.
  thurh, _prp. w. acc._ through; _causal_, through, by.
  thurh-.wunian, _wv._ continue.
  thurst, _sm._ thirst.
  thursti[.g], _aj._ thirsty.
  thus, _av._ thus.
  th[=u]send, _sn._ thousand.
  _[.g]e_.thw[=ae]r-l[=ae][.c]an, _wv._ agree.
  th[=y], _instr. of_ se; _av._ because.
  th[=y]fel, _sm._ bush.
  th[=y].l[=ae]s, _cj._ lest.
  thyn[.c]an, _wv. impers. w. dat._ m[=e] thyn[.c]th, methinks
      [th[e,]n[.c]an].
  th[=y]rel, _sn._ hole [thurh].

              U.

  Ufe-weard, _aj._ upward, at the top of.
  un-[=a]r[=i]med-lic, _aj._ innumerable.
  unc, _see_ ic.
  un-_[.g]e_cynd, _aj._ strange, of alien family.
  un-d[=e]ad-lic-nes, _sf._ immortality.
  under, _prp. w. dat. and acc._ under.
  under-cyning, _sm._ under-king.
  under-.delfan, _sv._ dig under.
  under-.f[=o]n, _sv. 1_, receive, take.
  under-.[.g]ietan, _sv. 5_, understand.
  undern-t[=i]d, _sf._ morning-time.
  un-forht, _aj._ dauntless.
  un-for-molsnod, _aj._ (past partic.) undecayed.
  un-_[.g]e_h[=i]ersum, _aj. w. dat._ disobedient.
  un-hold, _aj._ hostile.
  un-_[.g]e_metlic, _aj._ immense.
  un-mihti[.g], _aj._ weak.
  un-nytt, _aj._ useless.
  un-rihtl[=i]ce, _av._ wrongly.
  un-rihtw[=i]s, _aj._ unrighteous.
  un-_[.g]e_r[=i]m, _sn._ countless number or quantity.
  un-_[.g]e_r[=i]m, _aj._ countless.
  un-_[.g]e_s[=ae]li[.g], _aj._ unhappy, accursed.
  un-scyldi[.g], _aj._ innocent.
  un-t[=i]emend, _aj._ barren [_from pres. partic._ of t[=i]eman].
  {115}
  un-_[.g]e_thw[=ae]r-nes, _sf._ discord.
  un-_[.g]e_witti[.g], _aj._ foolish.
  [=u]p, _av._ up.
  [=u]p-[=a]hafen-nes, _sf._ conceit, arrogance.
  [=u]p-fl[=o]r, _sf._ (_dat. sing._ -a) upper floor, upper story.
  uppan, _prp. w. dat._ on, upon.
  urnon, _see_ iernan.
  [=u]s, _see_ ic.
  [=u]t, _av._ out.
  [=u]tan, _av._ outside.
  uton, _defect. verb, w. infin._ let us--uton g[=a]n, let us go!

              W.

  Wacian, _wv._ be awake, watch.
  w[=ae]dla, _sm._ poor man.
  wael, _sn._ slaughter--wael [.g]e.sl[=e]an, make a slaughter.
  wael-hr[=e]ow, _aj._ cruel.
  waelhr[=e]ow-l[=i]ce, _av._ cruelly, savagely.
  waelhr[=e]ownes, _sf._ cruelty.
  w[=ae]pen, _sn._ weapon.
  waer, _aj._ wary.
  w[=ae]ron, waes, _see_ wesan.
  waestm, _sm._ (growth); fruit.
  waeter, _sn._ water.
  waeter-s[.c]ipe, _sm._ piece of water, water.
  w[=a]fung, _sf._ (spectacle), display.
  -ware, _pl._ (only in composition) dwellers, inhabitants [_originally
      defenders, cp._ w[e,]rian].
  w[=a]t, _see_ witan.
  _[.g]e_w[=a]t, _see_ _[.g]e_w[=i]tan.
  w[=e], _see_ ic.
  _[.g]e_.weald, _sn._ power, command.
  wealdan, _sv. 1, w. gen._ rule.
  Wealh, _sm._ (_pl._ W[=e]alas), _sm._ Welshman, Briton (_originally_
      foreigner).
  weall, _sm._ wall.
  weall-l[=i]m, _sm._ (wall-lime), cement, mortar.
  wearg, _sm._ felon, criminal [_originally_ wolf, _then_ proscribed man,
      outlaw].
  weaxan, _sv. 1_, grow, increase.
  we[.g], _sm._ way, road.
  we[.g]-f[=e]rende, _aj._ (pres. partic.) way-faring.
  wel, _av._ well.
  wel-willend-nes, _sf._ benevolence.
  w[=e]nan, _wv._ expect, think.
  _[.g]e_.w[e,]ndan, _wv._ turn; go [windan].
  w[e,]nian, _wv._ accustom, wean [[.g]ewuna].
  weofod, _sn._ altar.
  weorc, _sn._ work.
  weorpan, _sv. 3_, throw.
  weorth, _sn._ worth.
  weorth, _aj._ worth, worthy.
  weorthan, _sv. 3_, happen; become--w. aet spr[=ae][.c]e, enter into
      conversation.
  _[.g]e_.weorthan, _sv. 3, impers. w. dat._--him [.g]ewearth, they agreed
      on.
  weorth-full, _aj._ worthy.
  weorthian, _wv._ honour, worship; make honoured, exalt.
  weorth-l[=i]ce, _aj._ honourably.
  weorth-mynd, _sf._ honour.
  w[=e]ox, _see_ weaxan.
  w[=e]pan, _sv. 1_, weep.
  wer, _sm._ man.
  w[e,]rian, _wv._ defend [waer].
  werod, _sn._ troop, army.
  wesan, _sv._ be.
  west, _av._ west.
  West-seaxe, _smpl._ West-saxons.
  w[=e]ste, _aj._ waste, desolate.
  w[=i]d, _aj._ wide.
  w[=i]de, _av._ widely, far and wide.
  widewe, _sf._ widow.
  _[.g]e_.wieldan, _wv._ overpower, conquer [wealdan].
  wierthe, _aj. w. gen._ worthy [weorth].
  w[=i]f, _sn._ woman; wife.
  w[=i]f-healf, _sf._ female side.
  w[=i]f-mann, _sm._ woman.
  wiht, _sf._ wight, creature, thing.
  Wiht, _sf._ Isle of Wight [Vectis].
  Wiht-ware, _pl._ Wight-dwellers.
  wilde, _aj._ wild.
  wild[=e]or, _sn._ wild beast.
  willa, _sm._ will.
  {116}
  willan, _swv._ will, wish; _of repetition_, be used to.
  _[.g]e_.wilnian, _wv. w. gen._ desire.
  w[=i]n, _sn._ wine.
  wind, _sm._ wind.
  windan, _sv. 3_, wind.
  w[=i]n-[.g]eard, _sm._ vineyard.
  winnan, _sv. 3_, fight.
  _[.g]e_.winnan, _sv. 3_, win, gain.
  winter, (_pl._ winter), _sm._ winter; _in reckoning_ = year.
  winter-setl, _sn._ winter-quarters.
  w[=i]s, _aj._ wise.
  w[=i]s-d[=o]m, _sm._ wisdom.
  w[=i]se, _sf._ (wise), way.
  _[.g]e_.wiss, _aj._ certain.
  _[.g]e_.wissian, _wv._ guide, direct.
  _[.g]e_.wissung, _sf._ guidance, direction.
  wiste, _see_ witan.
  wit, _see_ ic.
  wita, _sm._ councillor, sage.
  witan, _swv._ know.
  _[.g]e_.w[=i]tan, _sv. 6_, depart.
  w[=i]te, _sn._ punishment; torment.
  w[=i]tega, _sm._ prophet.
  witod-l[=i]ce, _av._ truly, indeed, and [witan].
  _[.g]e_.witt, _sn._ wits, intelligence, understanding [witan].
  with, _prp. w. dat. and acc._ towards; along--with we[.g], by the road;
      _hostility_, against--fuhton with Brettas, fought with the Britons;
      _association, sharing, &c._, with; _defence_, against; _exchange,
      price, for_--with th[=ae]m the, in consideration of, provided that.
  with-.meten-nes, _sf._ comparison.
  with-.sacan, _sv. 2, w. dat._ deny.
  with-.standan, _sv. 2, w. dat._ withstand, resist.
  wlite, _sm._ beauty.
  w[=o]d, _aj._ mad.
  w[=o]d-l[=i]ce, _av._ madly.
  wolde, _see_ willan.
  w[=o]p, _sm._ weeping [w[=e]pan].
  word, _sn._ word, sentence; subject of talk, question, answer, report.
  _[.g]e_worden, _see_ weorthan.
  worhte, _see_ wyr[.c]an.
  woruld, _sf._ world.
  woruld-thing, _sn._ worldly thing.
  wrecan, _sv. 5_, avenge.
  wr[=e][.g]an, _wv._ accuse.
  _[.g]e_.writ, _sn._ writing [wr[=i]tan].
  wr[=i]tan, _sv. 6_, write.
  wudu, _sm._ wood.
  wuldor, _sn._ glory.
  wuldrian, _wv._ glorify, extol.
  wulf, _sm._ wolf.
  _[.g]e_.wuna, _sm._ habit, custom [wunian].
  wund, _sf._ wound.
  wundor, _sn._ wonder; miracle.
  wundor-lic, _aj._ wonderful, wondrous.
  wundor-l[=i]ce, _av._ wonderfully, wondrously.
  wundrian, _wv. w. gen._ wonder.
  _[.g]e_.wunelic, _aj._ customary.
  wunian, _wv._ dwell, stay, continue [[.g]ewuna].
  wunung, _sf._ dwelling.
  _[.g]e_wunnen, _see_ _[.g]e_winnan.
  wyr[.c]an, _wv._ work, make; build; do, perform [weorc].
  wyrhta, _sm._ worker.
  wyrt, _sf._ herb, spice; crop.
  wyrt-br[=ae]th, _sm._ spice-fragrance, fragrant spice.
  wyrtruma, _sm._ root.
  w[=y]s[.c]an, _wv._ wish.

              Y.

  Yfel, _aj._ evil, bad.
  yfel, _sn._ evil.
  ymbe, _prp. w. acc._ around; _of time_, about, at.
  ymb-.scr[=y]dan, _wv._ clothe, array.
  ymb-.[=u]tan, _av._ round about.
  [=y]terra, _aj. comp._ outer; _superl._ [=y]temest, outermost, last
      [[=u]t].




       *       *       *       *       *




Notes

[1] Where no key-word is given for a long vowel, it must be pronounced
exactly like the corresponding short one, only lengthened.

[2] Both vowels.

[3] Wherever the acc. is not given separately, it is the same as the nom.

[4] So also _n[=a]h_ = _ne_ (not) _[=a]h_.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANGLO-SAXON PRIMER***


******* This file should be named 34316.txt or 34316.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/4/3/1/34316



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

