Project Gutenberg's Three New Beavers from Utah, by Stephen D. Durrant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Three New Beavers from Utah

Author: Stephen D. Durrant

Editor: Harold S. Crane

Release Date: November 16, 2010 [EBook #34340]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE NEW BEAVERS FROM UTAH ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Josephine Paolucci,
The Internet Archive for some images, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.







Three New Beavers from Utah

By

STEPHEN D. DURRANT and HAROLD S. CRANE

University of Kansas Publications

Museum of Natural History

Volume 1, No. 20, pp. 407-417, 7 figs. in text
December 24, 1948

University of Kansas
LAWRENCE
1948


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY
Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard, Edward H. Taylor
~Volume 1, No. 20, pp. 407-417, 7 figs. in text~
~December 24, 1948~

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas

PRINTED BY
FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1948

22-3716

[Transcriber's Note: Words surrounded by tildes, like ~this~ signifies
words in bold. Words surrounded by underscores, like _this_, signifies
words in italics.]




Three New Beavers from Utah

By

STEPHEN D. DURRANT AND HAROLD S. CRANE


The subspecific identity of beavers from Utah seems never to have been
carefully investigated. With the exception of the name _Castor
canadensis repentinus_ applied to animals from Zion and Parunuweap
canyons by Presnall (1938:14), all other writers from 1897 until the
present time, have used for animals from Utah, the name combination
_Castor canadensis frondator_ Mearns, the type of which is from Sonora,
Mexico. Study of specimens of beavers from Utah, accumulated in the
collections of the Museum of Zoology, University of Utah, proves these
animals to be far more variable than formerly supposed, and discloses
the existence of three hitherto unnamed kinds, which are named and
described below.

We recognize the need for caution in proposing new names for American
beavers, because the transplanting of these animals from one watershed
to another may have permitted the animals of a given area to change
genetically, say, through hybridization, and may also have altered the
geographic distribution of the several kinds. The officials of the Utah
State Fish and Game Commission have assured us that such transplants
have not occurred in the areas where these three new kinds are found,
and further that nowhere in the state have transplants been made from
one major drainage system to another; such transplants as have been made
were only within the same major drainage system.

The capitalized color terms used in this paper are after Ridgway, Color
Standards and Color Nomenclature, Washington, D. C., 1912. All
measurements are in millimeters. We are indebted to the officials of the
United States National Museum for the loan of comparative materials.


~Castor canadensis pallidus~ new subspecies

_Type._--Female, adult, skin and skull, number 719, Museum of Zoology,
University of Utah; Lynn Canyon, 7,500 ft., Boxelder County, Utah;
September 7, 1932; collected by W. W. Newby.

_Range._--Known only from the Raft River Mountains.

_Diagnosis._--Size small; tail and hind foot short (see measurements).
Color (type): Pale, upper parts uniformly Ochraceous-Buff; underfur
Snuff Brown; underparts uniformly Light Buff, grading to Light
Ochraceous-Buff at base of tail; underfur Light Drab; front and hind
feet Light Ochraceous-Buff. Skull: Rostrum short; nasals broad (breadth
averaging 54 per cent of length), constricted posteriorly and barely
projecting posteriorly beyond premaxillae; zygomatic arches robust, but
not widely spreading (zygomatic breadth 77 per cent of basilar length);
mastoid breadth 73 per cent of zygomatic breadth; anterolateral margin
of orbit narrow (6.2); occipital condyles visible from dorsal view;
condylobasal length greater than occipitonasal length; upper incisors
narrow (Orange Chrome in color); coronoid processes high and wide; cheek
teeth narrow.

_Measurements._--Measurements of the type are as follows: Total length,
1040; length of tail, 380; length of hind foot, 157; length of ear, 35;
occipitonasal length, 129.1; basilar length, 116.6; mastoid breadth,
65.6; interorbital breadth, 23.6; length of nasals, 43.3; zygomatic
breadth, 89.7; breadth of nasals, 23.4; alveolar length of upper
molariform teeth, 30.4.

_Comparisons._--From topotypes and near topotypes of _Castor canadensis
taylori_, _C. c. pallidus_ differs as follows: Size smaller; tail and
hind foot shorter. Color: Markedly lighter throughout. Skull: Nasals
shorter and wider (breadth of nasals averages 54 per cent of length of
nasals, as opposed to 46 per cent); nasals barely projecting posteriorly
beyond premaxillae; rostrum shorter; zygomatic breadth relative to
basilar length less; mastoid breadth actually as well as relatively
greater; interorbital breadth greater; occipitonasal length shorter
rather than longer than condylobasal length; tympanic bullae smaller;
coronoid process higher and wider; cheek teeth narrower.

From specimens of _Castor canadensis baileyi_, from 20 miles north
northeast of Elko, Elko County, Nevada, _C. c. pallidus_ differs as
follows: Body smaller; tail longer; hind foot shorter; ears shorter:
Color: Markedly lighter throughout. Skull: Larger; nasals shorter and
wider (breadth of nasals averages 54 per cent of length of nasals as
opposed to 41 per cent); nasals barely projecting posteriorly beyond
premaxillae; rostrum broader; zygomatic breadth relative to basilar
length less; mastoid breadth actually as well as relatively greater;
occipitonasal length less rather than greater than condylobasal length;
tympanic bullae smaller; coronoid process higher and wider; cheek teeth
narrower.

From one topotype and two specimens of _Castor canadensis repentinus_,
from the Colorado River at Yuma, Yuma County, Arizona, _C. c. pallidus_
differs as follows: Tail and hind foot shorter. Color: Lighter
throughout. Skull: Narrower; nasals shorter and wider (breadth of nasals
averages 54 per cent of length of nasals as opposed to 47 per cent);
nasals barely projecting posteriorly beyond premaxillae; rostrum
shorter; zygomatic breadth relative to basilar length less; mastoid
breadth actually as well relatively greater; tympanic bullae narrower
and smaller; coronoid process higher and wider; cheek teeth narrower.

From one specimen of _Castor canadensis concisor_, from Trappers Lake,
Garfield County, Colorado, and from the original description of that
subspecies (Warren and Hall, 1939: 358), _C. c. pallidus_ differs as
follows: Size smaller. Color: Markedly lighter throughout. Skull:
Smaller, narrower; nasals shorter and wider (breadth of nasals averages
54 per cent of length of nasals as opposed to 48 per cent); rostrum
shorter; zygomatic breadth relative to basilar length less; mastoid
breadth relative to zygomatic breadth greater; tympanic bullae narrower
and smaller; jugals narrower; distal end of meatal tube smaller;
coronoid process shorter and wider; angular process shorter and rounded
rather than nearly pointed; cheek teeth narrower.

From the type and near topotypes of _Castor canadensis rostralis_, _C.
c. pallidus_ differs as follows: Size smaller; tail and hind foot
shorter. Color: Markedly lighter throughout. Skull: Smaller and
narrower; rostrum shallower and narrower; posterior end of nasals more
constricted and barely projecting posteriorly beyond premaxillae;
zygomatic breadth relative to basilar length less; mastoid breadth
actually as well as relatively greater; dorsal surface of lacrimal bone
larger; tympanic bullae narrower; coronoid process higher and wider;
angular process not projecting so far caudad; cheek teeth narrower.

From the type and near topotypes of _Castor canadensis duchesnei_, _C.
c. pallidus_ differs as follows: Size smaller; tail and hind foot
shorter. Color: Lighter throughout. Skull: Shorter, narrower and less
massive; nasals shorter and wider (breadth of nasals averages 54 per
cent of length of nasals as opposed to 46 per cent); nasals barely
projecting posteriorly beyond premaxillae; rostrum shorter and narrower;
zygomatic breadth relative to basilar length less; mastoid breadth
actually as well as relatively greater; tympanic bullae narrower and
smaller; coronoid process higher and wider; angular process not
projecting so far caudad; cheek teeth narrower.

_Remarks._--The Raft River Mountains of extreme northwestern Utah, where
_C. c. pallidus_ occurs, are the only mountains of the state within the
drainage of the Snake River. The Snake River proper lies 50 miles to the
northward in Idaho and contains another kind of beaver, _C. c. taylori_
(Davis, 1939: 273). Although occurring within the same drainage as _C.
c. taylori_, _C. c. pallidus_ is as distinct from it as from any other
named kind. The relationships of _C. c. pallidus_, as indicated by the
short rostrum and short, wide nasals, are rather more with _C. c.
rostralis_ of the Wasatch Mountains, than with _C. c. taylori_.

The pale color of the animals belonging to _C. c. pallidus_ was noted at
the time of capture, and is the same in the young specimen (625 mm.
total length) as in the type, an adult.

     _Specimens examined._--Total, 2, distributed as follows:
     _Boxelder County_: Raft River, 5 mi. S Yost, Raft River
     Mountains, 6,000 ft., 1; Lynn Canyon, Raft River Mountains,
     7,500 ft., 1.


~Castor canadensis rostralis~ new subspecies

_Type._--Male, young adult, skin and skull, number 5199, Museum of
Zoology, University of Utah; Red Butte Canyon, Fort Douglas, 5,000 ft.,
Salt Lake County, Utah; October 13, 1947; collected by Harold S. Crane
and Clifton M. Greenhalgh, original number 446 of Crane.

_Range._--Known from the western streams of the Wasatch Mountains;
probably occurs in all streams draining westward into the basin of
Pleistocene Lake Bonneville.

_Diagnosis._--Size large; tail and hind foot long (see measurements).
Color (type): Upper parts Snuff Brown, purest on head; underfur Brownish
Black (2); base of tail Cinnamon Buff; hind feet Carob Brown; ears
Blackish Brown (2); underparts Auburn, grading posteriorly to Cinnamon
Buff; underfur Light Drab. Skull: Large, massive; nasals short and broad
(breadth averaging 54 per cent of length) and moderately convex
transversely; rostrum deep and broad; ventral surface of rostrum
moderately concave dorsally; dorsal surface of lacrimal bone small;
frontal region generally flat; zygomatic arches robust and widely
spreading (zygomatic breadth averaging 82 per cent of basilar length).

_Measurements._--Measurements of the type and average and extreme
cranial measurements of 6 unsexed adults from Charleston, are,
respectively, as follows: Total length, 1,330; length of tail, 470;
length of hind foot, 170; length of ear, 34; occipitonasal length,
128.2, 134.3 (142.1-129.5); basilar length, 112.4, 117.2 (128.2-113.2);
mastoid breadth, 62.5, 64.3 (68.9-60.2); interorbital breadth, 27.9,
26.0 (26.9-26.0); zygomatic breadth, 91.3, 93.8 (105.8-90.8); length of
nasals, 44.9, 43.9 (51.3-41.5); breadth of nasals, 24.5, 23.7
(25.7-22.0); alveolar length of upper molariform teeth, 28.3, 30.9
(32.5-28.7).

_Comparisons._--From topotypes and near topotypes of _Castor canadensis
taylori_, _C. c. rostralis_ differs as follows: Color: Darker on upper
parts owing to darker underfur, guard hairs actually lighter. Skull:
Longer; nasals shorter and wider (breadth of nasals averages 54 per cent
of length of nasals as opposed to 47 per cent); extension of nasals
posterior to premaxillae less; rostrum shorter, broader and deeper;
dorsal surface of lacrimal bone smaller; zygomatic breadth relative to
basilar length greater; mastoid breadth relative to zygomatic breadth
less; coronoid process shorter; coronoid and condyloid processes farther
apart and space between them shallower.

From one topotype and two specimens from the Colorado River at Yuma,
Yuma County, Arizona, of _Castor canadensis repentinus_, _C. c.
rostralis_ differs as follows: Size larger; tail longer. Color: Darker
throughout. Skull: Longer; nasals shorter and wider (breadth of nasals
relative to length of nasals averages 54 per cent as opposed to 47 per
cent); extension of nasals posterior to premaxillae less; rostrum
shorter, deeper and wider; zygomatic breadth relative to basilar length
greater; mastoid breadth actually as well as relatively greater; dorsal
surface of lacrimal bone smaller; coronoid and condylar processes
farther apart and space between them shallower.

From specimens of _Castor canadensis baileyi_, from 20 miles north
northeast of Elko, Elko County, Nevada, _C. c. rostralis_ differs as
follows: Size larger; tail and hind foot longer. Color: Darker
throughout. Skull: Larger in all measurements taken; nasals markedly
wider (breadth of nasals relative to length of nasals averages 54 per
cent as opposed to 41 per cent); extension of nasals posterior to
premaxillae less; dorsal surface of lacrimal bone smaller; mastoid
breadth relative to zygomatic breadth less.

From one specimen of _Castor canadensis concisor_, from Trappers Lake,
Garfield County, Colorado, and from the original description of that
subspecies (Warren and Hall, 1939: 358), _C. c. rostralis_ differs as
follows: Color: Guard hairs lighter; underfur darker (blackish as
opposed to brownish). Skull: Longer and narrower; nasals broader and
shorter (breadth of nasals averages 54 per cent of length of nasals as
opposed to 48 per cent); dorsal surface of lacrimal bone smaller; distal
end of meatal tube smaller; distal end of angular process rounded
rather than pointed; coronoid process shorter; coronoid and condylar
processes farther apart and space between them shallower.

Among known kinds of _Castor canadensis_, _C. c. rostralis_ is most like
_Castor canadensis duchesnei_, from which the former subspecies differs
as follows: Tail and hind foot longer. Color: Darker throughout. Skull:
Nasals shorter and wider (breadth of nasals averages 54 per cent of
length of nasals as opposed to 46 per cent); nasals less arched
transversely; rostrum shorter, deeper and broader; ventral surface of
rostrum less concave dorsally; dorsal surface of lacrimal bone smaller.

For comparison with _Castor canadensis pallidus_, see account of that
subspecies.

_Remarks._--Animals from Kamas, in the drainage of the Weber River, are
intergrades between _C. c. rostralis_ and _C. c. duchesnei_, but their
short, wide nasals and wide rostra make them referable to _C. c.
rostralis_.

The available specimens of _C. c. rostralis_ are all from streams which
ultimately empty into Great Salt Lake, which is in the northern part of
the basin of Pleistocene Lake Bonneville. Some streams drain into the
Lake Bonneville Basin without emptying into Great Salt Lake proper.
Beavers from these streams, we suspect, when they become known, will be
found to be related to _C. c. rostralis_.

     _Specimens examined._--Total, 16 (2 skins and skulls, 14
     skulls only), distributed as follows: Summit County: Kamas,
     5,500 ft., 6. _Salt Lake County_: Red Butte Canyon, Fort
     Douglas, 5,000 ft., 1; Millcreek Canyon, 6 mi. above mouth,
     7,000 ft., 1. _Wasatch County_: Charleston, Heber Valley,
     5,500 ft., 8.


~Castor canadensis duchesnei~ new subspecies

_Type._--Male, young adult, skin and skull, number 4625, Museum of
Zoology, University of Utah; Duchesne River, 10 miles northwest of
Duchesne, 5,600 ft., Duchesne County, Utah; September 23, 1946;
collected by Dave Thomas, original number 160 of K. R. Kelson.

_Range._--Drainage of the Duchesne and White rivers in Utah and
Colorado.

_Diagnosis._--Size large; tail long (see measurements). Color (type):
Upper parts Sayal Brown, purest on head, grading to Cinnamon Buff at
base of tail; underfur Fuscous; hind feet Burnt Umber; ears Fuscous
Black; underparts Tawny Olive; underfur Smoke Gray. Skull: Large,
massive; nasals long, slender (breadth averaging 46 per cent of length)
and markedly convex transversely; rostrum long and attenuate; zygomatic
arches heavy and widely spreading (zygomatic breadth averaging 81.5 per
cent of basilar length); ventral surface of rostrum markedly concave
dorsally, especially immediately behind upper incisors; nasals extend
posterior to premaxillae.

_Measurements._--Measurements of the type and average and extreme
cranial measurements of 9 unsexed adults, from Currant Creek, are,
respectively, as follows: Total length, 1,176; length of tail, 458;
length of hind foot, 165; length of ear, 33; occipitonasal length,
123.6, 132.1 (138.5-122.3); basilar length, 98.6, 114.4 (125.8-99.2);
mastoid breadth, 60.4, 65.1 (67.2-64.1); interorbital breadth, 23.0,
25.1 (26.1-23.7); zygomatic breadth, 88.3, 94.2 (99.7-89.5); length of
nasals, 46.1, 48.4 (51.5-46.2); breadth of nasals, 20.5, 22.5
(24.5-18.8); alveolar length of upper molariform teeth, 28.9, 29.9
(32.2-26.5).

[Illustration: FIGS. 1-4 Dorsal views of skulls of _Castor canadensis_.
x 1/2]

     FIG. 1. _Castor canadensis rostralis_, male, young adult,
     no. 5199 (holotype), Mus. Zool., Univ. Utah.

     FIG. 2. _Castor canadensis pallidus_, female, adult, no. 719
     (holotype), Mus. Zool., Univ. Utah.

     FIG. 3. _Castor canadensis duchesnei_, male, young adult,
     no. 4625 (holotype), Mus. Zool., Univ. Utah.

     FIG. 4. _Castor canadensis concisor_, male, adult, no. 2090,
     Mus. Nat. Hist., Univ. Kansas, from Trappers Lake, Garfield
     County, Colorado, obtained by L. L. Dyche, October 22, 1891.

_Comparisons._--From topotypes and near topotypes of _Castor canadensis
taylori_, _C. c. duchesnei_ differs as follows: Color: Guard hairs
lighter, underfur darker. Skull: Nasals narrower; rostrum narrower;
mastoid breadth relative to zygomatic breadth less; zygomatic breadth
relative to basilar length greater; tympanic bullae narrower and
smaller; cheek teeth narrower.

[Illustration: FIGS. 5-7 Lateral views of left side of skulls of _Castor
canadensis_. x 1/2]

     Fig. 5. _Castor canadensis rostralis_, male, young adult,
     no. 5199 (holotype), Mus. Zool., Univ. Utah.

     Fig. 6. _Castor canadensis pallidus_, female, adult, no. 719
     (holotype), Mus. Zool., Univ. Utah.

     Fig. 7. _Castor canadensis duchesnei_, male, young adult,
     no. 4625 (holotype), Mus. Zool., Univ. Utah.

From specimens of _Castor canadensis baileyi_, from 20 miles north
northeast of Elko, Elko County, Nevada, _C. c. duchesnei_ differs as
follows: Size larger; tail and hind foot longer. Color: Guard hairs
lighter, underfur darker. Skull: Larger in all measurements taken;
nasals broader and longer (breadth of nasals averages 46 per cent of
length of nasals as opposed to 41 per cent); rostrum broader and longer;
mastoid breadth relative to zygomatic breadth less; tympanic bullae
larger.

From one specimen of _Castor canadensis concisor_, from Trappers Lake,
Garfield County, Colorado, and from the original description of that
subspecies (Warren and Hall, 1939: 358), _C. c. duchesnei_ differs as
follows: Color: Lighter throughout. Skull: Nasals more convex
transversely; rostrum narrower; ventral border of rostrum more concave
dorsally, especially immediately behind upper incisors; distal end of
meatal tube smaller; angular process shorter and rounded rather than
pointed; cheek teeth smaller.

Among known subspecies of _Castor canadensis_, _C. c. duchesnei_ is most
like _Castor canadensis repentinus_, but differs from the latter as
follows: Size larger; hind foot shorter. Color: Darker throughout.
Skull: Basilar length less; mastoid breadth greater; nasals shorter and
narrower; extension of nasals posterior to premaxillae less; nasals more
convex transversely; cheek teeth smaller.

For comparisons with _Castor canadensis pallidus_ and _Castor canadensis
rostralis_, see accounts of those subspecies.

_Remarks._--The extent of the range of _C. c. duchesnei_ within the
drainage of the White River is not definitely known. Three animals from
9-1/2 miles southwest of Pagoda Peak, Rio Blanco County, Colorado, from
the drainage of the White River, are intergrades between _C. c.
concisor_ and _C. c. duchesnei_. They are like the latter subspecies in
shape and length of the nasals, less expanded distal end of the meatal
tube and the rounded angular process, and it appears best, pending the
acquisition of more material, to refer them to C. c. duchesnei. Another
specimen, number 2090, Museum of Natural History, University of Kansas,
from Trappers Lake, Garfield County, Colorado, at the headwaters of the
White River, and only 16 miles distant from the three aforementioned
animals, is, however, nearly typical of _C. c. concisor_. Relying upon
the original description (Warren and Hall, 1939: 358), this animal is
like _C. c. concisor_ in size and shape of the jugals, in size of the
distal end of the meatal tube and in the pointed end of the angular
process. Warren and Hall (_loc. cit._) noted that animals assignable to
_C. c. concisor_ occurred throughout the mountainous parts of Colorado,
and recorded them from the headwaters of nearly all the major rivers of
that state. Apparently _C. c. concisor_ also occurs in the headwaters of
the White River, while the main part of the river is inhabited by
animals referable to _C. c. duchesnei_.

     _Specimens examined._--Total, 15 (4 skins and skulls, 11
     skulls only), distributed as follows: Utah: _Wasatch
     County_: Currant Creek, Strawberry Valley, 6,000 ft., 11.
     _Duchesne County_: Duchesne River, 10 mi. NW Duchesne, 5,600
     ft., 1. Colorado: _Rio Blanco County_: 9-1/2 mi. SW Pagoda
     Peak, 7,700 ft., 3 (Museum of Natural History, University of
     Kansas).




LITERATURE CITED


DAVIS, WILLIAM B.

1939. The Recent mammals of Idaho. The Caxton Printers, Caldwell, Idaho,
400 pp., 2 full page half-tones, 33 figs. in text, April 5, 1939.

PRESNALL, C. C.

1938. Mammals of Zion-Bryce and Cedar Breaks. Zion-Bryce Mus. Bull.,
2:1-20, January, 1938.

WARREN, EDWARD R. and HALL, E. RAYMOND.

1939. A new subspecies of beaver from Colorado. Journ. Mamm.,
20:358-362, 1 map, August 14, 1939.


_Transmitted, May 15, 1948._

22-3716





End of Project Gutenberg's Three New Beavers from Utah, by Stephen D. Durrant

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE NEW BEAVERS FROM UTAH ***

***** This file should be named 34340.txt or 34340.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/3/4/34340/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Josephine Paolucci,
The Internet Archive for some images, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
