The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Supposed Autographa of John the Scot, by
Edward Kennard Rand

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Supposed Autographa of John the Scot

Author: Edward Kennard Rand

Release Date: November 30, 2010 [EBook #34511]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUPPOSED AUTOGRAPHA--JOHN THE SCOT ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.







UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PUBLICATIONS

IN

CLASSICAL PHILOLOGY

Vol. 5, No. 8, pp. 135-141, plates 1-11 October 13, 1920




THE SUPPOSED AUTOGRAPHA OF JOHN THE SCOT

BY

EDWARD KENNARD RAND

{Transcriber's Note: ^ and {} around a number or letter signifies
a superscript.]


In the fifth part of Ludwig Traube's _Palaeographische Forschungen_,
(which I had the honor of publishing after that great scholar's
death)[1] evidence was presented for Traube's apparently certain
discovery of the very handwriting of John the Scot. In manuscripts of
Reims, of Laon, and of Bamberg, he had observed certain marginal notes
which were neither omitted sections nor glosses, but rather the author's
own amplifications and embellishments of his work. Johannes had made
such additions to his _De Divisione Naturae_ in the Reims manuscript,
and they all appear in that of Bamberg. In the latter manuscript there
are fresh additions--or enlargements as I shall call them in the present
paper--which have similarly been absorbed into the text in two
manuscripts now in Paris. We thus have, in an interesting series, the
author's successive recensions of his work. One of the shorter forms is
the basis of the text published by Thomas Gale in 1681; the most
complete form was edited by H. J. Floss in 1852 from the Paris
manuscripts.[2] Though not venturing to carry out Traube's elaborate
plans for treatment of the subject, I attempted to corroborate his
belief that the notes were in the hand of Johannes. The evidence seemed
conclusive to me at the time, and was not questioned, so far as I know,
in any subsequent publication. In the summers of 1912 and 1913, however,
I examined the manuscripts of John the Scot in Paris, in Reims, in Laon,
and in Bamberg, and became convinced, most reluctantly, that his
autograph is yet to be found. I here present the chain of facts that
make this conclusion inevitable.[3]

Let us start with the hypothesis that the marginal notes discovered by
Traube are in the hand of Johannes himself and let us support this
hypothesis until it becomes too heavy to bear. Our first document is the
Reims Manuscript 875 (= _R_) of the _De Divisione Naturae_. This is the
work of some six or seven writers, whose hands are sometimes hard to
tell apart. Though it is the briefest and hence the earliest form of the
text that I have found, it is not the original draft of the work. The
scribes could not have taken it from the author's dictation, for they
commit errors of various sorts that presuppose the existence of a text
that they were copying.[4] This text, which is as near to the original
as our present information permits us to come, I will call _O_.

Besides making corrections and additions in their copy of _O_, the
scribes also insert marginal notes that have all the characteristics of
the author's own amplifications of his work. This fact does not militate
against our present hypothesis, if we assume that Johannes added these
marginalia, or caused them to be added, in _O_, and that the scribes of
_R_, at first forgetting to include them in the text of their new copy,
later wrote them in the margin.[5] In some cases, as we might expect, a
different ink is used. The insular hand (= _I_), which we are assuming
to be that of Johannes, corrects minor errors in these enlargements now
and then.[6] This fact is entirely in accord with our hypothesis.

A number of enlargements omitted by the writers of the text were
supplied not by them but by special correctors, who were assigned, it
would seem, considerable portions of the manuscript to revise.
Particularly important among these wide-ranging correctors are two hands
that I will call _r^{1}_ and _r^{2}_. The former is a largish hand with
some slight traces of Insular habits.[7] _r^{2}_ is very similar, and
indeed may be merely a smaller variety of _r^{1}_. In the specimen that
I have reproduced, as is true of both _r^{1}_ and _r^{2}_ elsewhere,
correction by _I_ may be observed.[8] In all, I detected, or thought I
detected, five or six correcting hands, which sometimes supplement
stretches of text written by others, sometimes supplement their own
text, and, in all the cases under discussion, add notes of the author
which were evidently in the margin of _O_. It is sometimes hard to be
sure whether _r_ is the text-hand or not. The point is not vitally
important. The main fact is that several different kinds of correcting
hand make, either in their own texts or in those of others, the kind of
additions or enlargements with which we are specially concerned.
However, as we have seen, we can still retain our hypothesis by
supposing that _I_ is the hand of Johannes, while r represents various
correctors who copied from _O_ enlargements added there by Johannes or
at his direction.

But we have now to note an intimate connection between _I_ and _r_. They
collaborate on the same notes. Plate V (fol. 285^{v}) shows us an
enlargement that begins in the hand (= _r^{3}_) that writes the text. It
extends through _substantiam_ (1.3), then is succeeded by _I_ (_ex
his--horum est_), then returns (_Ibi--superans_), and finally gives way
to _I_ once more (_dum--esse_). The interesting possibility and
enlargements taken from _O_. Possibly two or more stages are represented
by _O_, _r_ starting with an earlier, and _I_ supplementing from a more
complete form--but into that _terra incognita_ of fresh hypothesis we
need not enter. _I_'s procedure, at any rate, seems exactly like that of
_r_. Thus his practice of calling in a variety of _r_ to complete a note
too large for the space is paralleled by _r^{4}_, the writer of the text
on fol. 231^{v} (Plate II), who uses up a legitimate amount of his
margin and then has _r^{5}_ finish it, with signs of references, on the
following page. The latter scribe uses a finer hand, and has no
difficulty in completing the note with a decent margin to spare.[9]

Surely in the scribal play illustrated in Plate V, _I_ is acting more
like a fellow-worker than the author of the work. Likewise on another
page, we note corrections and minor enlargements by the text-hand, then
similar changes by _I_, and, finally, corrections of _I_ by the
text-hand.[10] If Johannes wished to change _cogitationes_ to
_operationes_, it is strange that he did not do it himself rather than
beckon to some scribe to insert the word; another correction, _nisi_,
added above the line, is made in the hand of _I_. In short, _r_ and _I_
are two different scribes collaborating on what would appear to be a
rather difficult original or set of originals.

Moreover, if _I_ is Johannes, he does not understand his own text. In
_De Divisione Naturae_ i. 49 (Migne _P.L._ cxxii, 491 A) we read:

     Omnium hominum una eademque [Greek: ousia] est. Omnes enim
     unam participant essentiam, ac per hoc, quia omnibus
     communis est, nullius proprie est. Corpus autem commune
     omnium hominum non est. Nam unusquisque suum proprium
     possidet corpus, non et [Greek: ousian]. Igitur communis
     est, et corpus commune non est.

This passage forms part of one of the enlargements of _I_. In it he
writes _omnis_ for _omnes_, and _Non et [Greek: ousiae] igitur communis
est_ for _non et [Greek: ousian]. Igitur communis est_. These are
understandable errors for any scribe, but not for the author of the
work, to make. Others occur elsewhere in the Insular hand; I have not
recorded many, but I made no systematic search.

We now come to the most startling consideration of all, namely, that
_there are two varieties of insular script in the book_. The first
variety, which I will now call _i^{1}_, is exhibited in all the plates
thus far presented. It is loose, pointed, flowing, with few
abbreviations or ligatures specially characteristic of Irish script.
With only one or two exceptions, it uses a _d_ with a curved shaft. The
other variety (_i^{2}_), as Plate X (fol. 106) shows, is at once more
compact and regular, and more cursive, with more of the specifically
Irish traits; it has a straight-shafted _d_. Furthermore, the two hands
appear in different portions of the manuscript. _i^{1}_ is confined to
foll. 1-80^{v} (= quires I-X) and foll. 113-318^{v} (= quires XV-XLI),
while _i^{2}_ appears only in foll. 81-112^{v} (= quires XI-XIV) and
foll. 319-358 (= quires XLII-XLVI). In the sections corrected by
_i^{2}_, we note the same features as in the other parts. _i^{2}_
inserts many long enlargements and makes many minor corrections. He is
supplemented in one of his own enlargements by _r^{2}_.[11] On another
page, he is corrected by _r^{2}_, or possibly the text-hand.[12]

Our last resort, if we are still to look for the autograph of John the
Scot in the various hands of Reims, is to suppose that, if not _i^{1}_,
it is _i^{2}_. This is indeed the hand that Traube believed was the
author's; it happened that almost all of the photographs taken for
Traube contain enlargements by _i^{2}_ and not by _i^{1}_. Yet if
_i^{2}_ is Johannes, why does that hand never correct the sections
assigned to _i^{1}_? Of the two, _i^{1}_ seems more free, more
individual, more like an author's, unless that author be also a
calligraphist. But if we imagine that _i^{1}_ is Johannes, why does he
never appear in the sections assigned to _i^{2}_?

Our chain of evidence draws us to the conclusion that neither _i^{1}_
nor _i^{2}_ is Johannes, but that both are scribes employed by him,
together with others, to correct and enlarge the manuscripts of his
works. The two Insular writers were very possibly the most important of
his workmen, for he entrusted most of the revision to them. Their task
was done in intimate cooperation with the other scribes. They would call
them in to finish their notes if considerations of space demanded, or,
now and then, merely to indulge in a pastime of alternate writing.
Perhaps it was the difficulty of deciphering the original that induced a
scribe to appeal more frequently than usual for help from a
fellow-craftsman. I have confined my discussion to the manuscript 875 of
Reims, but the two Insular hands appear also in the manuscripts of
Bamberg and of Laon.[13]

After all is said and done, the great value of Traube's discovery
remains. It is positive that the enlargements in the manuscripts were
made at the direction of the author himself. They present to the modern
editor of the _De Divisione Naturae_ the fascinating task of
distinguishing the different revisions, and of following the growth of
the subject in Johannes' mind. The best way, I believe, would be to
print on the left-hand page the enlarged form of the text, for that is
the form in which the author wished his work to be known to posterity.
On the right-hand page, the briefest form, the nearest approach to his
original draft, might be given, with indication, in the critical
apparatus, of the successive stages by which the final text was reached.
Possibly further research may reveal _O_, or even the hand of Johannes
himself. For the present, we at least have accessible--if the contents
of the libraries of Reims and of Laon are accessible--the material for
preparing a highly accurate and well-nigh unique edition of one of the
masterpieces of medieval philosophy.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] In Abh. d. k. b. Akad. d. Wiss., philos.-philol. u. hist. Classe,
Muenchen, XXVI (1912).

[2] In Migne, _Patrologia Latina_, vol. 122 (1865).

[3] I have confined my illustrations almost entirely to passages
exhibited in the plates. I have notes of many other examples quite as
pertinent, but do not include them here, believing that those presented
amply prove my point.

[4] For an example, see Plate I (fol. 273). In the last regular line of
the page, after writing _caelestis essentiae particeps est_, the scribe
first omitted the words _de die--caelestis essentiae particeps est_ (an
exceedingly easy haplography) and then added them, with signs of
reference, in the margin immediately below. As the error is one of sight
and not of hearing, he must have had a text before him.

[5] Plate II (fol. 231^{v}) contains a striking instance. After the
citation of St. Basil, the author bethinks him of another possible
interpretation of his words (_An aliud ex uerbis ipsius--intelligendum_)
and sets it forth in the enlargement. It is not probable, I believe,
that the author dictated this forthwith to the scribe. As the existence
of _O_ has been proved, it is more natural to assume that the
enlargement had already been inserted there.

[6] E.g., fol. 59 (I have no photograph). The added _quodam_ in l.10 of
fol. 231 (Plate II) is not by _I_. See below, note 10. _Ut arbitror_ in
the right margin seems exactly the thing that an author tucks in when
revising and qualifying his work. But see below p. 138.

[7] Plate III contains a specimen (fol. 64). At first this hand looks
like that of the text, but it is really different. The corrections are,
I believe, by _r^{1}_ himself. They had been made in _O_, I infer, but
at first were not observed by _r^{1}_. The heading _De agere et pati_ is
by a hand of the thirteenth century or later (= _h_).

[8] See Plate IV (fol. 15). As in the previous specimen, this hand is
similar to that of the text, but not identical with it. The hand _h_
adds three headings.

[9] Fol. 232 (Plate VIII). _r^{5}_ then collated the work of _r^{4}_
with _O_, adding _quodam_ in l.10, and perhaps correcting
_consequentius_ to _consequentias_ in l.12.

[10] Fol. 58^{v} (Plate IX).

[11] See fol. 81, Plate XI (= Plate I in _Pal. Forsch._).

[12] Fol. 106 (Plate X).

[13] For _i^{2}_ in the Bamberg MS, see _Pal. Forsch._, Plates III-VIII.
For _i^{1}_ in the Laon MS, see _Pal. Forsch._, Plate X.




PLATES


    Plate I. Fol. 273.

    Plate II. Fol. 231^{v}.

    Plate III. Fol. 64.

    Plate IV. Fol. 15.

    Plate V. Fol. 285^{v}.

    Plate VI. Fol. 49.

    Plate VII. Fol. 56.

    Plate VIII. Fol. 232.

    Plate IX. Fol. 58^{v}.

    Plate X. Fol. 106.

    Plate XI. Fol. 81 (= _Pal. Forsch._, Plate I).

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 1]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 2]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 3]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 4]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 5]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 6]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 7]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 8]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 9]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 10]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PLATE 11]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Supposed Autographa of John the
Scot, by Edward Kennard Rand

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUPPOSED AUTOGRAPHA--JOHN THE SCOT ***

***** This file should be named 34511.txt or 34511.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/5/1/34511/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
