The Project Gutenberg EBook of AEsop's Fables with Modern Instances, by Aesop

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: AEsop's Fables with Modern Instances

Author: Aesop

Illustrator: Randolph Caldecott

Translator: Alfred Caldecott

Release Date: December 8, 2010 [EBook #34588]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AESOP'S FABLES WITH MODERN ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Rose Mawhorter and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)





  Production Notes:
  All obvious punctuation errors have been corrected.
  Pg. 22. A period was removed from the end of the title to conform to
  the pattern of the other title pages.


       *       *       *       *       *




  SOME OF AESOP'S FABLES

  WITH

  MODERN INSTANCES


  [Illustration]


  SOME OF

  AESOP'S FABLES

  WITH

  MODERN INSTANCES

  SHEWN IN DESIGNS

  BY

  RANDOLPH CALDECOTT

  FROM NEW TRANSLATIONS BY ALFRED CALDECOTT, M.A.

  THE ENGRAVINGS BY J.D. COOPER


  London
  MACMILLAN AND CO.
  1883


  _Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, _Edinburgh_.




  INDEX.


  NUMBER                                                   PAGE

  I. THE FOX AND THE CROW                                    1

  II. THE ASS IN THE LION'S SKIN                             5

  III. THE FISHERMAN AND THE LITTLE FISH                     9

  IV. THE JACKDAW AND THE DOVES                             13

  V. THE COPPERSMITH AND HIS PUPPY                          17

  VI. THE FROGS DESIRING A KING                             21

  VII. THE DOG AND THE WOLF                                 25

  VIII. THE STAG LOOKING INTO THE WATER                     29

  IX. THE FROGS AND THE FIGHTING BULLS                      33

  X. THE LION AND OTHER BEASTS                              37

  XI. THE FOX AND THE STORK                                 41

  XII. THE HORSE AND THE STAG                               45

  XIII. THE COCK AND THE JEWEL                              49

  XIV. THE ASS, THE LION, AND THE COCK                      53

  XV. THE WOLF AND THE LAMB                                 57

  XVI. THE MAN AND HIS TWO WIVES                            61

  XVII. THE FOX WITHOUT A TAIL                              65

  XVIII. THE EAGLE AND THE FOX                              69

  XIX. THE OX AND THE FROG                                  73

  XX. THE HAWK CHASING THE DOVE                             77




NOTE.


Sixteen of these Twenty Fables have been handed down to us in a Greek
form: for these Halm's text has been used. As to the other four--Number
IX. is from Phaedrus, and retains a flavour of artificiality; Numbers
XIII. and XX. are from Latin versions; and Number X. is from a French
one.

The Translations aim at replacing the florid style of our older English
versions, and the stilted harshness of more modern ones, by a plainness
and terseness more nearly like the character of the originals.

In the following cases the Translations have been adapted to the
Designs. In Number I. _cheese_ has been put for _meat_; in Number VIII.
a _pack of Hounds_ for a _Lion_; in Number XI. a _Stork_ for a _Crane_;
in Number XIX. a _Frog_ for a _Toad_; and in Number VII. the Dog should
be _tied up_. The reason of this is, that in the collaboration the
Designer and Translator have not been on terms of equal authority; the
former has stood unshakeably by English tradition, and has had his own
way.

                                                                A.C.


[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE FOX AND THE CROW


[Illustration]

THE FOX AND THE CROW.


A Crow stole a piece of cheese and alighted with it on a tree. A Fox
watched her, and wishing to get hold of the cheese stood underneath and
began to make compliments upon her size and beauty; he went so far as to
say that she had the best of claims to be made Queen of the Birds, and
doubtless it would have been done if she had only had a voice. The Crow,
anxious to prove to him that she did possess a voice, began to caw
vigorously, of course dropping the cheese. The Fox pounced upon it and
carried it off, remarking as he went away, "My good friend Crow, you
have every good quality: now try to get some common sense."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE ASS IN THE LION'S SKIN


[Illustration]

THE ASS IN THE LION'S SKIN.


An Ass who had dressed himself up in a Lion's skin was mistaken by
everybody for a lion, and there was a stampede of both herds and men.
But presently the skin was whisked off by a gust of wind, and the Ass
stood exposed; and then the men all charged at him, and with sticks and
cudgels gave him a sound drubbing.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE FISHERMAN AND THE LITTLE FISH


[Illustration]

THE FISHERMAN AND THE LITTLE FISH.


A Fisherman cast his net and caught a little Fish. The little Fish
begged him to let him go for the present, as he was so small, and to
catch him again to more purpose later on, when he was bulkier. But the
Fisherman said: "Nay, I should be a very simpleton to let go a good
thing I have got and run after a doubtful expectation."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE JACKDAW AND THE DOVES


[Illustration]

THE JACKDAW AND THE DOVES.


A Jackdaw observing how well cared for were the Doves in a certain
dovecote, whitewashed himself and went to take a part in the same way of
living. The Doves were friendly enough so long as he kept silence,
taking him for one of themselves; but when he once forgot himself and
gave a croak they immediately perceived his character, and cuffed him
out. So the Jackdaw, having failed in getting a share of good things
there, returned to his brother Jackdaws. But these latter not
recognising him, because of his colour, kept him out of their mess also;
so that in his desire for two things he got neither.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE COPPERSMITH AND HIS PUPPY


[Illustration]

THE COPPERSMITH AND HIS PUPPY.


A certain Coppersmith had a Puppy. While the Coppersmith was at work the
Puppy lay asleep; but when meal-time came he woke up. So his master,
throwing him a bone, said: "You sleepy little wretch of a Puppy, what
shall I do with you, you inveterate sluggard? When I am thumping on my
anvil you can go to sleep on the mat; but when I come to work my teeth
immediately you are wide awake and wagging your tail at me."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE FROGS DESIRING A KING


[Illustration]

THE FROGS DESIRING A KING.


The Frogs were grieved at their own lawless condition, so they sent a
deputation to Zeus begging him to provide them with a King. Zeus,
perceiving their simplicity, dropped a Log of wood into the pool. At
first the Frogs were terrified by the splash, and dived to the bottom;
but after a while, seeing the Log remain motionless, they came up again,
and got to despise it so much that they climbed up and sat on it.
Dissatisfied with a King like that, they came again to Zeus and
entreated him to change their ruler for them, the first being altogether
too torpid. Then Zeus was exasperated with them, and sent them a Stork,
by whom they were seized and eaten up.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE DOG AND THE WOLF


[Illustration]

THE DOG AND THE WOLF.


A Wolf, seeing a large Dog with a collar on, asked him: "Who put that
collar round your neck, and fed you to be so sleek?" "My master,"
answered the Dog. "Then," said the Wolf, "may no friend of mine be
treated like this; a collar is as grievous as starvation."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE STAG LOOKING INTO THE WATER


[Illustration]

THE STAG LOOKING INTO THE WATER.


A Stag parched with thirst came to a spring of water. As he was drinking
he saw his own reflection on the water, and was in raptures with his
horns when he observed their splendid size and shape, but was troubled
about his legs, they seemed so thin and weak. As he was still musing,
some huntsmen with a pack of hounds appeared and disturbed him,
whereupon the Stag took to flight, and keeping a good distance ahead so
long as the plain was free from trees, he was being saved; but when he
came to a woody place he got his horns entangled in the branches, and
being unable to move was seized by the hounds. When he was at the point
of death he said to himself: "What a fool am I, who was on the way to be
saved by the very things which I thought would fail me; while by those
in which I so much trusted I am brought to ruin."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE FROGS AND THE FIGHTING BULLS


[Illustration]

THE FROGS AND THE FIGHTING BULLS.


A Frog in his marsh looking at some Bulls fighting, exclaimed: "O dear!
what sad destruction threatens us now!" Another Frog asked him why he
said that, seeing that the Bulls were only fighting for the first place
in the herd, and that they lived quite remote from the Frogs. "Ah," said
the first, "it is true that our positions are wide apart, and we are
different kinds of things, but still, the Bull who will be driven from
the rule of the pasture will come to lie in hiding in the marsh, and
crush us to death under his hard hoofs, so that their raging really does
closely concern the lives of you and me."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE LION AND OTHER BEASTS


[Illustration]

THE LION AND OTHER BEASTS.


The Lion one day went out hunting along with three other Beasts, and
they caught a Stag. With the consent of the others the Lion divided it,
and he cut it into four equal portions; but when the others were going
to take hold of their shares, "Gently, my friends," said the Lion; "the
first of these portions is mine, as one of the party; the second also is
mine, because of my rank among beasts; the third you will yield me as a
tribute to my courage and nobleness of character; while, as to the
fourth,--why, if any one wishes to dispute with me for it, let him
begin, and we shall soon see whose it will be."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE FOX AND THE STORK


[Illustration]

THE FOX AND THE STORK.


The Fox poured out some rich soup upon a flat dish, tantalising the
Stork, and making him look ridiculous, for the soup, being a liquid,
foiled all the efforts of his slender beak. In return for this, when the
Stork invited the Fox, he brought the dinner on the table in a jug with
a long narrow neck, so that while he himself easily inserted his beak
and took his fill, the Fox was unable to do the same, and so was
properly paid off.

[Illustration: "Frame 1: "With Mr Fox's respects & many happy returns
of the day" Frame 2: "With Mrs Stork's kind regards and the compliments
of the season"]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE HORSE AND THE STAG


[Illustration]

THE HORSE AND THE STAG.


There was a Horse who had a meadow all to himself until a Stag came and
began to injure the pasture. The Horse, eager to punish the Stag, asked
a man whether there was any way of combining to do this. "Certainly,"
said the Man, "if you don't object to a bridle and to my mounting you
with javelins in my hand." The Horse agreed, and was mounted by the Man;
but, instead of being revenged on the Stag, he himself became a servant
to the Man.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE COCK AND THE JEWEL


[Illustration]

THE COCK AND THE JEWEL.


A Barn-door Cock while scratching up his dunghill came upon a Jewel.
"Oh, why," said he, "should I find this glistening thing? If some
jeweller had found it he would have been beside himself with joy at the
thought of its value; but to me it is of no manner of use, nor do I care
one jot about it; why, I would rather have one grain of barley than all
the jewels in the world."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE ASS, THE LION, AND THE COCK


[Illustration]

THE ASS, THE LION, AND THE COCK.


An Ass and a Cock were in a shed. A hungry Lion caught sight of the Ass,
and was on the point of entering the shed to devour him. But he took
fright at the sound of the Cock crowing (for people say that Lions are
afraid at the voice of a Cock), and turned away and ran. The Ass, roused
to a lofty contempt of him for being afraid of a Cock, went out to
pursue him; but when they were some distance away the Lion ate him up.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE WOLF AND THE LAMB


[Illustration]

THE WOLF AND THE LAMB.


A Wolf seeing a Lamb drinking at a brook, took it into his head that he
would find some plausible excuse for eating him. So he drew near, and,
standing higher up the stream, began to accuse him of disturbing the
water and preventing him from drinking.

The Lamb replied that he was only touching the water with the tips of
his lips; and that, besides, seeing that he was standing down stream,
he could not possibly be disturbing the water higher up. So the Wolf,
having done no good by that accusation, said: "Well, but last year you
insulted my Father." The Lamb replying that at that time he was not
born, the Wolf wound up by saying: "However ready you may be with your
answers, I shall none the less make a meal of you."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE MAN AND HIS TWO WIVES


[Illustration]

THE MAN AND HIS TWO WIVES.


A Man whose hair was turning gray had two Wives, one young and the other
old. The elderly woman felt ashamed at being married to a man younger
than herself, and made it a practice whenever he was with her to pick
out all his black hairs; while the younger, anxious to conceal the fact
that she had an elderly husband, used, similarly, to pull out the gray
ones. So, between them, it ended in the Man being completely plucked,
and becoming bald.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE FOX WITHOUT A TAIL


[Illustration]

THE FOX WITHOUT A TAIL.


A Fox had had his tail docked off in a trap, and in his disgrace began
to think his life not worth living. It therefore occurred to him that
the best thing he could do was to bring the other Foxes into the same
condition, and so conceal his own deficiency in the general distress.
Having assembled them all together he recommended them to cut off their
tails, declaring that a tail was an ungraceful thing; and, further, was
a heavy appendage, and quite superfluous. To this one of them rejoined:
"My good friend, if this had not been to your own advantage you would
never have advised us to do it."

[Illustration: "Nonsense, my dears! Husbands are ridiculous things & are
quite unnecessary!"]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE EAGLE AND THE FOX


[Illustration]

THE EAGLE AND THE FOX.


An Eagle and a Fox entered into a covenant of mutual affection and
resolved to live near one another, looking upon close intercourse as a
way of strengthening friendship. Accordingly the former flew to the top
of a high tree and built her nest, while the latter went into a bush at
the foot and placed her litter there. One day, however, when the Fox
was away foraging, the Eagle, being hard pressed for food, swooped down
into the bush, snatched up the cubs and helped her own fledglings to
devour them. When the Fox came back and saw what had happened she was
not so much vexed at the death of her young ones as at the impossibility
of requital. For the Eagle having wings and she none, pursuit was
impossible. So she stood some distance away and did all that is left for
the weak and impotent to do--poured curses on her foe. But the Eagle was
not to put off for long the punishment due to her violation of the
sacred tie of friendship. It happened that some country-people were
sacrificing a goat, and the Eagle flew down and carried away from the
altar some of the burning flesh. But when she had got it to her eyrie a
strong wind got up and kindled into flame the thin dry twigs of the
nest, so that the eaglets, being too young to be able to fly, were
roasted, and fell to the ground. Then the Fox ran up and, before the
Eagle's eyes, devoured them every one.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE OX AND THE FROG


[Illustration]

THE OX AND THE FROG.


An Ox, as he was drinking at the water's edge, crushed a young Frog
underfoot. When the mother Frog came to the spot (for she happened to be
away at the time) she asked his brothers where he was. "He is dead,
mother," they said; "a few minutes ago a great big four-legged thing
came up and crushed him dead with his hoof." Thereupon the Frog began to
puff herself out and ask whether the animal was as big as that. "Stop,
mother, don't put yourself about," they said; "you will burst in two
long before you can make yourself the same size as that beast."

[Illustration: "There, my child, have I not as many buttons as Lady
Golderoy now?"]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE HAWK CHASING THE DOVE


[Illustration]

THE HAWK CHASING THE DOVE.


A Hawk giving headlong chase to a Dove rushed after it into a farmstead,
and was captured by one of the farm men. The Hawk began to coax the man
to let him go, saying that he had never done him any harm. "No,"
rejoined the man; "nor had this Dove harmed you."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]





End of Project Gutenberg's AEsop's Fables with Modern Instances, by Aesop

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AESOP'S FABLES WITH MODERN ***

***** This file should be named 34588.txt or 34588.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/5/8/34588/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Rose Mawhorter and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
