The Project Gutenberg EBook of Let's Use Soybeans, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Let's Use Soybeans

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: December 14, 2010 [EBook #34651]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LET'S USE SOYBEANS ***




Produced by Patrick Hopkins, Gerard Arthus and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note

- There are a few handwritten comments on the original document.
These have been transcribed and included with the notation
"[Handwritten note: ]".

- On page 3, the word "flour" has been changed to "flower" (in a flower
pot).

       *       *       *       *       *




                [Illustration: LET'S USE
                       SOYBEANS]

              Department of Home Economics
  Extension Service in Agriculture and Home Economics
                University of Illinois
                    Urbana, Illinois




LET'S USE SOYBEANS


Soybeans and soybean products are receiving increased attention at the
present time when the rationing of many of the protein-rich foods of
animal origin has made us aware of the possibility of insufficient
protein in our dietaries.

This interest is highly desirable, since soybeans are such a valuable
source of protein of superior quality, of calcium and iron, and of at
least some of the members of the vitamin B complex. Soybeans also have a
high caloric value due to fat content and have a higher energy value per
pound than the other more commonly used legumes, with the exception of
peanuts.

Soybean products are sometimes called "diabetic foods" because they
contain no starch. It should be remembered, however, that soybeans
contain some soluble sugars; in all about 10 per cent or more of the
weight of dry soybeans is carbohydrate which the body can utilize. Even
so, this is much less than the carbohydrate content of other beans and
of wheat flour.


_Varieties of Soybeans_

There are two general types of soybeans, the field type and the edible
or vegetable type, which differ greatly in palatability. As the name
implies, the edible or vegetable varieties are more satisfactory for
human consumption, although a few of the field soybeans are also
palatable. Some of the vegetable types which are rated "very good" are
Hokkaido, Willomi, Jogun, Imperial, and Emperor. Among the field
varieties that are satisfactory for edible purposes are the Illini and
Manchu.




_HOW TO USE GREEN SOYBEANS_


Immature soybeans are very welcome as an early fall green vegetable.
Soybeans are ready for table use as soon as the pods have completely
filled out and while they are still green in color. This is in late
August or in September, depending on the variety, the time of planting,
and the season. Not all plants of the same variety mature at the same
time, but usually the maturity of pods on a single plant is sufficiently
uniform to warrant pulling the entire plant. The plants can then be
taken to a shady place to pick off the pods.

_To make hulling easier_, pour boiling water over the soybean pods and
let them stand 5 minutes in the hot water. Drain, and hull by breaking
the pod crosswise and squeezing out the beans. Cook as follows: To 1 pt
hulled beans, add 1 c boiling water and 3/4 t salt. Cover and cook for
10 minutes after the beans begin to boil. Avoid overcooking. Drain, and
season with butter or in any other manner desired. Soybeans of the
vegetable type should still be bright green in color after cooking, and
they will have a nutty texture. They do not soften like green peas but
can be used in any of the ways that green peas or green lima beans are
used.


_Preservation_

Green soybeans can be preserved by freezing, canning, or dehydrating,
although at the present time freezing seems to be the most satisfactory
method. (For directions for freezing see University of Illinois Circular
510, "How to Prepare Fruits and Vegetables for Freezer Storage.")

There is a difference of opinion with regard to the canning of soybeans.
Some feel that the flavor of the green soybean when canned is not
satisfactory, while others report palatable products. Soybeans should be
packed hot after blanching the shelled beans for 3 minutes in boiling
water. Some authorities recommend the addition of 1 t salt and from 1/2
to 1 t sugar to each pint of green soybeans. U.S.D.A. Farmers' Bulletin
No. 1762 recommends using a pressure cooker at 10 pounds pressure for
the following periods: pint jars, 80 minutes; quart jars, 90 minutes;
No. 2 tin cans, 70 minutes; No. 3 tin cans, 85 minutes. (Soaked mature
soybeans can also be preserved for future use by canning in the same
way.)

For the dehydration of green soybeans, it is generally agreed that a
steam blanching of from 5 to 7 minutes before shelling is satisfactory.
The shelled beans should then be dehydrated at a temperature of 150 deg. F.
for the first half of the dehydration, and at 145 deg. F. for the remainder
of the time. It will take from 6 to 9 hours for the process, and the
finished product will be hard and wrinkled but still green in color.
(For more complete directions for dehydration see University of Illinois
Circular 558, "Dehydrating Fruits and Vegetables at Home.")




_WAYS OF USING DRY SOYBEANS_


_Cooking Dry Soybeans_

_Method I._ Soak 1 c dry soybeans in 3 c water overnight. Drain[A] and
cook for 1 to 1-1/2 hours in 3 c fresh water to which 3 t salt have been
added.

  [A] To save nutrients, mild-flavored soybeans may be cooked in
  the water in which they were soaked.

_Method II._ Soak beans as in Method I, cook in a pressure cooker at 10
lbs. pressure for 10 minutes in 1-1/2 c water to which 1-1/2 t salt has
been added.

The beans may be seasoned with either butter or meat and served, or they
may be used in any of the dishes for which navy or lima beans are used.
They are more nutty in texture, however, than ordinary beans.


_Roasted Soybeans_

Two methods for roasting mature soybeans are given below. The products
in both cases are acceptable, but Method I gives more desirable results,
since the products more nearly resemble roasted peanuts. The second
method is included because of the ease of preparation and as a means of
conserving fat.

_Method I._ Soak dry soybeans overnight, or until completely swollen.
Dry the surface between towels and fry in deep fat, a few beans at a
time, for 5 to 8 minutes, depending upon the size of the beans
(temperature, 350 deg. F.). When they are slightly brown and crisp, drain,
salt, and use as salted peanuts would be used.

_Method II._ Soak beans overnight. Dry thoroughly and roll in melted
fat. Spread in a shallow pan and roast in a moderate oven (350 deg. F.)
until browned. Sprinkle with salt while still warm.


_Sprouting Dry Soybeans_

"Soybeans, like mung beans, can be sprouted in a flower pot, a sink
strainer, or any container that has holes in it for drainage and can be
covered. Be sure the container is large enough, for the beans swell to
at least six times their original bulk as they sprout. Soak overnight,
and next morning put the beans in the container, cover, and leave them
in a warm place. Flood with lukewarm water at least four or five times
each day during the sprouting period. In 4 to 6 days the sprouts will be
2 to 3 inches long. Then they should be kept in a cool place, just as
any fresh vegetable." (U.S.D.A. Leaflet No. 166, Soybeans for the
Table.)

Some authorities are recommending the use of chlorinated lime (calcium
hypochlorite) during the sprouting period to discourage the growth of
mold and bacteria. The amounts suggested range from 1/2 to 1 t per
gallon of water. This chlorinated water should be used for the last
sprinkling each day, and at other times plain water should be used. It
has also been found that the soybeans should be kept away from the light
while sprouting or they will develop an undesirable color. The first
requisite for soybeans to be sprouted is a variety that will germinate
readily.

  [Handwritten note:

     green baked ones are delicious too. bake as dry ones only
     no soaking or pre cooking is needed.]


_Illinois Baked Soybeans_

    3 c cooked soybeans
    3/8 t mustard
    1 t salt
    1/8 t pepper
    3 T molasses
    1/2 c boiling water
    1/2 c chili sauce
    1/4 lb diced salt pork

Combine thoroughly, in a baking dish, all the ingredients except salt
pork. Cook the salt pork in a frying pan until delicately browned. Add
the melted fat to the beans and place the squares of pork on top. Bake
at 350 deg. for 1-3/4 to 2 hours.


_Baked Soybeans Croquettes_

    2 T minced onion
    1-1/2 c celery, diced
    1-1/2 t salt
    1 c tomato puree
    5 T flour
    2 T fat
    3 c soybean pulp (cooked and ground)

Add minced onion, celery (tough celery should be parboiled), and salt to
tomatoes and bring to a boil. Mix the flour and fat together, add the
boiling tomato puree, and cook to a thick paste. Cool, and add soybean
pulp. Shape into croquettes; roll in corn flakes. Dip in egg and milk
mixture and roll again in corn flakes. Place on a greased sheet and bake
in a hot oven (410 deg. F.) for 20 to 30 minutes. Yield: 10 to 12
croquettes.


_Cottage Cheese Soybean Loaf_

    1/2 c roasted soybeans
    1 T chopped onion
    1 c cottage cheese
    1 c soybean pulp (cooked and ground)
    1 c milk
    1 egg, slightly beaten
    1 T fat
    1/2 t salt
    1 t poultry seasoning
    Pepper

Combine ingredients and bake in a greased loaf pan in a moderate oven
(350 deg. F.) for 30 minutes. Yield: 6 servings.


_Soybean Loaf_

    4 c cooked soybeans
    1 c dry bread crumbs
    2 T peanut butter
    1 T poultry seasoning
    1 c milk (more, if needed)
    1/2 t pepper

Grind soybeans coarsely and combine with other ingredients. Add enough
milk to moisten. Bake in a moderate oven (350 deg. F.) for 30 minutes. The
peanut butter may be omitted from this recipe if so desired. Yield: 6 to
8 servings.


_Soybean Sandwich Filling_

    1 c chopped cooked soybeans
    1/4 c chopped olives or pickles
    1 t chopped green onion
    1/4 t salt
    2 T mayonnaise

Blend the ingredients to the proper consistency for spreading. Serve the
sandwiches either toasted or plain. Yield: 4 large sandwiches.


_Soybean Drop Cookies_

    2-3/4 c flour
    1/2 t salt
    4 t baking powder
    1 c fat
    1-2/3 c sugar
    2 eggs
    2-3/4 c soybean pulp (cooked and ground)
    1/3 c milk
    1 t lemon flavoring

Sift together the flour, salt, and baking powder. Cream the fat and
sugar. Add beaten eggs and soybean pulp. Add milk and sifted dry
ingredients alternately. Drop by teaspoonfuls on a greased baking sheet
and bake 10 to 15 minutes in a hot oven (400 deg. F.). For variety 1-1/2 c
raisins or 1 c nuts may be added to this recipe. One-third less
shortening may be used if a plainer cooky is desired. This amount makes
7 dozen small cookies.




_WAYS OF USING SOYBEAN FLOUR WITH WHEAT FLOUR_


Soybean flours will probably be found on the market more generally in
the near future than they have been in the past, and homemakers are
advised to take advantage of the opportunity to use them. These flours
are considered an especially valuable supplement to wheat flour, since
they enhance the nutritive value of baked products from the standpoint
of protein, minerals, and certain members of the vitamin B complex.

At the present time millers are preparing three types of soybean flour,
which differ in fat content. One type contains all the fat found in the
original soybean and is known as high-fat or full-fat flour. There are
also two low-fat flours from which different amounts of fat have been
removed. Because of these differences and the fact that soybean flour
contains little or no starch and no gluten, it is wise to use recipes
that are developed for soybean flour if any appreciable amount is to be
incorporated. A small amount of flour can be added to many recipes (up
to 2 T soybean flour to 14 T wheat flour) without altering the other
ingredients, but above this amount a special recipe should always be
used. The following recipes include directions for incorporating from 15
to 100 per cent soybean flour.

Soybean flour can be used as a meat extender, in gravies, soups, and
sauces, and in a variety of baked products. When substituted for part of
the wheat flour in a recipe, soybean flour has the advantage of giving a
product which tends to brown more readily and will keep fresh for a
longer time. Soybean flour also improves the crust of breads and causes
them to toast even better than usual.


_Soybean Flour Yeast Bread_

    1 c skimmed milk
    1 cake compressed yeast
    2 T sugar
    1-1/2 T fat
    2 T water
    1-3/4 t salt
    3 to 3-1/2 c soybean flour mixture
      prepared as follows:
      Mix 1/2 c soybean flour with
      3 c white flour and use
      amount needed to make a
      smooth, tender dough.

Scald milk and add salt, shortening, and sugar. Cool to room
temperature. Soften yeast in the water and add to the cooled milk. Add
about 2 c of the flour mixture and beat until smooth. Add enough flour
to make a soft dough. Turn out on floured board and knead until the
dough is smooth and elastic, adding only enough flour mixture to prevent
sticking. Put in a greased bowl; brush top with melted fat. Cover, and
let rise until trebled in bulk (about 2 hours). Punch down and let rise
until double in bulk (about 1 hour). Shape into a loaf and let rise in a
greased pan until double in volume (about 1 hour). This amount of dough
will fill a pan 4 x 9 x 3 inches, and the dough should rise to 5/8 inch
above the edge of the pan before it is placed in the oven. Bake for 50
minutes in a moderate oven (375 deg. F.).


_Soybean Flour Rolls_

    2 c milk, scalded
    1/4 c water
    1 cake yeast
    1-1/2 t salt
    4 T shortening
    4 T sugar
    4 to 5 c soybean flour mixture
      prepared as follows:
      Mix 1 c soybean flour with
      4 c white flour and use
      amount needed to make a
      smooth, tender dough.

Use the same method as for yeast bread. Shape into the desired forms,
brush tops of rolls with melted fat, and let rise until double in
volume. Bake at 385 deg. F. for about 15 minutes. Yield: 30 to 36 small
rolls.


_Soybean Flour Applesauce Cake_

    1/2 c fat
    1 c sugar
    1 egg
    3/4 c thick applesauce (unsweetened)
    1/4 t nutmeg
    1/2 c soybean flour
    1-1/4 c white flour
    1/2 t salt
    1-1/4 t baking powder
    1/3 t soda

Cream fat and sugar. Add beaten egg and applesauce to which the nutmeg
has been added. Stir in the sifted dry ingredients. Bake as a layer cake
for 40 to 50 minutes in a moderate oven (350 deg. F.). Serves 10 to 12
persons.


_Soybean Flour Chocolate Cake_

    1/2 c fat
    1 c sugar
    2 eggs
    1/2 t salt
    2 t baking powder
    1/4 t soda
    2 squares chocolate
    1-1/4 c cake flour
    1/2 c soybean flour
    3/4 c + 2 T milk
    1/2 t vanilla

Cream the fat, sugar, and vanilla. Add beaten eggs; add melted
chocolate. Sift the dry ingredients and add alternately with the milk.
Bake in a shallow pan (8 x 8 inches) in a moderate oven (365 deg. F.) for 25
to 30 minutes.


_Brownies_

    1/3 c cake flour
    1/3 c soybean flour
    1/2 t baking powder
    1/3 c shortening
    2 sq (oz) chocolate
    1 c sugar
    2 eggs
    1 t vanilla
    1/2 c chopped nuts

Cream chocolate, shortening, and vanilla. Combine sugar and beaten eggs;
add the chocolate mixture and beat well. Add sifted dry ingredients and
nuts. Bake in a greased pan (8 x 8 inches) in a moderate oven (350 deg. F.)
for about 30 minutes. Cut in squares.

1/3 c of soybean flour can be used instead of the cake flour (making a
total of 2/3 c soybean flour) if so desired.




_MISCELLANEOUS SOYBEAN PRODUCTS_


There are other forms in which soybeans can be utilized as human food.
Some processors of soybeans are now preparing soybean grits and flakes,
and there is promise that they will be on the retail market in the near
future. These products are similar to soybean flour but are not so
finely ground. The soybean grits usually resemble coarse corn grits but
are sometimes pulverized to resemble corn meal. The flakes are similar
but are flat in shape.

Soybean grits and flakes can be used as cereals, in baked products where
a crisp texture is desirable, or as meat extenders. The greatest
difference in the behavior of the two products is that of liquid
absorption. The soybean grits tend to absorb more liquid than the
flakes, and therefore an adjustment must be made in the recipe when
using these products.


_Cinnamon Cookies_

(Using soybean grits or flakes)

    3/4 c cake flour
          and
    3 T soybean grits
          or
    1 c cake flour
          and
    1/2 c soybean flakes
    1 t cinnamon
    1/4 c shortening
    1/2 c sugar
    1/2 t vanilla
    1 egg
    1/8 t salt
    1 t baking powder

Cream the shortening and sugar. Add the vanilla. Sift the dry
ingredients and combine with the soybean grits or flakes. Add the dry
ingredients alternately with the beaten egg to the creamed mixture. Drop
by teaspoonfuls on a greased cooky sheet. Bake in a moderate oven (375 deg.
F.) for about 10 minutes. Yield: 2 dozen cookies.


_Apple Crisp_

(Using soybean grits or flakes)

    3/4 c sugar
    1/4 t cinnamon
    4 c apples
    2/3 c brown sugar
    1/2 c flour
    6 T soybean grits or flakes
    1/4 c butter

Combine sliced apples, sugar, and cinnamon, and place in a shallow pan.
Mix brown sugar and flour and work butter into mixture until a crumbly
mixture is formed. Sprinkle this mixture over the apples. Bake in a hot
oven (400 deg. F.) for 20 to 25 minutes. Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

  [Handwritten note:

     (over)]

  [Handwritten note:

     Soy Bean Flour Muffins

         1/2 c. soy bean flour
         1-1/2 c. white flour
         4 t. baking powder
         4 T. sugar
         1/2 t. salt
         1 egg
         4 T. melted fat
         1 c. milk

     Sift all dry ingredients together. Combine beaten egg, fat + milk +
     stir these quickly into the dry mixture. Bake in deep, greased muffin
     pans for 8 to 10 min. in a hot oven (425 deg. F.).

     Yield 9 to 12 muffins.]




Cooperative Extension Work in Agriculture and Home Economics: University
of Illinois College of Agriculture, and the United States Department of
Agriculture cooperating. H. P. Rusk, Director. Acts approved by Congress
May 8 and June 30, 1914


  Brief of "Ways of Using Soybeans As Food,"
  18 pp. mimeo (HEE 224),
  Evelyn Chambers Faulkner, Instructor in Home Economics


HEE3197





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Let's Use Soybeans, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LET'S USE SOYBEANS ***

***** This file should be named 34651.txt or 34651.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/6/5/34651/

Produced by Patrick Hopkins, Gerard Arthus and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
