Project Gutenberg's How to Prosper in Boll Weevil Territory, by G. H. Alford

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: How to Prosper in Boll Weevil Territory

Author: G. H. Alford

Release Date: December 23, 2010 [EBook #34729]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROSPER IN BOLL WEEVIL TERRITORY ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









THE BOLL WEEVIL

How to prosper in Boll Weevil Territory




[Illustration: Prof. P. G. HOLDEN

Director I H C Agricultural Extension Department]

"A one crop system will impoverish any country, and in turn it will
impoverish the people that are on its farms. It is only through
diversification of crops and the using of our energies every day of the
year, as well as our hands, that we can make a great rich country and a
great, strong, vigorous people."--Prof. P. G. Holden.


[Illustration: G. H. ALFORD

Of I H C Agricultural Extension Department]




  HOW TO PROSPER IN
  BOLL WEEVIL TERRITORY

  By G. H. ALFORD

  PUBLISHED AND COPYRIGHTED BY THE
  AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION DEPARTMENT
  INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER COMPANY OF NEW JERSEY

  PROF. P. G. HOLDEN, Director
  CHICAGO, USA




[Illustration: A good stalk of cotton]




Introductory


This book was prepared to furnish information on farming in the boll
weevil territory. Special attention has been given to the production of
cotton in infested districts and to showing how to adopt a system of
farming which has been found profitable by many farmers in boll weevil
territories. It was written by a man who has had practical experience all
his life in growing cotton in Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas. He later
devoted a number of years to the special study of the boll weevil in the
cotton fields of these states as special agent for the Farmers'
Co-operative Demonstration Work. In addition to this, he is acquainted
with the financial and economic conditions throughout the cotton belt.




Dedicated to all Cotton Growers




How to Prosper in Boll Weevil Territory

The System of Farming Necessary to Obtain Best Results Under Average
Conditions in Boll Weevil Territory


In order to obtain profitable returns from farming in boll weevil
territory, we must--First, grow an early crop of cotton; second, use every
means possible to destroy the weevil and reduce their number to a minimum;
third, follow a system of diversified farming.

=Grow an Early Variety of Cotton:= To secure maximum cotton crops in spite
of the boll weevil pest, the cotton grower must use every effort to bring
the crop to maturity just as early in the season as possible. An early
crop means profit--a late crop goes to the weevil, not to the farmer. If
we are to succeed in growing cotton under boll weevil conditions we must--

1. Reduce the cotton acreage so that the most effective cultural methods
may be closely followed. It is often advisable to reduce the acreage 50
per cent.

2. Plant only warm, fertile, well-drained land.

3. Thoroughly prepare the seed bed before planting. Young cotton plants do
not grow well in cloddy ground.


[Illustration: Boll Weevil; enlarged above; natural size below]


4. Make heavy applications of commercial fertilizer where the soil
responds to such treatment, for it will hasten maturity and increase the
yield.

5. Plant early, rapid-fruiting, prolific cotton seed.

6. Plant the seed as early as the season will permit, in rows just about
as wide apart as the cotton usually grows tall in the average season.

7. Commence to cultivate the young cotton just as soon as possible, and do
not permit a crust to form or the field to become grassy.

=Reduce the Cotton Acreage:= In many sections of the country, intensive
farming--smaller farms and more thorough cultivation--is being profitably
practiced. In boll weevil territory, we would likewise advocate
"intensive" cotton growing--smaller acreage to cotton with more thorough
cultivation--as a good step toward securing early and profitable cotton
crops. For instance, many farmers in the boll weevil territory are now
producing as much cotton on five acres by following proper methods as they
formerly produced on ten acres, thus leaving half of their land to produce
some other crop.

=Plant on Fertile Soil:= This is one of the necessities in order to
produce an early cotton crop. The land must be well-drained so that it
will warm up early in the spring and retain the heat. It must contain
plenty of humus or vegetable matter to prevent packing. Plenty of
vegetable matter also increases the water-holding capacity of the soil,
thus reducing the loss due to the droughts that may occur in summer. Where
the soil has not enough humus and therefore will not hold a sufficient
amount of water, the cotton crop will stop growing and putting on squares
during a long drought, and will shed the squares and many of the small
bolls already on the stalks.


[Illustration: At left of each pair is a boll weevil. The weevils at the
right are weevils often mistaken for boll weevils.]


The soil may be kept in the proper condition of fertility for cotton by
practicing a suitable rotation of crops, including legumes, and by turning
under the corn stalks, the oat and pea stubble, and the grass.

=Thoroughly Prepare the Soil:= The soil should be plowed deep for the
following reasons: First, to increase the water-holding capacity; second,
to let the water escape from the surface without running over the ground
and washing it off; third, to permit the air to circulate freely for a
considerable depth in the soil; fourth, to secure crops against droughts
by enabling the cotton roots to go down to moisture; fifth, to increase
the area from which plant roots may obtain food. It is advisable to flat
break the land in the fall and winter and then bed it some time before the
planting season. The bed should be disked or harrowed just before planting
the cotton seed, but it is seldom advisable to re-bed the land just before
planting. Cotton comes up quicker, grows off faster and begins bearing
sooner on a well settled, firm seed bed. It is not wise to plant the
cotton on freshly prepared land.


[Illustration: The late cotton is for weevil--not for the farmer. The boll
weevil prevented the above late cotton from making a single boll.]


=Apply Commercial Fertilizers:= Where the soil responds to commercial
fertilizer, it is advisable to make heavy applications to hasten maturity
and increase the yield. It is best to use fertilizers which will stimulate
the fruit rather than stalk growth. High grade, 16 per cent acid phosphate
is the basis for increasing fruit and hastening maturity; cotton seed meal
is usually the basis for stimulating stalk growth. A mixture of two parts
of 16 per cent acid phosphate and one part of 6 per cent cotton seed meal
is a good mixture for cotton on soil of average fertility.

It will usually also pay to mix about ten pounds of nitrate of soda with
every bushel of seed just before it is put into the planter. The nitrate
of soda has a tendency to cause the young cotton to grow vigorously and
resist the bad effects of cool nights. It also usually pays to make a side
application of nitrate of soda just after the cotton has been thinned the
first time.

=Plant Early Varieties:= The production of an early cotton crop requires
carefully selected seed of an early, rapid-fruiting, prolific variety.
This seed may be purchased each year, or selected from cotton plants with
low fruit limbs and short joints on the main stem and fruit limbs. With
the weevil pest to combat, the value of using the earliest and most
prolific seed cannot be over-estimated.

It is advisable for the average farmer to buy the best early varieties
from some reputable breeder and then use every known method to increase
the earliness and productiveness of the cotton. Reports of tests at the
Government Experiment Stations name the earliest and most prolific
varieties of cotton. It is not good business to buy varieties of seed that
have not been shown to be the earliest and most prolific by actual tests
in the fields through a sufficient number of years to eliminate weather
conditions. Seed should not be purchased because of high-sounding names or
exaggerated claims.

=Plant the Seed Early:= Seed should be planted just as early as the season
will permit. This is important in the work of hastening the cotton crop to
early maturity. The weevils do not multiply until the squares begin to
form. They seldom become sufficiently numerous to destroy the squares as
fast as they form, before the last of July. While it is important to plant
as early as the season will permit, do not forget that cotton is a
tropical plant and is badly effected by cold weather.

=Cultivate the Young Cotton:= Cultivation should begin before the cotton
comes up. This may be done by running a steel peg tooth harrow over the
field either at right angles or diagonally across the rows. This helps to
let the young cotton plants through and at the same time kills millions of
tiny weeds and much grass just as they are coming up. The cultivation
should be repeated when the little cotton is about five days old. This
early cultivation kills the grass and weeds in the sprout and forms a soil
mulch all over the field, which holds the moisture in the ground, thus
making the little plants grow more rapidly. Early cultivation with the
harrow will reduce the necessary work with the hoe to the minimum.

If for any reason the peg tooth harrow cannot be used, the ordinary
one-horse harrows should be used to stir the soil on top of the beds just
before the cotton comes up. The harrow or cultivator used will kill the
little grass and weeds and leave a shallow, loose layer of soil on the
surface.

All later cultivation should be made with such implements as the one or
two-horse cultivators, disk harrows and heel sweeps. A turning plow is out
of place in a cotton field unless the soil is devoid of vegetable matter
and runs together after heavy rains or unless it rains for two or three
weeks and it becomes necessary to plow under the grass. If the soil packs
after heavy rains, it may be advisable to use the turning plow as a
necessary evil, especially, when the cotton is young. If it should be
necessary to use it to loosen the soil or to clean out the crop, by all
means avoid deep cultivation late in the season. Be sure to use the
harrow or cultivator a few days after using the turning plow to thoroughly
pulverize the stirred soil and make a dust mulch.


[Illustration: The upper illustration shows a cotton field planted late
and yielding nothing. The lower illustration shows a field on the opposite
side of the turnrow on same plantation, planted early, properly treated,
and yielding three-quarters bale per acre. (Houter, Yearbook, U. S. Dept.
of Agriculture, 1906.)]


The essential thing in the cultivation of the cotton is to keep the ground
free from grass and weeds and covered with a soil mulch. Frequent and
shallow cultivation should be continued until the cotton begins to open.
Most of the benefits of thorough preparation, early, rapid-fruiting seed,
early planting and intensive, shallow cultivation may be lost unless the
fields are given the utmost attention until the cotton begins to open.
Frequent and shallow cultivation late in the season will not result in the
death of many adult weevils, but it will knock many punctured squares to
the hot ground and cause the cotton to remain green and continue to grow
and put on squares to furnish food for the boll weevil. The boll weevil
prefers squares to bolls and as long as the cotton puts on sufficient
squares to furnish it with the necessary food it will not attack many
bolls.

Avoid deep cultivation late in the season, especially close to the cotton.
If the plows cut the roots and cause the cotton to cease to put on squares
the weevil will at once attack the bolls, which would otherwise not be
injured.


[Illustration: More and better corn must be grown in weevil territory.
Above corn grown on I H C farm, Brookhaven, Miss.]




How to Reduce Boll Weevil

Best Methods of Reducing the Number of Weevil to a Minimum--Results of
Many Experiments Conducted


Remarkable results and profitable returns have been obtained by carefully
applying the following methods of destroying the boll weevil:

1. Completely strip the cotton stalks of foliage, squares, and bolls--the
weevils' sole food supply--plow the cotton stalks under good and deep, or
burn them at the earliest possible moment.

2. During the winter, destroy the rubbish in and about the fields, which
might serve as hibernating quarters for weevils.

3. When the weevils appear on the new cotton in the spring, pick them off
and destroy them.

4. Pick up all punctured squares and destroy them for at least one month
after the first squares form on the cotton.

=Importance of Destroying the Food Supply:= The most important step in
producing cotton in boll weevil territory is the early fall destruction of
the foliage, squares, and immature punctured bolls on the cotton stalks,
which constitute the weevils' only food supply. Thousands of
experimenters, including the United States Bureau of Entomology,
Government Agents in Farm Demonstration Work, the Louisiana State Crop
Pest Commission, and thousands of successful farmers substantiate this
statement that the early fall destruction of the cotton stalks is the most
effective method that can be employed for the reduction of the number of
weevil.

An experiment conducted by the Bureau of Entomology in Calhoun County,
Texas, showed that where the stalks on 410 acres of land were destroyed
early in October, that the yield was increased $14.56 per acre. Another
experiment was conducted on opposite sides of the Guadaulope River near
Victoria, Texas. The stalks were burned on one farm the latter part of
September and on the other they were allowed to stand until planting time.
Forty acres, on the farm on which the stalks were destroyed, produced
fifteen bales of cotton. Forty acres on the other farm made three and
one-half bales.

Experiments conducted by the Louisiana State Crop Pest Commission are
summed up in the following extracts from Circular No. 28: "Where the
cotton plants were destroyed before October 15, only 3 per cent of the
weevils survived the winter to infest the next year's crop. Where the
stalks were destroyed from October 15 to October 27, an average of about
15 per cent of the weevils passed through the winter successfully. Where
the stalks were destroyed between November 1 and November 25, an average
of approximately 22 per cent of the weevil survived the winter. Postponing
the fall destruction of cotton stalks until the middle of December, or
later, permitted over 43 per cent of the weevils to survive the winter
and attack the next crop." _Where the stalks were destroyed before October
15, only 3 per cent of the weevils passed the winter. Where the stalks
remained in the field until December 15, over 43 per cent of the weevils
survived the winter._ These figures certainly emphasize very strikingly
the value of early fall destruction of the boll weevil's food supply.

=Methods of Destroying the Food Supply:= With the importance of early fall
destruction of the cotton stalks fully realized, the cotton grower has
before him the question of how best to accomplish this. There are three
methods of destroying the squares, bolls, and foliage of the cotton
stalks: 1. Pasturing; 2. Plowing under; 3. Burning.


[Illustration: A mature cotton plant that was late in fruiting. The joints
are long and the balls far out from the center and base of the stalk. The
limbs have few joints and few bolls. Height of plant, 3 feet; balls 26--10
in lower half circle. Do not plant this type in weevil territory.]


Pasturing the cotton fields is a good method of destroying squares, bolls
and foliage where the cotton fields are fenced and where a sufficient
number of cattle can be turned into a field to eat all the squares, bolls,
and foliage in a few days. However, let it be distinctly understood that
the practice of turning just a few head of cattle into a fifteen or twenty
acre cotton field accomplishes no particular good. Every cotton grower
knows from his own observation that two or three head of cattle to an
acre, even when confined entirely to the cotton field, will eat very
little of the green foliage in one week, and it must be kept in mind that
it is vital to destroy as quickly and as completely as possible the food
supply of the mature weevils and the breeding places of the immature
weevils.

Plowing cotton stalks under is an effective method of destroying the food
supply of mature weevils and ending the lives of immature weevils where
there are few stumps and roots, where the cotton stalks are small, and
where large plows and strong teams can be had. Farmers who have attempted
to plow under green cotton stalks early in the fall, laugh at the advice
sometimes given to plow under the stalks at all times and under all
conditions as a means of destroying the food supply of the weevil. They
know from experience that such advice is often better theory than practice
as the plowing under of green cotton stalks is very often a decidedly
obstinate proposition. However, where large plows and strong teams are
available, use them and completely bury the cotton stalks wherever it can
be done.


[Illustration: Velvet beans yield abundant crops and add nitrogen to the
soil. A good crop for weevil territory]


Burning the stalks is a practical method of destroying the weevils. On
many farms and plantations there are not cattle enough to strip the cotton
stalks thoroughly and completely of every particle of foliage, squares and
bolls in a short time by pasturing. It is also often impossible to
completely bury the cotton stalks. In such cases, it is absolutely
necessary to cut, dry and burn them as soon as the cotton can be picked.
By burning the stalks, the food supply of the adult weevil is destroyed,
and weevils in immature stages in the squares and bolls are destroyed. A
large majority of the adult weevils also perish in the flames, especially
when the stalks are burned after sundown, as weevils retire to the stalk
piles for the night at about that time. They seldom move about at night,
and if care is taken not to disturb them when applying the torch,
practically all will be destroyed.

Of course, if the stalks are allowed to remain until a heavy frost has
come, practically all of the mature weevils will have gone into winter
hibernating quarters and the immature weevils in the squares and small
bolls will have been frozen. Nothing will be gained in that case by
burning the stalks and the best thing that can be done will be to cut the
stalks and turn them under as deeply as possible.

=Clean Up Hibernating Quarters:= Many weevils escape from the fields but
all do not fly beyond the reach of the farmer. Surprising numbers have
been found hibernating in cracks and holes in the ground and under grass,
weeds and other trash. In January, 1907, in one instance, the United
States Bureau of Entomology found 5,870 weevils per acre of which 70 per
cent were alive. Most of the many examinations that have been made have
shown more than one thousand live weevils per acre in the cotton fields.
Many are found along the fence rows, hedges, ditch banks and in decayed
logs and dead trees. Thousands more are found hibernating in nearby
cornfields and old sorghum, cane and hay fields.

Winter plowing of all cultivated fields is therefore another effective way
of reducing the number of weevils, as the thousand or more weevils per
acre in the cracks and holes in the ground and under the grass, weeds,
trash and cornstalks can practically all be killed by deep winter
breaking.

=Picking Off the Weevils:= After the hibernating weevils emerge from their
winter quarters in the spring and reach the young cotton, there is little
further movement until the general dispersing season in August, September
and October. The fact that the weevil does not move about much except in
the fall makes it possible for the individual farmer to accomplish results
from his own efforts in fighting the pest. There is little danger of
weevils coming in from other fields until in August, by which time the
cotton crop is normally set. For this reason, there need be no fear that
time will be wasted which is spent in thoroughly picking off the weevils
from the young cotton plants before the squares begin to form.

Where the food supply of the weevil has not been destroyed early in the
fall and strength added to this blow by plowing under the corn stalks,
trash, weeds and other vegetable matter that serve as hibernating
quarters, and by destroying practically all of the weevils hibernating
along the fence rows, hedges and ditch banks, the over-wintered weevils
are often sufficiently numerous to puncture all the squares as fast as
they form. Where this is the case, no bottom crop and seldom a middle crop
of cotton will be made unless the weevils are picked off and the punctured
squares destroyed.


[Illustration: An early cotton plant. The fruit limbs are low and close
together on the stalk and the joints are short. Plants of this structure
fruit early, rapidly and are well adapted to boll weevil conditions.]


The possible progeny of a single pair of weevils, during a season, has
been estimated at 12,755,100. Nature has provided a number of agencies to
prevent such excessive multiplication; nevertheless, the picking off of a
single pair of weevils from the young cotton plants may mean millions less
later on.

Before squares form on the cotton, the over-wintered weevils that have
come out of winter quarters feed on the opening leaves or buds of the
young cotton plants. Early in the morning it is an easy matter to find the
weevils in the buds, where they can be easily picked off and destroyed.

The only reason why the weevils cannot be eradicated by thoroughly picking
them off, is that large numbers of over-wintered weevils do not emerge
until after the squares begin to form. As soon as the squares form, the
weevil gets on the inside of the bracts and feeds only by inserting its
beak deep into the squares. After the squares begin to form, it is hardly
practicable to pick the weevils off.

=Destroy All Punctured Squares:= The weevils that survive the winter are
all in the adult stage. They breed only in the squares and bolls and
therefore cannot multiply until squares form. The most conspicuous
indication of the presence of the boll weevil is the flaring of the
square. When the weevil punctures a square, it turns yellow and the bracts
flare open. The punctured squares usually fall to the ground in a few
days.

The over-wintered weevils live only a few weeks after coming out of winter
quarters in the spring, as they die shortly after breeding in the squares
and bolls. Therefore, if the young cotton plants are thoroughly picked two
or three times just before the squares begin to form, and every punctured
square is destroyed for at least one month after the first squares form,
practically all of the over-wintered weevils will be dead and hence there
will be few young weevils later on. If it were possible to destroy every
punctured square and boll, and thereby prevent the appearance of new
broods, the weevil pest could be exterminated in one year. At any rate,
the results that can be accomplished behoove every farmer to work
carefully and painstakingly to destroy all the punctured squares possible
before the new broods of weevils are hatched.

During the growing season, many weevils can be destroyed by co-operating
with the natural agencies that tend to reduce their number. For instance,
the weevils in the punctured squares that fall on the hot ground in July
and August and are not shaded, are usually killed at once by the heat or
will starve for lack of food, because of the hardening of the square. By
using a brush on the cultivators to agitate the plants when cultivating
the crop, many punctured squares will be knocked off onto the hot ground
sooner than they would naturally fall off. At the same time, some of the
adult weevils will also be shaken off onto the hot ground. When an adult
weevil is thrown on a surface of finely pulverized, hot soil, it is killed
almost instantly.

=Attempts to Destroy Weevils with Poison:= In territory newly infested
with the boll weevil, attempts continue to be made to destroy the weevils
by poisoning. Of course the farmers soon learn better, but the experience
is very expensive. If advocates of poison would only remember that after
the squares begin to form on the cotton, the boll weevils feed only by
inserting their beaks deeply into the squares or bolls, they would realize
that it is impossible to place poison where the weevils will feed upon it.
In all the experiments performed in the field by the United States Bureau
of Entomology, very heavy applications throughout the season have failed
to show any advantage in the use of poison. Therefore, do not waste any
money on poisons.

=Not Attracted by Light:= The weevil seldom moves at night. It is inactive
after sundown. The weevil is never attracted to lights and hence the use
of a trap lantern has no effect on them.


[Illustration: Good corn must be grown in weevil territory]




The Cotton Boll Weevil

Its History, Habits, Food Supply and Life Rate of Increase and Damage Done
to Crops


=History:= The cotton boll weevil is not a native of the United States. It
came from Mexico in 1892. It may have flown across the Rio Grande River
near Brownsville, Texas, or it is possible that it was carried across in
seed cotton. Since 1892, it has extended its range annually from fifty to
one hundred and twenty-five miles until it has spread over Texas,
Oklahoma, Louisiana, Arkansas, Mississippi and a part of Alabama.

=Life and Habits:= The eggs are laid within the squares and bolls of the
cotton plant. The weevil prefers the squares and seldom punctures a boll
as long as there are numerous squares to puncture. The mouth of the adult
weevil is located at the end of the snout. The weevil eats a small hole
into the square or boll and then turns around and deposits one egg in the
puncture and seals the hole with a small drop of a gluey substance to
protect the egg from ants, rain and other destructive agencies. The weevil
seldom deposits more than one egg in a square or boll until the squares
and bolls become very scarce. The egg hatches in from three to fifteen
days, depending on the temperature. The larvae is a tiny white footless
grub, with a brown head and dark jaws. This grub feeds on the inside of
the square or boll and passes into the pupae stage in from six to twelve
days. The adult or mature weevil develops from the pupae stage in three to
ten days and eats its way out of the square or boll.

=How to Know a Boll Weevil:= The safest plan for one who is not well
acquainted with the boll weevil is to send any doubtful specimen to an
entomologist or to a government expert. There are a few characteristics,
however, that will assist anyone in separating the boll weevil from the
numerous other weevils that are often mistaken for it. On each front leg
of the boll weevil are two spines--one somewhat larger than the other. The
snout has a black shining appearance and the "feelers" are near the outer
end. The boll weevil is usually from one-fourth to three-eighths of an
inch long and about half as broad. When they first come from the square or
boll, they are almost pink but rapidly turn darker until they are of a
dark brown or chocolate color.

=Weevils' Food Supply:= The foliage, squares and bolls on cotton stalks
constitute the weevils' sole food supply. The Mexican cotton boll weevil
never feeds upon okra, peas, beans or other plants unless captured and
placed in confinement and then only to a slight extent.

=Rate of Increase:= The weevils that survive the winter begin to lay eggs
when the first squares form on the cotton and successive broods continue
to lay eggs until checked by heavy or killing frost in the late fall.
Observations made by Drs. W. D. Hunter and W. E. Hinds, show that the
female weevil deposits eggs at the rate of from three to five per day and
continues to lay eggs for an average of twenty-eight days. The following
is a quotation from Dr. W. D. Hunter, government entomologist in charge
of the boll weevil work in the South: "A conservative estimate of the
possible progeny of a single pair of weevils during the season beginning
on June 20 and extending to November 4 is 12,755,000."


[Illustration: Larvae of boll weevil in cotton square]


=Life Period of Weevil:= Weevils born during the early summer live from
fifty to seventy-five days. Weevils that are born late in the fall
hibernate and large numbers live through the winter and for about twenty
days after emerging in the spring.

=Hibernation:= The immature weevils in the squares and bolls are usually
killed during the winter. All adult weevils become dormant and the well
protected weevils usually live through the winter and do great damage in
the spring. The adult weevil spends the winter in hedges, broomsedge,
woods, hay stacks, farm buildings, decayed logs, moss and dead trees.




Rotation of Crops


A Safe and Sane System of Crop Rotation in Boll Weevil Territory
Absolutely Necessary

When the boll weevil first appears in a territory, the first efforts at
breaking away from all cotton usually consist in going largely into
another single crop system of farming rather than the production of a
variety of crops. The evils of the new system are usually as great as
those of the all cotton system. Many farmers rush into the truck business.
Of course, truck crops should be grown on every farm in the weevil
territory, and, in some particular localities, they may constitute the
main reliance for cash, but it seems that the truck business is a gamble
for the average cotton farmer. Trucking has lured many a farmer to
financial ruin.

The crop rotation for the average cotton farmer should include oats, corn,
some cotton, and at least one leguminous crop. Along with this should go
the growing of hogs, mules, horses and cattle instead of having to buy
them from other sections of the country.

It is not possible for the farmer in the boll weevil territory to entirely
supplant cotton as a money crop, but this crop should be supplemented with
the growing of home supplies, as well as other crops which will produce
cash returns.

Cotton is one of the greatest cash crops, and while it should be the main
money crop in the boll weevil territory north of latitude 32, it should
not be the only cash crop grown. The safest plan either within or without
the boll weevil territory is to follow a system of diversified farming.
The cotton farmers, especially those in the boll weevil territory, cannot
afford to depend entirely on cotton as a cash crop. A system of rotation
suitable for cotton belt farmers should include some of the following
staple crops:

_Oats are probably_ the surest and best paying small grain crop that can
be grown over practically the entire cotton belt. The same soil that will
produce one bale of cotton per acre will grow 60 bushels of oats. At the
average price that has prevailed for oats during the past five years, the
60 bushels will sell for $36 to $40, and the straw, when baled, will often
pay the larger part of the expense of growing the grain.

_The bale of cotton per acre land_ will produce about $30 worth of oats,
at least one and a half tons of lespedeza hay, and five bushels of
lespedeza seed. The lespedeza hay will sell for about $12 per ton and the
lespedeza seed for about $3 per bushel. The total is $63 per acre. We are
personally acquainted with a farmer who has averaged $65 per acre for
eight years.

_Thirty dollars worth of oats_ and twenty bushels of soy beans at $1.50
per bushel, and one and a half tons of soy bean hay at $8 per ton, means
$72 per acre. These are very conservative figures. At the Mississippi
Delta Experiment Station in 1912 the land produced ninety bushels of oats
to the acre, twenty-two and a half bushels of soy beans, "after losing a
good percentage of the beans by shattering," and 5,200 pounds of soy bean
hay. The average yield of cotton on the same land was about 500 pounds of
lint per acre.


[Illustration: Oats in a three-year rotation with cotton and corn]


_Oats and vetch_ sown together furnish more and better grazing and better
hay than either when sown separately. There is no better hay than oats and
vetch cut in the dough stage. Few hays will sell for a better price on the
market. The oat and vetch hay provides a much more satisfactory ration for
horses and mules than corn or leguminous hay.

_Oats may be followed by cowpeas._ When the cowpeas are planted in rows on
good land, well fertilized and cultivated, the yield is usually from ten
to twenty bushels of peas and one and a half tons of hay. The peas usually
sell for about $2 per bushel and the hay for about $12 per ton.

_Ninety bushels of oats_ and sixty-seven bushels of peanuts were produced
on the same land at the Mississippi Delta Experiment Station in one year.
At the present prices for peanuts and peanut hay, it is a very profitable
crop to grow after oats when properly handled.

_When corn is planted_ on fertile soil thoroughly prepared, _properly
fertilized_ and cultivated, the yield is usually about fifty bushels per
acre. The average price per bushel is about 80 cents. Peas planted in corn
at the last working will usually average about eight bushels of peas and a
ton or more of valuable hay. The peavine hay can be harvested by live
stock.

_The growing of live stock_ will help to create extensive home markets for
roughage and leguminous crops, keep the money at home that is usually sent
to the north and west for pork products, mules, horses, hay, beef, and so
on, and at the same time add greatly to the fertility of the soil. Pork
can be produced in the cotton belt more easily than any other live stock.
It would not be wise for the average cotton farmer to devote his farm
exclusively to hog raising, yet it will certainly pay him to produce
enough pork for home use and some to sell to supplement the money formerly
obtained for cotton.

Chickens, turkeys, ducks and other poultry sell for good prices and every
cotton farmer in the weevil territory should raise some poultry for sale.

The Labor Problem

Plenty of good labor is an absolute necessity in growing cotton under boll
weevil conditions. The tendency of newly infested districts is to neglect
the laborer at the time when he needs support and encouragement. Thousands
of families have moved out of a single county in one season to other
cotton sections, while if they had been given a little encouragement to
grow corn, grain, cowpeas, hogs, vegetables in his own garden, etc., he
would have remained in the community where he is much needed.

The farmers, planters, merchants and bankers must unite and see to it that
the laborers have the actual necessities of life. He should be encouraged
to grow his home supplies, a little cotton, a few chickens and his own
pork. This method would put farming on a basis which will eliminate and do
away with the necessity of sending to the north and west for bacon, lard,
mules, corn, hay and other supplies. By working together and keeping our
laborers satisfied we will keep them in the community where they are
needed to till the soil and help build up our farms.

The Debt Problem

When traveling in weevil territory, we meet farmers almost daily who are
anxious to sell their farms at from one-third to one-fifth of their real
value. The farmers tell us that they are in debt and will never be able to
pay out. They say that the boll weevil has come to destroy their
cotton--their sole cash crop.

Now these farmers are mistaken on two counts. First, cotton is not the
only surplus money crop; second, the boll weevil does not prevent the
growing of profitable crops of cotton in normal seasons. The cotton money
is now used to pay for corn, bacon, lard, mules and hay. When the tenants
and farmers all live at home and practice the most rigid economy, the
cotton money will soon pay all debts.

Life on the farm is robbed of practically all of its pleasures as long as
we pay fifty per cent credit profits and the creditor constantly knocks at
the door. The only people who really suffer in periods of hard times are
the men who are in debt; men who owe money and are often compelled to
sacrifice their property to meet the imperative demands of their
creditors. The farmer who is out of debt when the boll weevil comes and
has an abundance of high class food supplies on his farm is not materially
affected. Many of the cotton farmers who are in debt when the boll weevil
comes lose their homes.

Labor Saving Implements

The following is an extract from an address delivered at Greenville,
Miss., in the boll weevil territory, by Dr. S. A. Knapp, a man who did
more for real genuine progress in the South than any other one man has
ever done. "The farmer who uses modern machinery in planting and
cultivating his crop will succeed, and the one who does not will make a
failure. The old way of making a crop by hand by the use of the hoe and
plow must soon be a thing of the past. We must come to use the modern
implements and the sooner we let the negro understand that he must work
his crop in this way, the better off we shall be."


[Illustration: Boll weevils attacking growing cotton boll]


The Personal Element in the Boll Weevil Fight

By B. L. Moss

Editor Progressive Farmer, Birmingham, Alabama.

A man's personal attitude and convictions play a large part in his
successes and failures in all walks of life, and nowhere is the truth more
apparent than in a farmer's attitude toward the boll weevil problem.

Before the coming of the weevil, it is looked upon by nine farmers out of
ten as a remote danger, doubtful in time of arrival and greatly
exaggerated in its possibilities for damage. No preparations for it are
made, the farm mortgage is left hanging like a cloud over the family
homestead, and the old methods so long in vogue are left unchanged.

Then the crash comes! The obsolete methods of the past are worthless
against the weevil; the cotton crop is swept away, interest on the
mortgage is unpaid, and its foreclosure is certain. This picture is the
rule and not the exception.

Such a situation calls forth the real qualities of the man. Many a farmer,
for the first few years of the weevil invasion, has proven a quitter. He
has failed because he did not think he could succeed. Usually he has been
the identical man who failed to believe in and prepare for the coming of
the weevil.

The exceptional man has believed in and prepared for the weevil's coming,
and he has succeeded. Incidentally, his success has shown out as a beacon
light to his doubting neighbors and has ultimately pointed the way for
them.

Five years' experience tells me that you can raise cotton profitably in
the presence of the boll weevil. The HOW of the matter is given by others
in this booklet, but you, YOU, must take it up with the spirit of FIGHT.
Believe that you can, swear that you will, and success is yours.


[Illustration: Lespedeza a great hay crop for the lower South]


The Boll Weevil's Influence in the Regeneration of the South

By H. Guy Hathorn, Planter, Woodville, Miss.

For many years the one crop system has been the bane of the cotton belt.
When land was virgin, cheap and plentiful, the evil was not so apparent,
and the necessity for a saner system was not so pressing. A depleted soil,
unreliable labor and various other factors caused certain individuals to
see the error of their way, and induced them to adopt a diversified system
and the use of labor-saving implements. It was necessary for the great
majority to receive a paralyzing shock before they would make any material
change; that shock came in the shape of the boll weevil. As certain
alternative medicines create great debility and languor of the body before
the curative power can become operative, so has all business in any way
connected with the growing of cotton suffered depression as a preliminary
to the greater financial vigor and strength that comes after a few years'
experience with stock raising and diversification as the rule, and with
cotton occupying a secondary place in the farm operation.




Letter from the Late Dr. S. A. Knapp to G. H. Alford


Of course the heavy rains have been favorable to the weevil, and nothing
else could have been expected in weevil territory than the weevil should
appear and be rather plentiful on the young cotton. But our experience in
this boll weevil fight is that it is far better to have a wet period at
this time than later, when the plant is much larger and the squares more
numerous. The farmer is inclined to look at the dark side of things. This
early rain is rather a favorable symptom than otherwise because, in all
probability, it will clear off and be warm and dry. In 1907 we had just
such a period of rain a trifle later than this. It cleared off and in a
few weeks nine-tenths of the weevil, so far as reported, had disappeared.
The man who energetically clears out his cotton as soon as the weather
permits and strictly follows our plan of intensive cultivation, will be
quite sure to make a fair crop.

We are not afraid of these early rains; it is the late rain, because if
the planter now follows our plan and picks up the squares for a month, the
weevils will be pretty nearly exterminated. In fact, if everybody would do
it the weevil would do very little damage. But when there is a period of
continuous rain after the plant has nearly matured, it is a much more
difficult problem to handle. The sun has less access to the plant and it
is more difficult to secure all the fallen squares.

The greatest problem with which we have had to deal in boll weevil
territory is the hopeless view of the farmer. He wants to plow up his
cotton and put in something else, or he refuses to give his cotton the
attention which it requires. If he follows our plan thoroughly he will
succeed, and in future will make his crop hopefully as he did before the
boll weevil appeared.


Picking Weevils and Squares

The following is the substance of a number of letters from Mississippi
farmers relative to picking weevils and squares: Mr. T. L. Rush says that
the first time he caught an average of fifty weevils per acre and the
second time twenty-eight. The cost of picking the weevils was about fifty
cents per acre. He gathered the punctured squares seven times at a cost of
about $2.50 per acre. Mr. C. S. Rowland picked the weevils and squares on
thirty-five acres of cotton at a cost of $43.60. Mr. J. W. Shelton picked
an average of sixty-five weevils per acre off his little cotton for four
weeks at a cost of 25 cents per hundred. Mr. J. M. Crawford found 268
weevils the first time; two hundred and fifty the second time, one hundred
and ninety-seven the third time and one hundred and fifty the fourth time.
He gathered one bushel of squares the first time and three bushels a
second time. The cost was about $20.00 on the ten acres. Mr. A. W. Harrell
picked over two acres of cotton three times and got one hundred and fifty
weevils and seven hundred squares. It cost him about $2.00 per acre.




Profitable Farming in South


G. H. Alford, one of the agents of the government representing the
agricultural department, talked to business men and planters at the
Vicksburg Cotton Exchange last week and said some good things, among them
the following:

"The planters who keep their laborers and force them to grow plenty of
corn, rice, potatoes, molasses, hogs and poultry for home use and to
cultivate say six or seven acres of cotton, according to government
instructions, will grow more prosperous every year. They will not grow as
much cotton, but it will not be necessary for them to send two-thirds of
the money obtained for cotton to other sections of the country to pay for
farm products. Boll weevil or no weevil, prosperity will be the rule in
Warren county when all of her people live on the products of the farms and
grow cotton as a surplus crop. I meet planters every day who are anxious
to sell their plantations. They tell me they are in debt and will never be
able to raise the mortgage. They say that the boll weevil is here to
destroy cotton--their money crop. They are mistaken on two counts.
Profitable crops of cotton can be grown in spite of the boll weevil and
cotton is not now a surplus money crop. They will grow profitable crops of
cotton as a surplus crop in a year or so. They will then all live at home
and grow say two-thirds as much cotton. The cotton money will then raise
the mortgages instead of paying for corn, bacon, lard, mules, hay, etc.
The boll weevil means diversified farming and stock raising. This means
fertile soil and good farming. Fertile soil and good farming means high
priced land. The boll weevil will probably keep the price of land down for
two or three years, but diversified agriculture and the raising of good
hogs, cattle, mules, horses and other stock will force the price up and up
until it will sell for four or five times its present market value. Let
every planter hold a tight grip on his land. There is no excuse for the
blues. The northern farmers are getting rich. They cannot grow cotton.
They cannot grow sugar cane, rice and many other crops that can be grown
in Warren. Any crop will grow here that the northerners can grow.
Diversified farming and stock raising and the growing of cotton as a
surplus crop will put Warren county on the high road to genuine
prosperity.


[Illustration: Pigs idea of heaven]




A Very Instructive Letter


Letter from C. R. Byrnes, Natchez, Miss., to G. H. Alford: "We are just
closing our second year of serious disaster from this little pest. We show
a decided improvement in 1910 over the year of 1909. Our acreage is about
one-half of what it was last year and we will make about the same crop as
last year. In my individual case, I made last year seventeen bales on 150
acres; this year I will make the same crop on eighty acres. You are aware
that I do not live on my own farm and have only negro tenants. I have
directed the management by not exceeding two visits to the farm each week
during the working season and have followed the government's directions as
well as I could, situated as I am. If I had lived on my farm far better
results could have been obtained. I have now more corn than I will require
for next year's crop and a good start of hogs and cattle. My farm has been
more than self-sustaining this year and I believe I will have a splendid
return next year, as I have so little to buy.


[Illustration: A tractor turning four furrows]


My success is due to the aid of Government instructions. To illustrate:
One of my negro tenants, when I told him in the month of May that he must
send his entire family into his cotton patch and pick every punctured
square from the cotton stalks and burn them and also kill the weevils to
be found, objected; said he did not believe in it. I replied that the
instructions were not original with me, that they were from the United
States Government, after a fifteen years' study of the boll weevil, and if
he thought he knew more about it than the Government I would try to place
him in the employ of the Government and get one of their men to come and
work his crop under his, the tenant's, direction. This remark had the
desired effect. He got the weevils and will make three bales of cotton on
eight acres, while he made only one and one-half bales on sixteen acres
last year.

Being a member of our Board of Supervisors, I insisted that our President,
manager of the convict farm, plant five acres in cotton and work it under
Government's instructions. He was opposed to planting any cotton. I
insisted on it, stating that I was not after the money it would bring, but
wanted it as an experiment and aid to our farmers, knowing that the labor
was there under absolute control, and that there would be no reason why it
could not be properly farmed. The five acres were planted and properly
worked--two heavy bales have been ginned and another light bale will be
picked. Now this was on thin upland, fertilized and worked as you would
have directed. Splendid results, is it not?

You are aware that this year and last year gave us too much rain in our
section to successfully combat the weevil, but we have doubled the yield
under similar conditions for each year and this increase is certainly due
to the good work done by the Government in our behalf. Many more farmers
will next year follow more closely your instructions and if we can get a
normal season as to rainfall, the cotton crop will, in my opinion, show
much more decidedly the value of the Government's work.

No doubt but this pest will spread until it covers the entire cotton belt
of the south. I can see work for you all the way to the Atlantic
Seaboard--work in front of you and work behind you. Have you ever thought
what a barren waste there might have been in the wake of this little giant
were it not for the valuable assistance rendered by our Government? As it
is we cover up his tracks almost as fast as they are made. Stand by us
until we are able to stand alone. Then you and all connected with you in
this good work will forever have the heart-felt thanks of all the farmers
here."


[Illustration: The modern method of preparing the soil]




Boll Weevil Literature


U. S. Senate Document 305, and Farmers' Bulletins 51, 74, 209, 211, 314,
344, 512. Published by U. S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.

Knapp's Method of Growing Cotton by H. E. Savely, and W. B. Mercier.
Published by Doubleday, Page and Company, Garden City, N. Y.

Southern Field Crops by J. F. Duggar. Published by the Macmillan Co., New
York.

Numerous publications may be obtained from the Louisiana Crop Pest
Commission, Baton Rouge, La.; the Texas A. M. College, College Station;
the Mississippi A. M. College, Agricultural College, Miss., and the
Alabama A. M. College, Auburn, Ala.




I H C Booklets


These booklets will be sent to any address upon receipt of the amounts
named below. Quantity lots are sent transportation charges collect.

  NAME                                       Single Copies  Quantities
                                                  Each         Each
  The Story of Bread                             $0 03        $0 02
  The Creeds of Great Business Men                  05           03
  Getting a Start with Alfalfa in the Corn Belt     02           01
  Lecture Notes for Alfalfa Charts                  04           03
  Studies in Alfalfa                                04           03
  Alfalfa Sermon                                    02           01
  Sweet Clover                                      04           03
  Seed Corn                                         03           02
  Alfalfa in the Cotton Belt                        02           01
  For Better Corn in the Cotton Belt                02           01
  Diversified Farming in the Cotton Belt            04           02
  The Boll Weevil                                   04           03
  The Cattle Tick                                   02           01
  For Better Crops in the South                     04           03
  I H C Demonstration Farms in the South            02           01
  For More and Better Corn in the Northwest         02           01
  Poultry Book                                      02           01
  The Golden Stream                                 05           02
  The Disk Harrow                                   04           02
  For Better Crops                                  06           03
  Engine Operator's Guide                           03           02
  The Story of Twine                                03           02
  Binder Twine Industry                             20           15
  Harvest Scenes of the World                       50           35

  "The Rag Doll" for Testing Seed Corn--
    Cloth, each 10c; per dozen, 75c.
    Paper, per dozen, 5c.
  Plans and Specifications for Farm Buildings, per plan, 5c.

Besides the booklets named above, from time to time there will be issued
other interesting agricultural booklets pertinent to crops in all parts of
the United States. Future issues will treat such subjects as cowpeas, soy
beans, peanuts, velvet beans, rice, sugar, cane, silos, feeds and feeding,
weeds, insects, etc.

  Agricultural Extension Department
  Harvester Building
  Chicago, Ill.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

Passages in bold are indicated by =bold=.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of How to Prosper in Boll Weevil Territory, by 
G. H. Alford

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROSPER IN BOLL WEEVIL TERRITORY ***

***** This file should be named 34729.txt or 34729.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/7/2/34729/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
