Project Gutenberg's Wrinkles in Electric Lighting, by Vincent Stephen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Wrinkles in Electric Lighting

Author: Vincent Stephen

Release Date: January 20, 2011 [EBook #35015]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WRINKLES IN ELECTRIC LIGHTING ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Harry Lame and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                                    |
  |                       TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES                          |
  |                                                                    |
  | * Some minor typographical errors corrected.                       |
  | * Inconsistencies in spelling and lay-out have not been corrected. |
  | * Italics are represented between underscores as in _italics_.     |
  | * Bold faced type is represented as in =bold face=.                |
  | * Sidenotes from the original work have been deleted from this     |
  |   e-text, since their sheer number made reading the text difficult.|
  |   The section titles given in the Table of Contents are the same   |
  |   as the original sidenotes.                                       |
  |                                                                    |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+




                                WRINKLES
                                   IN
                           ELECTRIC LIGHTING.




                                WRINKLES
                                   IN
                           ELECTRIC LIGHTING.

                                   BY

                            VINCENT STEPHEN.

                             [Illustration]

                  E. & F. N. SPON, 125, STRAND, LONDON.

                     NEW YORK: 12, CORTLANDT STREET.

                                  1888.




INTRODUCTION.


In the following pages it is my intention to give engineers on board
ship, who may be put in charge of electric lighting machinery without
having any electrical knowledge, some idea of the manner in which
electricity is produced by mechanical means; how it is converted into
light; what precautions must be used to keep the plant in order, and
what to do in the event of difficulties arising. I do not therefore aim
at producing a literary work, but shall try and explain everything in
the plainest language possible.




CONTENTS.


  THE ELECTRIC CURRENT, AND ITS PRODUCTION BY CHEMICAL MEANS.       PAGE

  Production of electric current in chemical battery--Current very
  weak--Current compared to circulation of the blood--Strength and
  volume of current--Pressure not sufficient without volume--Action
  of current is instantaneous--Resistance to the passage of the
  current--Copper the usual metal for conductors--Heat produced by
  current when wire is too small                                       1


  PRODUCTION OF ELECTRIC CURRENTS BY MECHANICAL MEANS.

  _Magneto-Electric Machines._

  Current produced by mechanical means--Alternating current--
  Magneto-electric machines--Shock produced by interruption of
  current--The current must be commutated--Description of
  commutator--Current, though alternating in the dynamo, is
  continuous in the circuit--Continuous current used for
  electro-plating                                                      5

  _Dynamo-Electric Machines._

  Current will magnetise an iron or steel bar--Permanent magnet--
  Electro-magnet--Where the magneto and dynamo machines differ--
  Armature of so-called continuous-current dynamo--Type of
  commutator--Commutator brushes--Current continuous in the
  circuit--Alternating-current dynamos--Current not commutated--
  Intense magnetic field produced--Simplicity of Ferranti armature--
  Large number of alternations of the current--Alternating current
  cannot be used to excite an electro-magnet--Exciter coupled on
  to same spindle as dynamo--Power of exciter if used alone            9


  ELECTRIC LAMPS.

  Production of electric light--Arc lights--Mechanism to regulate
  carbons--Some lamps suitable for alternating current--When
  carbons are consumed, light goes out--Arc lamps very complicated--
  Jablochkoff candles--Arc formed between the carbons--Candles
  require alternating current--Incandescent lamps--Vacuum formed
  in lamps prevents combustion--Vacuum not perfect--Advantages of
  incandescent lamps for house and ship lighting--Unaffected by
  wind, and suitable for either continuous or alternating currents    19


  LEADS.

  Leads made usually of copper wire--Short circuit--High E.M.F. for
  arc lights, but low for incandescent--Arc lights in series--
  Incandescent lamps in parallel circuit--E.M.F. same for one lamp
  as for a number--If lamps suitable, each one turns on and off
  separately--Safety fuses                                            24


  SHIP LIGHTING.

  Position for dynamo--Dynamo to be kept clean and cool--Quick-speed
  engines--Slow-speed engines with belts--Means of keeping belt on
  the pulley--Engine must work steadily--A good sensitive governor
  wanted--The belt must be kept tight--A handy belt-stretcher--
  Friction gearing--Switch board near dynamo--Leads of different
  colours--Main leads and branch leads--Lamps held in frosted
  globes--Switches for each lamp--Lamps of various candle-powers--
  Plan for lighting quarter-deck at times--Arrangement of
  temporary leads--Leads and lamps always ready, and easily fixed
  up--Lighting of ships' holds--Danger of fire with oil lamps--Arc
  lamps not suitable--Arrangement of leads for incandescent lamps--
  Work carried on better, and pilfering of cargo prevented--Hold
  leads disconnected while at sea--Installation complete--Lights
  wanted as night approaches--Precautions before starting dynamo--
  Lubrication must be perfect--Commutators and collectors require
  very little oil--Position of brushes--Start the engine--Switches
  not turned on; no current except from exciter--Testing work
  of exciter--Dynamos very powerful magnets--Look out for your
  watches--Switch on the lamps--Current is produced in large dynamo--
  Difference of a few lamps compensated by governor--Turn all
  lamps on, and light up gradually--Inequality of light in different
  lamps--Weeding out of bad lamps--Lamps not to be run too bright--
  No trouble with dynamo if oiling is attended to--Seizing--Oil
  must be thin--The dynamo must be kept clean--Little troubles with
  the lamps--No safety fuse--Effects of vibration of ship on lamps--
  What to look to if a lamp is out.--Recapitulation--A current of
  50 volts is hardly felt--Incandescent lights for side lights--
  Mast-head light--Arc light should never be used--Present mast-head
  light quite powerful enough--On passenger steamers, side one
  blaze of light, and side lights barely visible--Speed of dynamo
  constant, but steam power used in proportion to number of lamps
  in use--No danger to life from electric current on board ship--
  Binnacle lamps. Electric light not suitable--Dynamo if near a
  compass will affect it--Notes                                       27




WRINKLES IN ELECTRIC LIGHTING.

THE ELECTRIC CURRENT, AND ITS PRODUCTION BY CHEMICAL MEANS.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

It will first be necessary to explain how electric currents are produced
by means of chemicals. In a jar A, Fig. 1, are placed two plates B and
C, one zinc, and the other copper, each having connected to it at the
top a copper wire of any convenient length. The plates are kept in
position by means of pieces of wood, and the jar is about half filled
with a solution of salt and water, or sulphuric acid and water; if then
the two wires are joined, a current of electricity at once flows through
them, however long they may be. The current produced in this manner is
very weak, and does not even keep what strength it has for any length of
time, but rapidly gets weaker until quite imperceptible. The current
is, however, continuous; that is, it flows steadily in the one direction
through the wire, and may be used for ringing bells, or for other
purposes where a feeble current only is required to do intermittent
work. The wire E in connection with the copper plate is called the
positive lead, and the other the negative, and the current is said to
flow from the copper plate, through the wire E through the circuit to D,
and thence to the zinc plate, and through the liquid to the copper
plate. The current has often been compared to water flowing through a
pipe, but I think it can be better compared to the blood in the human
body, which through the action of the heart is continually forced
through the arteries and veins in one steady stream. There is, however,
this difference, that there is no actual progression of matter in the
electric current, it being like a ripple on water, which moves from end
to end of a lake without the water itself being moved across. Now that I
have given you an idea of how the current acts, I must try and explain
how different degrees of strength and volume are obtained. In the first
place, let us consider what constitute strength and volume in an
electric current, or at least try and get a general notion about them.
For this purpose I shall compare the electric current to water being
forced through a pipe; and the strength of the electric current, or
electromotive force, written for short E.M.F., will be like the pressure
of water at any part of the pipe. Two pipes may carry different
quantities of water, and yet the pressure may be the same in each; in
one a gallon of water may pass a given point in the same time that a
pint passes the same point in the other, and yet in each case the
different quantities may pass that point at the same speed. Thus in
electricity, two currents may be of different volume or quantity,
measured in amperes, and yet be of the same E.M.F. measured in volts; or
they may be of different E.M.F., or pressure, or intensity, and yet be
of the same volume. If any work is to be done by the water forced
through a pipe, such as turning a turbine, it is evident that pressure
of itself is not sufficient, seeing that a stream an inch in diameter
may be at the same pressure as another a foot in diameter. So with the
electric current, if work is to be done, such as driving a motor or
lighting a lamp, it is not sufficient to have a certain E.M.F.; there
must be quantity or volume in proportion to the amount of work, so that
if it takes a given quantity to work one lamp, it will take twice that
quantity to work two lamps of the same kind. It must not be inferred
from this, that if one lamp requires a certain E.M.F., that two lamps
will require it to be doubled, as such is not the case, except under
certain conditions which I will explain later on.

The action of electricity is practically instantaneous in any length of
wire, so that if the current is used to ring two bells a mile apart,
but connected by wires, they will commence to ring simultaneously. I
have so far not said anything about resistance to the passage of the
current through the wires. I shall therefore refer again to our
comparison of the current to water forced through a pipe, and you will
agree that a certain sized pipe will only convey a certain amount of
water in a given time. If a larger quantity is to be conveyed in the
same time, a greater pressure must be applied, or a larger pipe must be
used.

It is evident that increasing the size of the pipe will get over the
difficulty more readily than increasing the pressure of the water. The
pipes themselves offer a certain resistance to the passage of the water
through them, in the shape of friction; so that if an effect is to be
produced at a distance, rather more pressure is required than if it is
done close at hand, so as to make up for the loss sustained by friction.

Much the same may be said of the electric current; a certain sized wire
will only carry a certain current, and if more current is required, a
thicker wire must be used to convey it, or it must be of a greater
E.M.F. It is usually more convenient to increase the thickness of the
wire than to increase the E.M.F. of the current. The wire offers a
certain resistance to the passage of the current through it, which may
be compared to friction, and this resistance varies according to the
metal of which it is composed. Copper is the metal in ordinary use for
wires for electric lighting purposes, and the purer it is the better
will it convey the current. Iron is used for telegraph wires on account
of cheapness, the current used being so small that this metal conveys it
readily enough; if copper were used, the wires will only require to be
about one-third the diameter of the iron ones. The following are the
respective values for electrical conductivity of various metals when
pure, taking silver as a standard:--Silver 100, copper 99.9, gold 80,
zinc 29, brass 22, iron 16.8, tin 13.1, lead 8.3, mercury 1.6.

If a wire is made to convey a current which is too large for its
electrical capacity, it will get heated, which decreases its
conductivity, with the result that the heat increases until finally the
wire fuses. I shall have more to say about this when speaking of
electric lighting.




PRODUCTION OF ELECTRIC CURRENTS BY MECHANICAL MEANS.


_Magneto-electric Machines._

I have shown how the electric current is produced by the action of
chemical or primary batteries, and how this current will flow through
suitable conductors. I shall now explain how mechanical power may be
converted into electricity. It has been found that if a wire, preferably
of copper, of which the ends are joined together, is moved past a magnet
a current is induced in the wire, flowing in one direction while the
wire is approaching the magnet, and in the opposite direction while it
is receding from it. This is then not a continuous current like we
obtained from the chemical battery, but an alternating one, and you will
see later on how it can be made to produce similar effects. The oftener
the wire passes the magnet the more electricity is generated, so that if
we make a coil of the wire and move a large number of parts of wire past
at one time, the effects on each part are accumulated; and if instead of
having one magnet to pass before, we have several, the effects will be
doubled or trebled, &c., in proportion to the number. If, again, the
coil is moved at an increased speed past the magnets, the effects will
be still further increased.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The knowledge of these facts led to the construction of the various
magneto-electric machines, of which a familiar type is seen in those
small ones used for medical purposes. They contain a large horse-shoe
magnet, close to the end of which two bobbins of copper wire are made to
revolve at a high speed, and all who have used these machines know that
the more quickly they turn the handle the greater shock the person
receives who is being operated upon. The current generated is really
very feeble, the shock being produced by interrupting it at every half
revolution by means of a small spring or other suitable mechanism. If
the current is not so interrupted, it cannot be felt at all, which may
be proved by lifting up the spring on the spindle of the ordinary kind.
The current is an alternating one, and changes its direction throughout
the circuit, however extended it may be, at every half revolution. If it
is required to have a continuous current, use must be made of what is
termed a commutator, and I shall endeavour to explain the manner in
which it acts as simply as possible. Without going into any further
details as to the construction of the bobbins, and their action at any
particular moment, I shall content myself with saying that if the wire
on the two bobbins is continuous, and the ends are connected, the
current will flow one way during half a revolution, and the other way
during the other half. Now, in Fig. 2, on the spindle A on which the
bobbins are fixed, is fitted a split collar formed of two halves B and
C, to which are joined respectively the ends of the wires + and -. This
collar is insulated from the spindle by a suitable insulating material,
that is to say, a material which does not conduct electricity, such as
wood, ivory, &c., and is represented in Fig. 2 by the dark parts D. So
far the circuit is not complete, so that however quickly you turn the
machine no current is produced. If, however, some means is employed for
joining B and C by a conductor, the alternating current is produced as
before. In Fig. 3, I show a section through B A C. On a base E made of
wood, are fixed two metal springs F and G, which are made to press
against B and C respectively; wires are connected at H and K, which,
joined together, complete the circuit. A continuous current is said to
be + or positive where it leaves a battery, and - or negative where it
returns; it will be convenient to use these signs and terms in the
following explanation. At one portion of the revolution the spindle will
be in the position shown in Fig. 3, and the + current is flowing into B,
through F, to the terminal H, thence through the circuit to the terminal
K, through G to C, and so back through the - wire to the bobbins of the
machine. In Fig. 4 the spindle has made a half revolution, bringing B in
contact with G, and C with F. But by this half turn the current is
reversed in the bobbins, and the + current flows into C, through F, to
terminal H as before, and through the circuit to K, through G and B,
back to the bobbins. Thus you see that in the circuit the current will
be always in the same direction, or continuous, although in the bobbins
it is alternating, and may be used for any purpose for which a
continuous current is required, such as electro-plating, &c.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

There are various forms of the magneto-electric machines, as well as of
commutators, but the foregoing shows the general principle of them all.


_Dynamo-electric Machines._

It will now be necessary to explain the nature of a dynamo-electric
machine, called, for shortness, a dynamo, and to show in what it
differs from a magneto-electric machine.

I have explained how an electric current is produced by a wire passing
in front of a magnet; now, this magnet may either be of the ordinary
kind, or it may be what is termed an electro-magnet. One of the effects
which electricity can be made to produce is the magnetising of steel
bars to form the ordinary and well-known permanent magnets which are
used in ships' compasses, &c. To produce this effect, part of the wire
in a circuit is made into a spiral as in Fig. 5.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

The steel rod to be magnetised is placed within the spiral, and a
continuous current of electricity is then sent through the wire, which
causes the rod to become magnetised with a North pole at one end, and a
South pole at the other. The more current is passed through the circuit,
and the more turns are in the spiral, the more quickly and strongly is
the rod magnetised; and it will retain its magnetism for an indefinite
time if made of suitable steel. There is a point at which the metal is
said to be saturated with magnetism, and the strength it has then
acquired will be that which it will retain afterwards, although while
under the influence of the current that strength may be considerably
exceeded. If instead of a steel rod one of iron is placed in the
spiral, and the current is passed through as before, it will be
magnetised in the same manner; but as soon as the current is stopped,
the rod loses almost all its magnetism, and if the current is then
passed in the opposite direction the rod will be magnetised in the
opposite way. The softer and more homogeneous is the iron, the more
instantaneously will it acquire and lose its magnetism, and the greater
strength of magnetism it is able to acquire. An iron bar, round which
are wound a large number of turns of insulated or covered wire,
constitutes an electro-magnet. The difference then between a
magneto-electric and a dynamo-electric machine is, that in the former
permanent magnets are used, and in the latter electro-magnets take their
place. I do not intend to go into particulars as to the construction of
the various dynamos in present use, as there are many books to be had in
which these machines are fully described. I need merely say that in the
so-called continuous-current dynamos, the whole or part of the current
produced is made to pass through the coils of the electro-magnets, thus
inducing in them the required magnetism. I showed how, in the
magneto-electric machine, the currents are collected by means of a
commutator, and it is evident that in Figs. 2, 3, and 4 there might be
separate wires coming from each bobbin to B and C; and if there were
more than two bobbins, there might still be two wires from each to B
and C. On the other hand the collecting collar might be split into more
sections; in fact there might be as many sections as bobbins. To show
how the current is collected in continuous-current dynamos, I must give
a short explanation of the revolving part or armature of a standard type
of machine.

In Fig. 6 is shown a horse-shoe magnet, with its North and South poles,
N and S. Between these poles is made to revolve the armature, composed
of a number of coils of wire made to form a ring like a life-buoy. The
ends of the wires are made to lie along a collar on the spindle, made of
some insulating material, each wire being parallel to its neighbour, and
kept separate from it, as shown in Fig. 7.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

These wires are so arranged that if one end of a sectional coil is on
top of the spindle at a given moment, the other will be on the under
side. If then, as shown in Fig. 7, a rubber of copper, made in the form
of a brush of copper wire for convenience, is placed in contact with the
upper part of the commutator collar, and another similar one with the
lower, it is evident the circuit will be completed in the same manner as
before explained.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. Edison Dynamo.]

A wire which is + when above the spindle, will be - when below it,
and as the spindle revolves the current changes in the various wires
from - to + as they reach the top, so that it will always therefore
be + in the upper brush and - in the lower one, and will accordingly be
continuous through the circuit. It will be seen in the illustrations
of various continuous-current dynamos, that though their shape and
arrangement differ, the mode of collecting the current is much about the
same as I have described above. Figs. 8 and 9 show some of the
continuous-current dynamos at present in use.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. Brush Dynamo.]

I will now explain the nature of an alternating-current dynamo.

The principal difference between the continuous-and alternating-current
dynamo, is in the number of magnets used. Most of the former have only
four magnets, while the latter have frequently as many as thirty-two. In
reality, as I have shown, these are all alternating-current dynamos,
only that in the so-called continuous-current ones, the current is
commutated, whereas in the others it is not, but is used as it is
produced. In the principal alternating-current dynamos, a number of
small magnets, usually sixteen, are attached to a framework directly
opposite a similar number of others of the same size, the space between
the ends being only about an inch or two. These are all electro-magnets,
and are wound in such manner that when excited by a current, every
alternate one shall have the same magnetism, as in Fig. 10, and every
opposite one a contrary magnetism.

This produces an intense magnetic field between the ends of the magnets,
and in this space revolves the armature. This armature, in the Siemens
dynamo, is composed of a disc having as many bobbins on the periphery as
there are magnets on each side of the dynamo. As each bobbin approaches
each magnet a current is induced in one direction, which is reversed
when the bobbin recedes; thus an alternating current is produced, which
is collected by connecting the ends to insulated rings or collars on the
spindle, and having small copper brushes or rubbers in contact with
them. In the Ferranti dynamo, the armature is quite different, and much
more simple, as comparison of Figs. 11 and 12 will show.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

[Illustration: FIG. 11. Siemens Armature.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12. Ferranti Armature.]

It consists of a copper tape bent in and out so as to form a sort of
star with eight arms, the number of layers of insulated copper tape
being from ten to thirty, according to requirements. The centre is made
in a similar shape with bolts or rivets holding each convolution in
place. The two ends of the tape are attached respectively to two
collector-rings on the spindle, against which press two solid metal
rubbers which carry off the current for use in the circuit. It can be
shown that as each arm approaches a magnet a current will be induced in
one direction, which will be reversed as each arm recedes; and therefore
an alternating current will be produced. As there are sixteen magnets
for the armature to pass at each revolution, there must be sixteen
alternations of the current during the same time, so that if the speed
of the armature is 500 revolutions per minute, there will be 500 x 16 =
8000 alternations in one minute. These alternations being so extremely
rapid, when this current is used for electric lighting, the steadiness
of the light will be in no way affected, but will remain as constant as
with a continuous current.

[Illustration: FIG. 13. Siemens Alternating Dynamo.]

The alternating current produced by these dynamos cannot be used for
exciting an electro-magnet, as the magnetism would be reversed at every
alternation; a separate small dynamo of the continuous type is therefore
used as an exciter to magnetise all the electro-magnets in the field,
and it is usually coupled on to the same spindle, and therefore goes at
the same speed as the alternating-current dynamo. The exciter is usually
of a size to be able to do alone about one-tenth to one-twentieth of
the work that the larger machines does in the way of lighting; so that
if from any cause the latter is disabled while the ship lighted by it is
at sea, the exciter may be used alone to do a portion of the lighting,
in the first-class saloon for instance. This can only be done if the
exciter is so constructed as to give the proper E.M.F. that the lamps
require.

[Illustration: FIG. 14. Ferranti Alternating Dynamo.]

Figs. 13 and 14 are illustrations of two of the alternating current
dynamos in use on board ship and elsewhere.




ELECTRIC LAMPS.


I have explained how power can be converted into electric currents,
either continuous or alternating, and I must now show how these currents
can be applied to the production of light.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

The current may be used to produce an _arc light_ in the following
manner:--Two carbon rods, A and B, are held by suitable means in the
position shown in Fig. 15, and the two wires from a dynamo are joined
respectively to A and B, the upper one always being the positive lead
when a continuous current is used. When the current is sent through the
circuit, it passes through the carbons A and B, which are conductors.
Immediately this occurs, suitable mechanism in the lamp, being acted on
by the current, or by hand in the case of search-lights, or by
clock-work, moves the two carbons a small distance apart, with the
consequence that a dazzling arc of light is formed between them. If the
carbons get too far apart, the mechanism brings them nearer together
again, and on the delicacy with which it acts, depends the steadiness of
the light. It would be useless to explain how this mechanism acts, as it
is in a different form in each maker's lamp. Some lamps have been
constructed for use with an alternating current, but with the majority a
continuous current is used. While an arc light is burning the carbons
waste away, the upper one more rapidly than the lower, and the mechanism
has to approach them constantly to make up for this waste.

When the carbons are consumed as far as convenient, an automatic
arrangement cuts off the current, and the light goes out; or it diverts
the current to another set of carbons, which at once light up. The
carbons are made in suitable lengths to last a certain number of hours,
four, six, eight, &c. In Fig. 16 is shown an arc lamp complete.

[Illustration: FIG. 16. Arc Lamp Complete.]

An arc lamp is of necessity a complicated affair, which it is not
advisable to have on board ship, except where an electrician is engaged
permanently.

Another way of producing light is to use the current in what is called
an _electric candle_, of which a familiar type is the Jablochkoff
candle.

Fig. 17 shows the form of this candle, A and B being two carbon rods
parallel to one another, and joined, but at the same time insulated from
one another by kaolin, a sort of chalky substance, which is a
non-conductor.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.]

The wires C and D from the dynamo are joined respectively to A and B
through metallic supports, as in an arc lamp, and when the current is
turned on it flows through C A and across by a small strip of carbon E
to B and D back to the dynamo. The strip E is only large enough to carry
the current across for a moment, and is immediately consumed, but an arc
of light is then formed between the carbons as in the arc lamp. As the
carbons consume, the kaolin in between burns away, just in the same
manner as, in an ordinary candle, the wick is consumed and the wax melts
and burns away, except that in the latter case the wax feeds the light,
whereas the kaolin is only used to keep the carbons the required
distance apart and the arc of light from running down them. It is
evident that the carbons must be consumed equally, for which reason use
must be made of the alternating current. Any unsteadiness that occurs in
the light produced is consequent on unsteadiness of the current, or
impurities in the carbons, &c., there being no mechanism of any kind
required. These candles do not give such a great light as arc lights,
but it is of the same nature in every way. Fig. 18 shows one of these
candles in its holder, from which can be seen how electrical contact is
made with the two carbons.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

If the current is interrupted in any way, and the light goes out, it
will not be produced again automatically, but requires a small piece of
carbon between the two carbons as a path for the current to pass across
as in the beginning.

A third form of electric light is produced by using the current in an
_incandescent lamp_.

To explain the action of an incandescent lamp, I must refer back to what
I said about wires getting heated by a current being passed through them
which was too large for their capacity. If two large wires are joined by
a small one, and a strong current is passed through the circuit, the
small wire rapidly gets red hot, and finally fuses. If this small wire
is contained in a globe from which the air is exhausted, when the
current is passed through it, it gets red, then white hot, and when
very brilliant gets fused. If, instead of wire, we have in the small
globe a thin filament of carbon, when the current is passed through, we
get a brilliant light which remains constant because the carbon does not
fuse, and it cannot burn away for want of air. Fig. 19 shows a Swan
lamp, and Fig. 20 an Edison lamp, both made on this principle.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

If in these lamps the vacuum were perfect, the carbon filament would
never get consumed; it is, however, impossible to get a perfect vacuum,
but the better it is, the longer will the filament last. Incandescent
lamps are the only ones that are suitable for house or ship lighting.
[Advantages of incandescent lamps for house and ship lighting.] They
give a yellowish light like a good gas-flame, they do not consume the
air of a room, they cause no smell, and only give out a very slight
heat. They are perfectly safe, because if the globe gets broken and
allows air to get in, the filament is instantly consumed, and the light
goes out. They can be put in all sorts of places where it would be
impossible to have any other lamps, such as near the ceiling, close to
curtains, in a room full of explosives or combustibles, and even under
water. They are not affected by wind; they can therefore be used under
punkahs, or near open windows, sky-lights, or ports, or in the open air.
These lamps can be used with either continuous or alternating currents,
but will probably last longer with the latter, because, when a
continuous current is used, particles of the carbon of the filament
appear to be conveyed from one end of the filament to the other,
reducing the thickness at the one end, until finally it breaks. This
evidently cannot occur with an alternating current, as the impulse in
one direction is counteracted by the following one in the opposite
direction. If the current used is of too high a tension for the lamps,
they will show an intensely brilliant light for a short time, but the
filament will soon be destroyed, and the lamp rendered useless.




LEADS.


We have now to consider the means used for conveying the current,
continuous or alternating, to the lamps we intend to use. The leads for
the electric current, which correspond in some measure with the pipes
which convey gas, are made of copper wire, as pure as can be obtained,
covered with some insulating material to prevent the escape of the
current through contact with other conductors. The size of the wire is
regulated according to the amount of current which is to be conveyed; it
will do no harm to have it of twice the required section, but if it is
of less than the required section, it will offer so much resistance to
the passage of the current, that it will probably get fused in a very
short time. If the lead attached to one terminal of the dynamo comes
back to the other terminal without there being any lamps in the circuit,
or other means of making use of the current, it is said to be short
circuited, and if the dynamo is kept going something must give out very
soon. The two leads must therefore never be connected with one another,
except by a lamp or other resistance, and the manner in which the lamps
are placed, and the size of the leads, depend upon the relative tension
and quantity of current and the kind of lamps to be used. If the current
is to be used in arc lamps it is usual to have a high E.M.F., which
allows of the leads being of small section; but if it is to be used in
incandescent lamps it is found more convenient to have a low E.M.F., and
as this implies a large quantity of current, the leads have to be of
large section.

Arc lamps usually require to be placed in series, that is to say, in
such a manner that the current, after leaving the dynamo, passes through
each lamp in succession. The E.M.F. required in this case is the sum of
the E.M.F. for each lamp, the quantity required being the same as for
one lamp. This accounts for the high E.M.F. used in arc lighting and
the small size of the wire for conducting the current. Incandescent
lamps can be either in series or parallel, and frequently the two
systems are combined. To explain the meaning of having lamps parallel,
we will suppose the two leads from a dynamo to be taken along a wall,
parallel to one another, and about six inches apart, ending at the end
of the wall, but not connected in any way. If we then place lamps at
intervals between the two leads, connecting one loop of each to the
upper lead, and the other to the lower lead, by means of small copper
wire, these lamps are said to be all parallel. In this arrangement the
current required is the sum of the quantity necessary for each lamp, but
the E.M.F. is the same as that required for one lamp of the same kind.
As we therefore require to send a large quantity of current through the
leads at a small pressure or E.M.F., these leads must be of large
section. In the above arrangement each lamp may be turned on or off
separately without affecting the others. Sometimes two or more lamps are
placed in groups between the parallel leads; these are then in series
with regard to one another, and can only be turned on or off two or more
at a time, in other words, one group at a time. If our dynamo is
producing a current of 100 volts E.M.F. when working at its proper
speed, and our lamps are 100-volt lamps, we shall be able to turn each
lamp on or off separately; but if we want to put in 50-volt lamps, we
must place two together, and we shall then have to turn them on or off
two at a time. I am supposing that in both cases the lamps require the
same quantity of current, though of different E.M.F.

To prevent the lamps being spoilt by the current being too strong
through a sudden increase in the speed of the dynamo, as also to prevent
the leads getting fused, and perhaps setting fire to the casing, it is
usual to have safety fuses in various parts of the circuit. These are of
different kinds, but a typical one consists of a small lead wire, large
enough to carry the normal current, but which fuses when the current is
too strong, and at once interrupts its passage. The lamps in the same
portion of the circuit are then extinguished and so saved from
destruction, and cannot then be lighted again until the fuse is renewed,
which, however, can be done with ease.




SHIP LIGHTING.


We will consider now the case of a steamship to be lighted by means of
incandescent lamps. It is sometimes a matter of some difficulty to fix
on a suitable position for the dynamo and engine, especially in ships
which have already been running for some time. In selecting a position,
it must be borne in mind that a dynamo will work best in a cool clean
place, cleanliness being most important. If a lot of coal dust is flying
about where the dynamo is working, it will be drawn into it, and tend to
impair its electrical, as well as mechanical efficiency. If the dynamo
is kept properly lubricated, it will work well enough in a hot place,
but we must remember that the heating of the wire which makes up a large
portion of the dynamo, reduces its conductivity, so that the cooler it
is kept the better. The dynamo should be so placed that the engineer can
get to every side of it easily. If a quick-speed engine is to be used
for driving it direct, it will make a very compact installation, but
there seems to be some difficulty as yet in getting suitable reliable
engines, besides which many marine engineers object to quick-speed
engines altogether. If a slow-speed engine is to be used, a belt is of
course required to get the necessary speed on the dynamo, and various
precautions are needful to prevent the belt slipping off the pulley when
the ship is rolling about in a sea-way. In all cases, the engine and
dynamo should be placed with their spindles fore-and-aft, or in a line
with the ship's keel, the rolling being felt more than the pitching.
There are various ways of keeping the belt from slipping off the pulley.
Some have flanges on the pulley, others have guides or rollers on each
side of the belt, each plan having its advantages and disadvantages; but
some plan must be used, otherwise the belt slips off, usually in the
middle of the first-saloon dinner, and out go all the lights, besides
which the belt may be considerably damaged before the engine can be
stopped. The engine must be one that will work very steadily, otherwise
the lights will pulsate at each revolution of the engine, which is most
unpleasant. If the engine is a single one, it must have a large
fly-wheel, or a driving-wheel large and heavy enough to answer the same
purpose. The engine requires a good sensitive governor, so as to keep
the speed regular when some of the lamps are turned on or off. When the
engine and dynamo are in the main engine-room, the throttle-valve, or a
stop-valve, should be in a convenient place for the engineer on watch to
get at so as to instantly shut off the steam if the belt slips off or
breaks. In ships where an electrician is carried there will not be the
same necessity for this precaution. It is necessary to have some means
of tightening up the belt, so as to keep it from slipping round the
pulley. Where the engine and dynamo are on the same level there may be a
screw arrangement in the base-plate of the latter by which the distance
between centres can be increased. Where the engine and dynamo are on
different levels, and the latter is a fixture, recourse must be had to a
roller, bearing against the upper part of the belt and capable of screw
adjustment. If link leather belting is used, it will be found necessary
to take out several rows of links each day until it has finished
stretching. A very handy thing to use for this purpose, and which can be
made on board by an engineer, is a double clamp with a screw in between,
just like the ones which are being sold for stretching trousers which
have got baggy at the knees. Whatever belt is used, it is very important
that there should be no joint or inequality which can cause a jump or
slip when going over the pulley, as this will cause the lights to
pulsate each time. In America friction gearing has been tried, but I do
not know with what success. From my experience of friction gearing, I am
inclined to think it might do very well. There is certainly no doubt
that direct-acting quick-speed engines are the ones to use, and it is
only a question of getting a suitable one.

The dynamo being firmly fixed in position, the main leads are connected
to it, and carried along to the switch-board, which should be in a
convenient position near at hand. On this switch-board are usually
placed the large safety fuses. The board should have a cover to it, to
prevent any one meddling with it, and to keep it clean. The main leads
are of a large size, and from these other smaller ones branch off, being
spliced and soldered to them. It is a very good practice to use leads of
two different colours, as we can then work by the following rule: Never
connect together two leads of different colours except by means of a
lamp or other resistance. The size of the various leads depends on the
current to be conveyed, and is a matter for the electricians. On the
main-deck of a large passenger steamer, the main leads may be carried
along side by side under the upper deck, and from these, smaller ones
branch off into the various sets of rooms, smaller ones still going into
each room. In each room there will be one lamp with its switch to turn
it on or off as desired, and a safety fuse. The lamps are held in small
brackets, and are contained when desired in frosted globes, which
diffuse the light and make it very pleasant. When these globes are held
rigidly in the brackets, the least knock breaks them. A very good
bracket I have seen in use is one which allows the globe to move about
on its support when touched, being at the same time sufficiently a
fixture to resist the motion of the ship; and in the particular ship in
which I saw these used in the first saloon, there was not a single
breakage during a four months' voyage. The switches for turning each
light on or off can be under the control of the passengers, or, on the
other hand, they can be fitted to work with keys kept by the stewards,
as thought most desirable.

The lamps used can be of various candle-powers, within certain limits,
and of whatever make is considered best. They can also be of various
makes, as long as they are constructed to stand the same E.M.F. The
lamps in the passenger berths give quite sufficient light if of
10-candle power; the ones for lighting the saloons, passages, and other
large spaces, may with advantage be of 20-candle power. In these days of
luxurious travelling, when the various lines are trying to attract
passengers to their particular ships, what follows may be thought worth
consideration. In steamers going through the tropics to India, China,
Australia, &c., it is usual to get up dances, concerts, and other
entertainments on the quarter-deck, at times when it would be impossible
to do anything below on account of the heat. The quarter-deck then has
to be lighted up. This is effected by means of globe oil-lamps hung
about here and there, two being hung in front of the piano, in
unpleasant proximity to the head of the obliging lady pianist. Now in a
ship lighted by electricity, there is no reason why a couple of leads
should not be brought up from below through a skylight or other opening,
on to the quarter-deck. Indeed the leads might be arranged to screw into
a place in the deck, or on the side of a skylight, just in the same
manner as a hose is connected for washing decks. These leads would have
holders for lamps fitted permanently at intervals, and when required for
use would be stopped up along the awning-spar or ridge-chains, and the
lamps screwed or hooked into the holders. With a few handy men, five or
ten minutes would suffice to arrange the whole thing after the leads had
once been fitted. The leads once fitted for this purpose would be
always ready for use, and could be kept coiled away in a box which might
also have a compartment to contain the dozen or so of lamps required.

If the dynamo is already running as many lamps as it is capable of, some
of the bedroom lights may be turned off while the quarter-deck is being
lighted. Another thing which I think has not yet been done is the
following. When working cargo at night, and indeed during the day to
some extent, lights are of necessity used in the holds. The _theory_ is,
that no naked lights shall be allowed, but the _practice_ is this: lamps
are taken below, get knocked about, the wicks fall down and want
pricking up, the lamps are opened for this purpose, and as they are
found to give more light without a dusty glass round them than with it,
they are left open. Candles are often taken below lighted, and even
matches struck to see the mark on a bale. I am aware that arc lamps are
used in the Royal Albert Docks, London, in connection with the dock
lighting, lamps being carried below when required, with flexible leads
attached, and that, in some few steamers, arc lamps have been used in
the same manner in connection with their own plant. These arc lamps are,
I think, not nearly as suitable as incandescent lamps for the purpose of
lighting up a ship's hold; the light is too glaring, and casts deep
shadows amongst the bales and cases, besides which, the lamps are large
and clumsy. I would suggest that leads should be carried behind the
stringer-battens in the ship's side, or along under the next upper-deck,
having simple sockets or holders for incandescent lamps at certain
intervals. Whoever might be in charge of the hold would screw or hook on
the lamps as required, and so light up every part of the hold thoroughly
while work was going on. There would be no risk of fire, and I am
convinced that the extra leads and lamps would pay for themselves in a
very short time, because work would get on more quickly, and pilfering
of the cargo would be in a great measure put a stop to. The leads for
the holds could be so arranged as to be quite unconnected with the
dynamo while at sea, so that there could not be the remotest possibility
of the current finding its way below when not wanted. In fine, there is
no reason whatever why a ship's hold should not be lighted up when
required, as well as a warehouse or store on shore.

Now, we will suppose that our installation is complete, ready for
working, everything having been pronounced in order by the electrician
who has looked after the work. Evening is approaching, and the lights
will soon be required; we must therefore see that our engine and dynamo
are ready for a start. If the engine and dynamo are separate, the belt
must be felt, to see that it is tight enough, otherwise it must be
tightened by whatever means are provided for the purpose. We must also
see that the engine and dynamo are properly oiled, and that the
worsteds are down the tubes of the oil-cups, and working properly, not
dry, as I have known them to be, with fatal results to the dynamo. If
the lubrication is performed by means of tubes leading to each bearing
from an elevated oil-box, we must see that the oil really gets to the
bearings, and regulate its flow as required. The commutators and
collector-rings and rubbers require only a wipe of oil, just sufficient
to prevent undue wearing of the surfaces; if too much is put on them,
they will spark a great deal, and sparking will wear them away more
quickly than friction. The brushes of copper wire which collect the
current of the exciter dynamo, and others of similar pattern, must be
placed so that the ends press on the commutator as shown in Fig. 21.
The ends should project just a little way beyond the point or
line of contact, and when the dynamo is running, there should be
very little sparking. I am supposing that our plant consists of an
alternating-current dynamo with a small exciter. The wires leading from
the exciter to the other dynamo remain always connected, as there is no
need for meddling with them.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]

We will now start the engine, and thereby set the dynamo going round,
slowly at first, and gradually up to the speed required. The main
switches are not yet turned on, so there is no current going through the
leads as yet; what then is being done? A current is being produced by
the exciter only, and is magnetising the electro-magnets of the larger
dynamo, and if we want to know if it is really doing its work as
intended, we just hold a small pocket-compass over the ends of two
opposite magnets of the dynamo, and observe how the needle points. It
should at once take up the position shown in Fig. 22, and if then held
over the next couple in like manner, the needle should simply turn
round, and point in exactly the opposite direction. If it points in any
other direction, there is something wrong with the connections. If,
however, the connections are right at starting, they will of course
remain right, and there should be no need for this test. It is well to
remember that when dynamos are working, they are, or contain for the
time being, very powerful magnets, therefore if we bend over them to
examine them, our watches will get magnetised, which does not improve
their qualities as time-keepers. Say that our dynamo is now going round
at the required speed, which may be 500 or 600 revolutions per minute;
the engine is not using much steam as yet, because very little work is
being done. We now switch on a set of lamps; this closes the circuit,
and the large dynamo begins to produce its alternating current, which
goes through the lamps and lights them up. This, however, gives the
engine more work to do, and more steam must be turned on, otherwise the
necessary speed will not be kept up. We switch on all the other lamps as
required, and must see that the speed of the dynamo is kept constant. A
difference of a few lamps, affecting the engine to a small extent only,
should be compensated automatically by the governor. If the brightest
lamps are not bright enough, the speed should be increased a little, but
care must be taken not to overdo it, because if the current is too
strong, some of the safety fuses will melt, and the corresponding lamps
will go out. It must not be inferred from what I have said, that it is
necessary to run the dynamo at first without switching on any lamps. On
the contrary, a better effect will be produced if all the lamps are
switched on before starting, as they will then gradually work up to
their full brilliancy; whereas, if one set of lamps is started first,
and run bright, and we then switch on another set, the current at first
will be too small for the two sets, and the first set will get quite
dull, remaining so until the dynamo is going at its proper speed again.
When lighted up for the first time, it will be found that some of the
lamps are much brighter than others; this is because the lamps at
present made are not of perfectly equal resistances. We must go round,
then, and note where the dull ones are, and we can either at once, or
during next day, shift them into the bathrooms and places where such a
perfect light is not required. All the lamps in one room, the first
saloon, or music room, for instance, should be equalised as much as
possible, and in such places the brightest should be used. Nothing looks
worse than to see a couple of dull lights in the same room as a lot of
bright ones. By seeing to these matters we can make the lighting much
more satisfactory than it otherwise would be. During the first few
evenings we shall probably have some of the lamps go out through the
filaments breaking. This I consider a weeding out of defective lamps,
because if it were that the current was too strong, the fuses would have
given way. Some of the fuses give way when the current is _not_ too
strong; this is owing to imperfections in the fuses, and they must be
replaced by spare ones. For the sake of economy, it is well not to run
the lamps too bright. Without giving the lamps the maximum current a
very good light can be obtained, and they will last all the longer. I
need hardly say that there is a medium in this as in everything else,
and it does not look well when a candle is placed alongside of an
electric lamp to enable a person to read or write in comfort.

All this time the dynamo is running, and we must feel the bearings
occasionally to see if they are keeping cool. There will be no trouble
if the lubrication is all right. If the oil does not get into the
bearings as it should do, they will heat, jam the spindle, or seize, and
bring up the engine or break the belt. The lights will then all go out,
and everybody will say hard things of the electric light, while the
fault really rests with us. Sometimes seizing occurs through the spindle
not being slack enough in the bearings, but this generally occurs while
testing the dynamo at the works.

It must be borne in mind that in dynamos the spindle must be a good fit,
and there may be room in the bearings for ordinary engine-oil while
there may not be for a thicker oil, such as castor oil. Therefore, if
the bearings show a tendency to heat, it may improve matters to thin the
oil used with petroleum. While giving the dynamo its proper supply of
oil, we must only apply it in the proper places. If we let the bobbins
get smothered in oil, the insulating material on the wire will get
rotted, and a short circuiting will probably take place. The dynamo
cannot be kept too clean, and there should be a canvas cover to put over
it while not in use, especially while coaling. We will suppose that all
is going on right; a steward comes along and says: "Mr. So-and-so, I
cannot get the lamp in number 6 berth to light although I have turned
the switch the right way." "All right, I will go and look at it," you
answer. Now, let us see what is the matter. We unhook or unscrew the
lamp, and look at the filament; it is not broken. We replace the lamp
again, and are careful that it makes good contact; but still no light.
Let us look at the safety fuse; why, there is none! it has been missed
out. We get one of the spare ones out of our electric store, and put it
in its place, and the lamp lights properly at once. We find another lamp
out, and look at it. We see at once that the filament is broken, so
there is no question about this one; it must be changed. Hallo! what is
up with this one? it goes in and out all the time like a flash light.
The current must be getting to it all right, otherwise it would not
light at all. I see what it is; it is a Swan lamp, and the spring is not
pressing quite fairly on it, so that one hook is making good contact,
while the other tightens and slacks with the vibration of the ship. This
is soon set right by turning the spring round a little, or hooking the
lamp the other way. Or it is an Edison lamp, which has got slightly
unscrewed, and no longer makes good contact at the back end of the
holder. In some lamp-fittings the ends of the leads are held in a spring
grip in the base of the bracket, and it may happen that they have
slipped out, and so broken the circuit, and extinguished the light. In
the Swan lamps, and others of a similar pattern, one of the little
platinum loops in the base of the lamps sometimes gets broken off; the
lamp is then of no further use. To recapitulate, if a lamp goes out, the
first thing is to see if the filament is broken, next if it makes good
contact. If it does not then light up, see if there is any current
getting to it; this may be found out by touching the two hooks in a Swan
holder, or the back and side of an Edison screw holder, with a moistened
finger. With a current of 50 volts a slight tickling sensation will be
felt if the current is passing through. If this cannot be felt, there
must be some part or other disconnected, perhaps the safety fuse has
given out, or the ends of the leads got adrift from the bracket. If in
any doubt about the lamp, try another in the same place.

In some steamers incandescent lamps are used in the side lamps; they can
easily be fitted for this purpose, especially when the ship is provided
with lighthouses built in, as in the Anchor Line steamers. Two or more
incandescent lamps can be arranged on a small stand, which will slide
into the lantern, taking the place of the regulation oil lamp, and
connected by flexible leads to the other leads. It would be easy to put
six 20-candle power lamps in a group in each lantern, as it does not
matter in what position they are placed; two might be used on ordinary
occasions, while on a foggy night, the whole six could be switched on.
If one lamp went out through the filament giving way, it would not
affect the others, so that there would still be a light in the lantern.
If, through some breakdown of the engine or dynamo, the electric current
were no longer to be had, then it would only be necessary to withdraw
the stand of lamps, and put in the ordinary regulation oil-lamp. The
mast-head lamp could also be fitted with the electric light, as indeed
has already been done. On no account, however, should an arc light be
used, as besides being too dazzling, it is much too uncertain; in fact
many other reasons could be given for rejecting it. It is even a
question whether it is an advantage to have incandescent lamps for a
mast-head light. There is certainly the great advantage of not having to
pull the lamp up and down to trim it, a rather risky performance in
heavy weather, and also of the light not being affected by any wind that
may get into the lamp; though as regards the first, English officers
would never be satisfied to see a lamp dangling on the stay all day
long, as appears to be the custom in some foreign steamers, besides
which it would have to be lowered to be cleaned outside.

The present mast-head lights are quite powerful enough already, too much
so when compared with the side lights. I am not aware of any collisions
having occurred through a mast-head light not being seen in time, but
how many from the side lights not being seen! It was no doubt
contemplated, as indeed the regulations show, that no lights should be
visible about a vessel, except the regulation lights; but many who have
seen a large passenger steamer go past will have noticed how her side
was--one, two, or three rows of dazzling bright lights, and will have
looked almost in vain for the green or red light dimly visible in the
midst of all the bright ones. If bright electric lights, therefore, are
shining through the ports, we must have our side lights at least as
bright, so as to give them a chance of being seen. If electric lamps are
used as side lights, the dynamo must be kept running all night. If it is
thought desirable to put out all unnecessary lights at 11 P.M., the
leads can be so arranged that these lights can be all on one or more
circuits, and the necessary ones on another.

Although the dynamo will have to go at nearly the same speed throughout
the night, it will not have the same amount of work to do, and the
engine will therefore use much less steam, the consumption being in
proportion to the number of lights used. An economical engineer will
therefore see that bedroom lamps are not kept lighted all the evening
without any necessity. On shore we should never think of keeping
gas-lights blazing away for no purpose, and why should we use
electricity with more lavishness, especially when it is so easy to turn
a light on or off. The switches might with advantage be painted with
Balmain's luminous paint, and there would then be no trouble in finding
them in the dark. It is well to know that on board ship, probably in all
cases of electric lighting, there is no danger to life to be apprehended
from touching any of the leads where bare, or indeed any part of the
dynamos, as the E.M.F. is usually not more than 50 volts. It is best,
however, not to try any experiments, and it is a good general rule, not
to touch a bare part of a dynamo or lead with both hands at the same
time. The fear of getting hurt has the good effect of keeping passengers
and others from meddling with their lamps.

I have said nothing about the use of electric lights in binnacles,
though it would be a great advantage to be able to supply them with a
good steady light quite unaffected by wind. There is an obstacle to
their use for this purpose, in that the electric current being used near
the compass, the latter is affected by it. In theory, an alternating
current should have no effect; but it would require very exhaustive
experiments to be made before enough confidence could be inspired
concerning its innocence, and I fancy it would usually be looked upon
with great suspicion by captains and officers of ships. The dynamo being
made up of powerful magnets, must of course be always at a good distance
from the compasses. In some installations on iron steamers, the return
leads have been dispensed with, the iron of the ship carrying the
current back, in the same way that the earth or sea does it in a
telegraph circuit.

It is to be observed that a dynamo with _brushes_ on the commutator is
not necessarily a _Brush_ dynamo as a good many people seem to think,
the latter being named after its inventor, Mr. Brush.

A dynamo is not a _battery_ as some people call it, and there is no need
for multiplying names.

A pocket speed-indicator should be supplied for testing the speed of the
dynamo, to see that it is kept up to proper speed, and that the belt (if
used) does not slip to an unreasonable extent.

I think I have now said enough to redeem my introductory promise, and if
I have, so to speak, let more electric light on to a subject previously
dark to a good many people, I shall be well satisfied with my labour,
and I hope that those who peruse this book will be induced to go more
deeply into the subject by means of the many good books which have been
written by cleverer men than I, and which enter more thoroughly into all
its details.

[Illustration]




                                 LONDON

      PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMFORD STREET
                           AND CHARING CROSS.




                             BOOKS RELATING
                                   TO
                            APPLIED SCIENCE,
                              PUBLISHED BY
                            E. & F. N. SPON,
                          LONDON: 125, STRAND.

                      NEW YORK: 35, MURRAY STREET.


_A Pocket-Book for Chemists, Chemical Manufacturers, Metallurgists,
Dyers, Distillers, Brewers, Sugar Refiners, Photographers, Students,
etc., etc._ By THOMAS BAYLEY, Assoc. R.C. Sc. Ireland, Analytical and
Consulting Chemist and Assayer. Fourth edition, with additions, 437 pp.,
royal 32mo, roan, gilt edges, 5_s._

     SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS:

     Atomic Weights and Factors--Useful Data--Chemical Calculations--
     Rules for Indirect Analysis--Weights and Measures--Thermometers and
     Barometers--Chemical Physics--Boiling Points, etc.--Solubility of
     Substances--Methods of Obtaining Specific Gravity--Conversion of
     Hydrometers--Strength of Solutions by Specific Gravity--Analysis--
     Gas Analysis--Water Analysis--Qualitative Analysis and Reactions--
     Volumetric Analysis--Manipulation--Mineralogy--Assaying--Alcohol--
     Beer--Sugar--Miscellaneous Technological matter relating to Potash,
     Soda, Sulphuric Acid, Chlorine, Tar Products, Petroleum, Milk,
     Tallow, Photography, Prices, Wages, Appendix, etc., etc.


_The Mechanician_: A Treatise on the Construction and Manipulation of
Tools, for the use and instruction of Young Engineers and Scientific
Amateurs, comprising the Arts of Blacksmithing and Forging; the
Construction and Manufacture of Hand Tools, and the various Methods of
Using and Grinding them; the Construction of Machine Tools, and how to
work them; Machine Fitting and Erection; description of Hand and Machine
Processes; Turning and Screw Cutting; principles of Constructing and
details of Making and Erecting Steam Engines, and the various details of
setting out work, etc., etc. By CAMERON KNIGHT, Engineer. _Containing
1147 illustrations_, and 397 pages of letter-press, Fourth edition, 4to,
cloth, 18_s._




_Just Published, in Demy 8vo, cloth, containing 975 pages and 250
Illustrations, price 7s. 6d._


SPONS' HOUSEHOLD MANUAL:

     A Treasury of Domestic Receipts and Guide for Home Management.

     PRINCIPAL CONTENTS.

     =Hints for selecting a good House=, pointing out the essential
     requirements for a good house as to the Site, Soil, Trees, Aspect,
     Construction, and General Arrangement; with instructions for
     Reducing Echoes, Waterproofing Damp Walls, Curing Damp Cellars.

     =Sanitation.=--What should constitute a good Sanitary Arrangement;
     Examples (with illustrations) of Well--and Ill-drained Houses; How
     to Test Drains; Ventilating Pipes, etc.

     =Water Supply.=--Care of Cisterns; Sources of Supply; Pipes; Pumps;
     Purification and Filtration of Water.

     =Ventilation and Warming.=--Methods of Ventilating without causing
     cold draughts, by various means; Principles of Warming; Health
     Questions; Combustion; Open Grates; Open Stoves; Fuel Economisers;
     Varieties of Grates; Close-Fire Stoves; Hot-air Furnaces; Gas
     Heating; Oil Stoves; Steam Heating; Chemical Heaters; Management
     of Flues; and Cure of Smoky Chimneys.

     =Lighting.=--The best methods of Lighting; Candles, Oil Lamps, Gas,
     Incandescent Gas, Electric Light; How to test Gas Pipes; Management
     of Gas.

     =Furniture and Decoration.=--Hints on the Selection of Furniture;
     on the most approved methods of Modern Decoration; on the best
     methods of arranging Bells and Calls; How to Construct an Electric
     Bell.

     =Thieves and Fire.=--Precautions against Thieves and Fire; Methods
     of Detection; Domestic Fire Escapes; Fireproofing Clothes, etc.

     =The Larder.=--Keeping Food fresh for a limited time; Storing Food
     without change, such as Fruits, Vegetables, Eggs, Honey, etc.

     =Curing Foods for lengthened Preservation=, as Smoking, Salting,
     Canning, Potting, Pickling, Bottling Fruits, etc.; Jams, Jellies,
     Marmalade, etc.

     =The Dairy.=--The Building and Fitting of Dairies in the most
     approved modern style; Butter-making; Cheesemaking and Curing.

     =The Cellar.=--Building and Fitting; Cleaning Casks and Bottles;
     Corks and Corking; Aerated Drinks; Syrups for Drinks; Beers;
     Bitters; Cordials and Liqueurs; Wines; Miscellaneous Drinks.

     =The Pantry.=--Bread-making; Ovens and Pyrometers; Yeast; German
     Yeast; Biscuits; Cakes; Fancy Breads; Buns.

     =The Kitchen.=--On Fitting Kitchens; a description of the best
     Cooking Ranges, close and open; the Management and Care of Hot
     Plates, Baking Ovens, Dampers, Flues, and Chimneys; Cooking by Gas;
     Cooking by Oil; the Arts of Roasting, Grilling, Boiling, Stewing,
     Braising, Frying.

     =Receipts for Dishes.=--Soups, Fish, Meat, Game, Poultry,
     Vegetables, Salads, Puddings, Pastry, Confectionery, Ices, etc.,
     etc.; Foreign Dishes.

     =The Housewife's Room.=--Testing Air, Water, and Foods; Cleaning
     and Renovating; Destroying Vermin.

     =Housekeeping, Marketing.=

     =The Dining-Room.=--Dietetics; Laying and Waiting at Table;
     Carving; Dinners, Breakfasts, Luncheons, Teas, Suppers, etc.

     =The Drawing-Room.=--Etiquette; Dancing; Amateur Theatricals;
     Tricks and Illusions; Games (indoor).

     =The Bedroom= and Dressing-Room; Sleep; the Toilet; Dress; Buying
     Clothes; Outfits; Fancy Dress.

     =The Nursery.=--The Room; Clothing; Washing; Exercise; Sleep;
     Feeding; Teething; Illness; Home Training.

     =The Sick-Room.=--The Room; the Nurse; the Bed; Sick Room
     Accessories; Feeding Patients; Invalid Dishes and Drinks;
     Administering Physic; Domestic Remedies; Accidents and Emergencies;
     Bandaging; Burns; Carrying Injured Persons; Wounds; Drowning; Fits;
     Frost-bites; Poisons and Antidotes; Sunstroke; Common Complaints;
     Disinfection, etc.

     =The Bath-Room.=--Bathing in General; Management of Hot-Water
     System.

     =The Laundry.=--Small Domestic Washing Machines, and methods of
     getting up linen; Fitting up and Working a Steam Laundry.

     =The School-Room.=--The Room and its Fittings; Teaching, etc.

     =The Playground.=--Air and Exercise; Training; Outdoor Games and
     Sports.

     =The Workroom.=--Darning, Patching, and Mending Garments.

     =The Library.=-Care of Books.

     =The Garden.=--Calendar of Operations for Lawn, Flower Garden, and
     Kitchen Garden.

     =The Farmyard.=--Management of the Horse, Cow, Pig, Poultry, Bees,
     etc., etc.

     =Small Motors.=--A description of the various small Engines useful
     for domestic purposes, from 1 man to 1 horse power, worked by
     various methods, such as Electric Engines, Gas Engines, Petroleum
     Engines, Steam Engines, Condensing Engines, Water Power, Wind
     Power, and the various methods of working and managing them.

     =Household Law.=--The Law relating to Landlords and Tenants,
     Lodgers, Servants, Parochial Authorities, Juries, Insurance,
     Nuisance, etc.


_On Designing Belt Gearing._ By E. J. COWLING WELCH, Mem. Inst. Mech.
Engineers, Author of 'Designing Valve Gearing.' Fcap. 8vo, sewed, 6_d._


_A Handbook of Formulae, Tables, and Memoranda, for Architectural
Surveyors and others engaged in Building._ By J. T. HURST, C. E.
Fourteenth edition, royal 32mo, roan, 5_s._

     "It is no disparagement to the many excellent publications we refer
     to, to say that in our opinion this little pocket-book of Hurst's
     is the very best of them all, without any exception. It would be
     useless to attempt a recapitulation of the contents, for it appears
     to contain almost _everything_ that anyone connected with building
     could require, and, best of all, made up in a compact form for
     carrying in the pocket, measuring only 5 in. by 3 in., and about
     1/4 in. thick, in a limp cover. We congratulate the author on the
     success of his laborious and practically compiled little book,
     which has received unqualified and deserved praise from every
     professional person to whom we have shown it."--_The Dublin
     Builder._


_Tabulated Weights of Angle, Tee, Bulb, Round, Square, and Flat Iron and
Steel_, and other information for the use of Naval Architects and
Shipbuilders. By C. H. JORDAN, M.I.N.A. Fourth edition, 32mo, cloth,
2_s._ 6_d._


_A Complete Set of Contract Documents for a Country Lodge_, comprising
Drawings, Specifications, Dimensions (for quantities), Abstracts, Bill
of Quantities, Form of Tender and Contract, with Notes by J. LEANING,
printed in facsimile of the original documents, on single sheets fcap.,
in paper case, 10_s._


_A Practical Treatise on Heat, as applied to the Useful Arts_; for the
Use of Engineers, Architects, &c. By THOMAS BOX. _With 14 plates._ Third
edition, crown 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_A Descriptive Treatise on Mathematical Drawing Instruments_: their
construction, uses, qualities, selection, preservation, and suggestions
for improvements, with hints upon Drawing and Colouring. By W. F.
STANLEY, M.R.I. Fifth edition, _with numerous illustrations_, crown 8vo,
cloth, 5_s._


_Quantity Surveying_, By J. LEANING. With 42 illustrations. Second
edition, revised, crown 8vo, cloth, 9_s._

     CONTENTS:

     A complete Explanation of the London Practice.
     General Instructions.
     Order of Taking Off.
     Modes of Measurement of the various Trades.
     Use and Waste.
     Ventilation and Warming.
     Credits, with various Examples of Treatment.
     Abbreviations.
     Squaring the Dimensions.
     Abstracting, with Examples in illustration of each Trade.
     Billing.
     Examples of Preambles to each Trade.
     Form for a Bill of Quantities.
        Do.     Bill of Credits.
        Do.     Bill for Alternative Estimate.
     Restorations and Repairs, and Form of Bill.
     Variations before Acceptance of Tender.
     Errors in a Builder's Estimate.
     Schedule of Prices.
     Form of Schedule of Prices.
     Analysis of Schedule of Prices.
     Adjustment of Accounts.
     Form of a Bill of Variations.
     Remarks on Specifications.
     Prices and Valuation of Work, with Examples and Remarks upon each
       Trade.
     The Law as it affects Quantity Surveyors, with Law Reports.
     Taking Off after the Old Method.
     Northern Practice.
     The General Statement of the Methods recommended by the Manchester
       Society of Architects for taking Quantities.
     Examples of Collections.
     Examples of "Taking Off" in each Trade.
     Remarks on the Past and Present Methods of Estimating.


_Spons' Architects' and Builders' Pocket-Book of Prices and Memoranda._
Edited by W. YOUNG, Architect. Crown 8vo, cloth, _Published annually_.
Fifteenth edition. _Now ready._


_Long-Span Railway Bridges_, comprising Investigations of the
Comparative Theoretical and Practical Advantages of the various adopted
or proposed Type Systems of Construction, with numerous Formulae and
Tables giving the weight of Iron or Steel required in Bridges from 300
feet to the limiting Spans; to which are added similar Investigations
and Tables relating to Short-span Railway Bridges. Second and revised
edition. By B. BAKER, Assoc. Inst. C.E. _Plates_, crown 8vo, cloth,
5_s._


_Elementary Theory and Calculation of Iron Bridges and Roofs._ By AUGUST
RITTER, Ph.D., Professor at the Polytechnic School at Aix-la-Chapelle.
Translated from the third German edition, by H. R. SANKEY, Capt. R.E.
With 500 _illustrations_, 8vo, cloth, 15_s._


_The Elementary Principles of Carpentry._ By THOMAS TREDGOLD. Revised
from the original edition, and partly re-written, by JOHN THOMAS HURST.
Contained in 517 pages of letter-press, and _illustrated with 48 plates
and 150 wood engravings_. Sixth edition, reprinted from the third, crown
8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._

     Section I. On the Equality and Distribution of Forces--Section II.
     Resistance of Timber--Section III. Construction of Floors--Section
     IV. Construction of Roofs--Section V. Construction of Domes and
     Cupolas--Section VI. Construction of Partitions--Section VII.
     Scaffolds, Staging, and Gantries--Section VIII. Construction of
     Centres for Bridges--Section IX. Coffer-dams, Shoring, and
     Strutting--Section X. Wooden Bridges and Viaducts--Section XI.
     Joints, Straps, and other Fastenings--Section XII. Timber.


_The Builder's Clerk_: a Guide to the Management of a Builder's
Business. By THOMAS BALES. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._


_Our Factories, Workshops, and Warehouses_: their Sanitary and
Fire-Resisting Arrangements. By _B. H. Thwaite_, Assoc. Mem. Inst. C.E.
_With 183 wood engravings_, crown 8vo, cloth, 9_s._


_Gold_: Its Occurrence and Extraction, embracing the Geographical and
Geological Distribution and the Mineralogical Characters of Gold-bearing
rocks; the peculiar features and modes of working Shallow Placers,
Rivers, and Deep Leads; Hydraulicing; the Reduction and Separation of
Auriferous Quartz; the treatment of complex Auriferous ores containing
other metals; a Bibliography of the subject and a Glossary of Technical
and Foreign Terms. By _Alfred G. Lock_, F.R.G.S. _With numerous
illustrations and maps_, 1250 pp., super-royal 8vo, cloth, 2_l._ 12_s._
6_d._


_Iron Roofs_: Examples of Design, Description. _Illustrated with 64
Working Drawings of Executed Roofs._ By ARTHUR T. WALMISLEY, Assoc. Mem.
Inst. C.E. Second edition, revised, imp. 4to, half-morocco, 3_l._ 3_s._


_A History of Electric Telegraphy_, to the Year 1837. Chiefly compiled
from Original Sources, and hitherto Unpublished Documents, by J. J.
FAHIE, Mem. Soc. of Tel. Engineers, and of the International Society of
Electricians, Paris. Crown 8vo, cloth, 9_s._


_Spons' Information for Colonial Engineers._ Edited by J. T. HURST. Demy
8vo, sewed.

     No. 1, Ceylon. By ABRAHAM DEANE, C.E. 2_s._ 6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     Introductory Remarks--Natural Productions--Architecture and
     Engineering--Topography, Trade, and Natural History--Principal
     Stations--Weights and Measures, etc., etc.

     No. 2. Southern Africa, including the Cape Colony, Natal, and the
     Dutch Republics. By HENRY HALL, F.R.G.S., F.R.C.I. With Map. 3_s._
     6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     General Description of South Africa--Physical Geography with
     reference to Engineering Operations--Notes on Labour and Material
     in Cape Colony--Geological Notes on Rock Formation in South
     Africa--Engineering Instruments for Use in South Africa--Principal
     Public Works in Cape Colony: Railways, Mountain Roads and Passes,
     Harbour Works, Bridges, Gas Works, Irrigation and Water Supply,
     Lighthouses, Drainage and Sanitary Engineering, Public Buildings,
     Mines--Table of Woods in South Africa--Animals used for Draught
     Purposes--Statistical Notes--Table of Distances--Rates of Carriage,
     etc.

     No. 3. India. By F. C. DANVERS, Assoc. Inst. C.E. With Map. 4_s._
     6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     Physical Geography of India--Building Materials--Roads--Railways--
     Bridges--Irrigation--River Works--Harbours--Lighthouse Buildings--
     Native Labour--The Principal Trees of India--Money--Weights and
     Measures--Glossary of Indian Terms, etc.


_A Practical Treatise on Coal Mining._ By GEORGE G. ANDRE, F.G.S.,
Assoc. Inst. C.E., Member of the Society of Engineers. _With 82
lithographic plates._ 2 vols., royal 4to, cloth, 3_l._ 12_s._


_A Practical Treatise on Casting and Founding_, including descriptions
of the modern machinery employed in the art. By N. E. SPRETSON,
Engineer. Third edition, with 82 _plates_ drawn to scale, 412 pp., demy
8vo, cloth, 18_s._


_The Depreciation of Factories and their Valuation._ By EWING MATHESON,
M. Inst. C.E. 8vo, cloth, 6_s._


_A Handbook of Electrical Testing._ By H. R. KEMPE, M.S.T.E. Fourth
edition, revised and enlarged, crown 8vo, cloth, 16_s._


_Gas Works_: their Arrangement, Construction, Plant, and Machinery. By
F. COLYER, M. Inst. C.E. _With 31 folding plates_, 8vo, cloth, 24_s._


_The Clerk of Works_: a Vade-Mecum for all engaged in the
Superintendence of Building Operations. By G. G. HOSKINS, F.R.I.B.A.
Third edition, fcap. 8vo, cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._


_American Foundry Practice_: Treating of Loam, Dry Sand, and Green Sand
Moulding, and containing a Practical Treatise upon the Management of
Cupolas, and the Melting of Iron. By T. D. WEST, Practical Iron Moulder
and Foundry Foreman. Second edition, _with numerous illustrations_,
crown 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_The Maintenance of Macadamised Roads._ By T. CODRINGTON, M.I.C.E,
F.G.S., General Superintendent of County Roads for South Wales. 8vo,
cloth, 6_s._


_Hydraulic Steam and Hand Power Lifting and Pressing Machinery._ By
FREDERICK COLYER, M. Inst. C.E., M. Inst. M.E. _With 73 plates_, 8vo,
cloth, 18_s._


_Pumps and Pumping Machinery._ By F. COLYER, M.I.C.E., M.I.M.E. _With 23
folding plates_, 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Pumps and Pumping Machinery._ By F. COLYER. Second Part. _With 11 large
plates_, 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_A Treatise on the Origin, Progress, Prevention, and Cure of Dry Rot in
Timber_; with Remarks on the Means of Preserving Wood from Destruction
by Sea-Worms, Beetles, Ants, etc. By THOMAS ALLEN BRITTON, late Surveyor
to the Metropolitan Board of Works, etc., etc. _With 10 plates_, crown
8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_The Municipal and Sanitary Engineer's Handbook._ By H. PERCY BOULNOIS,
Mem. Inst. C.E., Borough Engineer, Portsmouth. _With numerous
illustrations_, demy 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     The Appointment and Duties of the Town Surveyor--Traffic--
     Macadamised Roadways--Steam Rolling--Road Metal and Breaking--
     Pitched Pavements--Asphalte--Wood Pavements--Footpaths--Kerbs and
     Gutters--Street Naming and Numbering--Street Lighting--Sewerage--
     Ventilation of Sewers--Disposal of Sewage--House Drainage--
     Disinfection--Gas and Water Companies, etc., Breaking up Streets--
     Improvement of Private Streets--Borrowing Powers--Artizans' and
     Labourers' Dwellings--Public Conveniences--Scavenging, including
     Street Cleansing--Watering and the Removing of Snow--Planting
     Street Trees--Deposit of Plans--Dangerous Buildings--Hoardings--
     Obstructions--Improving Street Lines--Cellar Openings--Public
     Pleasure Grounds--Cemeteries--Mortuaries--Cattle and Ordinary
     Markets--Public Slaughter-houses, etc.--Giving numerous Forms
     of Notices, Specifications, and General Information upon these
     and other subjects of great importance to Municipal Engineers and
     others engaged in Sanitary Work.


_Metrical Tables._ By G. L. MOLESWORTH, M.I.C.E. 32mo, cloth, 1_s._
6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     General--Linear Measures--Square Measures--Cubic Measures--Measures
     of Capacity--Weights--Combinations--Thermometers.


_Elements of Construction for Electro-Magnets._ By Count TH. DU MONCEL,
Mem. de I'lnstitut de France. Translated from the French by C. J.
WHARTON. Crown 8vo, cloth, 4_s._ 6_d._


_Practical Electrical Units Popularly Explained_, with _numerous
illustrations_ and Remarks. By JAMES SWINBURNE, late of J. W. Swan and
Co., Paris, late of Brush-Swan Electric Light Company, U.S.A. 18mo,
cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._


_A Treatise on the Use of Belting for the Transmission of Power._ By J.
H. COOPER. Second edition, _illustrated_, 8vo, cloth, 15_s._


_A Pocket-Book of Useful Formulae and Memoranda for Civil and Mechanical
Engineers._ By GUILFORD L. MOLESWORTH, Mem. Inst. C.E., Consulting
Engineer to the Government of India for State Railways. _With numerous
illustrations_, 744 pp. Twenty-first edition, revised and enlarged,
32mo, roan, 6_s._

     SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS:

     Surveying, Levelling, etc.--Strength and Weight of Materials--
     Earthwork, Brickwork, Masonry, Arches, etc.--Struts, Columns,
     Beams, and Trusses--Flooring, Roofing, and Roof Trusses--Girders,
     Bridges, etc.--Railways and Roads--Hydraulic Formulae--Canals,
     Sewers, Waterworks, Docks--Irrigation and Breakwaters--Gas,
     Ventilation, and Warming--Heat, Light, Colour, and Sound--Gravity:
     Centres, Forces, and Powers--Millwork, Teeth of Wheels, Shafting,
     etc.--Workshop Recipes--Sundry Machinery--Animal Power--Steam and
     the Steam Engine--Water-power, Water-wheels, Turbines, etc.--Wind
     and Windmills--Steam Navigation, Ship Building, Tonnage, etc.--
     Gunnery, Projectiles, etc.--Weights, Measures, and Money--
     Trigonometry, Conic Sections, and Curves--Telegraphy--Mensuration--
     Tables of Areas and Circumference, and Arcs of Circles--Logarithms,
     Square and Cube Roots, Powers--Reciprocals, etc.--Useful Numbers--
     Differential and Integral Calculus--Algebraic Signs--Telegraphic
     Construction and Formulae.


_Hints on Architectural Draughtsmanship._ By G. W. TUXFORD HALLATT.
Fcap. 8vo, cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._


_Spons' Tables and Memoranda for Engineers_; selected and arranged by J.
T. HURST, C.E., Author of 'Architectural Surveyors' Handbook,' 'Hurst's
Tredgold's Carpentry,' etc. Ninth edition, 64mo, roan, gilt edges,
1_s._; or in cloth case, 1_s._ 6_d._

     This work is printed in a pearl type, and is so small, measuring
     only 2-1/2 in. by 1-1/4 in. by 1/4 in. thick, that it may be easily
     carried in the waistcoat pocket.

     "It is certainly an extremely rare thing for a reviewer to be
     called upon to notice a volume measuring but 2-1/2 in. by 1-1/4
     in., yet these dimensions faithfully represent the size of the
     handy little book before us. The volume--which contains 118 printed
     pages, besides a few blank pages for memoranda--is, in fact, a true
     pocket-book, adapted for being carried in the waistcoat pocket, and
     containing a far greater amount and variety of information than
     most people would imagine could be compressed into so small a
     space.... The little volume has been compiled with considerable
     care and judgment, and we can cordially recommend it to our readers
     as a useful little pocket companion."--_Engineering._


_A Practical Treatise on Natural and Artificial Concrete, its Varieties
and Constructive Adaptations._ By HENRY REID, Author of the 'Science and
Art of the Manufacture of Portland Cement.' New Edition, _with 59
woodcuts and 5 plates_, 8vo, cloth, 15_s._


_Notes on Concrete and Works in Concrete_; especially written to assist
those engaged upon Public Works. By JOHN NEWMAN, Assoc. Mem. Inst. C.E.,
crown 8vo, cloth, 4_s._ 6_d._


_Electricity as a Motive Power._ By Count TH. DU MONCEL, Membre de
l'Institut de France, and FRANK GERALDY, Ingenieur des Ponts et
Chaussees. Translated and Edited, with Additions, by C. J. WHARTON,
Assoc. Soc. Tel. Eng. and Elec. _With 113 engravings and diagrams_,
crown 8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_Treatise on Valve-Gears_, with special consideration of the
Link-Motions of Locomotive Engines. By Dr. GUSTAV ZEUNER, Professor of
Applied Mechanics at the Confederated Polytechnikum of Zurich.
Translated from the Fourth German Edition, by Professor J. F. KLEIN,
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pa. _Illustrated_, 8vo, cloth, 1_2s._
6_d._


_The French-Polisher's Manual._ By a French-Polisher; containing Timber
Staining, Washing, Matching, Improving, Painting, Imitations, Directions
for Staining, Sizing, Embodying, Smoothing, Spirit Varnishing,
French-Polishing, Directions for Re-polishing. Third edition, royal
32mo, sewed, 6_d._


_Hops, their Cultivation, Commerce, and Uses in various Countries._ By
P. L. SIMMONDS. Crown 8vo, cloth, 4_s._ 6_d._


_The Principles of Graphic Statics._ By GEORGE SYDENHAM CLARKE, Capt.
Royal Engineers. _With 112 illustrations._ 4to, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Dynamo-Electric Machinery_: A Manual for Students of Electro-technics.
By SILVANUS P. THOMPSON, B.A., D.Sc., Professor of Experimental Physics
in University College, Bristol, etc., etc. Second edition,
_illustrated_, 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Practical Geometry, Perspective, and Engineering Drawing_; a Course of
Descriptive Geometry adapted to the Requirements of the Engineering
Draughtsman, including the determination of cast shadows and Isometric
Projection, each chapter being followed by numerous examples; to which
are added rules for Shading, Shade-lining, etc., together with practical
instructions as to the Lining, Colouring, Printing, and general
treatment of Engineering Drawings, with a chapter on drawing
Instruments. By GEORGE S. CLARKE, Capt. R.E. Second edition, _with 21
plates_. 2 vols., cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_The Elements of Graphic Statics._ By Professor KARL VON OTT, translated
from the German by G. S. CLARKE, Capt. R.E., Instructor in Mechanical
Drawing, Royal Indian Engineering College. _With 93 illustrations_,
crown 8vo, cloth, 5_s._


_A Practical Treatise on the Manufacture and Distribution of Coal Gas._
By WILLIAM RICHARDS. Demy 4to, with _numerous wood engravings and 29
plates_, cloth, 28_s._

     SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS:

     Introduction--History of Gas Lighting--Chemistry of Gas
     Manufacture, by Lewis Thompson, Esq., M.R.C.S.--Coal, with
     Analyses, by J. Paterson, Lewis Thompson, and G. R. Hislop,
     Esqrs.--Retorts, Iron and Clay--Retort Setting--Hydraulic Main--
     Condensers--Exhausters--Washers and Scrubbers--Purifiers--
     Purification--History of Gas Holder--Tanks, Brick and Stone,
     Composite, Concrete, Cast-iron, Compound Annular Wrought-iron--
     Specifications--Gas Holders--Station Meter--Governor--
     Distribution--Mains--Gas Mathematics, or Formulae for the
     Distribution of Gas, by Lewis Thompson, Esq.--Services--Consumers'
     Meters--Regulators--Burners--Fittings--Photometer--Carburization
     of Gas--Air Gas and Water Gas--Composition of Coal Gas, by Lewis
     Thompson, Esq.--Analyses of Gas--Influence of Atmospheric Pressure
     and Temperature on Gas--Residual Products--Appendix--Description
     of Retort Settings, Buildings, etc., etc.


_The New Formula for Mean Velocity of Discharge of Rivers and Canals._
By W. R. KUTTER. Translated from articles in the 'Cultur-Ingenieur,' by
LOWIS D'A. JACKSON, Assoc. Inst. C.E. 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_The Practical Millwright and Engineer's Ready Reckoner_; or Tables for
finding the diameter and power of cog-wheels, diameter, weight, and
power of shafts, diameter and strength of bolts, etc. By THOMAS DIXON.
Fourth edition, 12mo, cloth, 3_s._


_Tin_: Describing the Chief Methods of Mining, Dressing and Smelting it
abroad; with Notes upon Arsenic, Bismuth and Wolfram. By ARTHUR G.
CHARLETON, Mem. American Inst. of Mining Engineers. _With plates_, 8vo,
cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Perspective, Explained and Illustrated._ By G. S. CLARKE, Capt. R.E.
_With illustrations_, 8vo, cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._


_Practical Hydraulics_; a Series of Rules and Tables for the use of
Engineers, etc., etc. By THOMAS BOX. Fifth edition, _numerous plates_,
post 8vo, cloth, 5_s._


_The Essential Elements of Practical Mechanics; based on the Principle
of Work_, designed for Engineering Students. By OLIVER BYRNE, formerly
Professor of Mathematics, College for Civil Engineers. Third edition,
_with 148 wood engravings_, post 8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     Chap. 1. How Work is Measured by a Unit, both with and without
     reference to a Unit of Time--Chap. 2. The Work of Living Agents,
     the Influence of Friction, and introduces one of the most beautiful
     Laws of Motion--Chap. 3. The principles expounded in the first and
     second chapters are applied to the Motion of Bodies--Chap. 4. The
     Transmission of Work by simple Machines--Chap. 5. Useful
     Propositions and Rules.


_Breweries and Maltings_: their Arrangement, Construction, Machinery,
and Plant. By G. SCAMELL, F.R.I.B.A. Second edition, revised, enlarged,
and partly rewritten. By F. COLYER, M.I.C.E., M.I.M.E. _With 20 plates_,
8vo, cloth, 18_s._


_A Practical Treatise on the Construction of Horizontal and Vertical
Waterwheels_, specially designed for the use of operative mechanics. By
WILLIAM CULLEN, Millwright and Engineer. _With 11 plates._ Second
edition, revised and enlarged, small 4to, cloth, _12s._ 6_d._


_A Practical Treatise on Mill-gearing, Wheels, Shafts, Riggers, etc._;
for the use of Engineers. By THOMAS BOX. Third edition, _with 11
plates_. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_Mining Machinery_: a Descriptive Treatise on the Machinery, Tools, and
other Appliances used in Mining. By G. G. ANDRE, F.G.S., Assoc. Inst.
C.E., Mem. of the Society of Engineers. Royal 4to, uniform with the
Author's Treatise on Coal Mining, containing _182 plates_, accurately
drawn to scale, with descriptive text, in 2 vols., cloth, 3_l._ 12_s._

     CONTENTS:

     Machinery for Prospecting, Excavating, Hauling, and Hoisting--
     Ventilation--Pumping--Treatment of Mineral Products, including
     Gold and Silver, Copper, Tin, and Lead, Iron, Coal, Sulphur,
     China Clay, Brick Earth, etc.


_Tables for Setting out Curves for Railways, Canals, Roads, etc._,
varying from a radius of five chains to three miles. By A. KENNEDY and
R. W. HACKWOOD. _Illustrated_, 32mo, cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._


_The Science and Art of the Manufacture of Portland Cement_, with
observations on some of its constructive applications. _With 66
illustrations_. By HENRY REID, C.E., Author of 'A Practical Treatise on
Concrete,' etc., etc. 8vo, cloth, 18_s._


_The Draughtsman's Handbook of Plan and Map Drawing_; including
instructions for the preparation of Engineering, Architectural, and
Mechanical Drawings. _With numerous illustrations in the text, and 33
plates_ (_15 printed in colours_). By G. G. ANDRE, F.G.S., Assoc. Inst.
C.E. 4to, cloth, 9_s._

     CONTENTS:

     The Drawing Office and its Furnishings--Geometrical Problems--
     Lines, Dots, and their Combinations--Colours, Shading, Lettering,
     Bordering, and North Points--Scales--Plotting--Civil Engineers'
     and Surveyors' Plans--Map Drawing--Mechanical and Architectural
     Drawing--Copying and Reducing Trigonometrical Formulae, etc., etc.


_The Boiler-maker's and Iron Ship-builder's Companion_, comprising a
series of original and carefully calculated tables, of the utmost
utility to persons interested in the iron trades. By JAMES FODEN, author
of 'Mechanical Tables,' etc. Second edition revised, _with
illustrations_, crown 8vo, cloth, 5_s._


_Rock Blasting_: a Practical Treatise on the means employed in Blasting
Rocks for Industrial Purposes. By G. G. ANDRE, F.G.S., Assoc. Inst. C.E.
_With 56 illustrations and 12 plates_, 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_Painting and Painters' Manual_: a Book of Facts for Painters and those
who Use or Deal in Paint Materials. By C. L. CONDIT and J. SCHELLER.
_Illustrated_, 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_A Treatise on Ropemaking as practised in public and private
Rope-yards_, with a Description of the Manufacture, Rules, Tables of
Weights, etc., adapted to the Trade, Shipping, Mining, Railways,
Builders, etc. By R. CHAPMAN, formerly foreman to Messrs. Huddart and
Co., Limehouse, and late Master Ropemaker to H.M. Dockyard, Deptford.
Second edition, 12mo, cloth, 3_s._


_Laxton's Builders' and Contractors' Tables_; for the use of Engineers,
Architects, Surveyors, Builders, Land Agents, and others. Bricklayer,
containing 22 tables, with nearly 30,000 calculations. 4to, cloth, 5_s._


_Laxton's Builders' and Contractors' Tables._ Excavator, Earth, Land,
Water, and Gas, containing 53 tables, with nearly 24,000 calculations.
4to, cloth, 5_s._


_Sanitary Engineering_: a Guide to the Construction of Works of Sewerage
and House Drainage, with Tables for facilitating the calculations of the
Engineer. By BALDWIN LATHAM, C.E., M. Inst. C.E., F.G.S., F.M.S.,
Past-President of the Society of Engineers. Second edition, _with
numerous plates and woodcuts_, 8vo, cloth, 1_l._ 10_s._


_Screw Cutting Tables for Engineers and Machinists_, giving the values
of the different trains of Wheels required to produce Screws of any
pitch, calculated by Lord Lindsay, M.P., F.R.S., F.R.A.S., etc. Cloth,
oblong, 2_s._


_Screw Cutting Tables_, for the use of Mechanical Engineers, showing the
proper arrangement of Wheels for cutting the Threads of Screws of any
required pitch, with a Table for making the Universal Gas-pipe Threads
and Taps. By W. A. MARTIN, Engineer. Second edition, oblong, cloth,
1_s._, or sewed, 6_d._


_A Treatise on a Practical Method of Designing Slide-Valve Gears by
Simple Geometrical Construction_, based upon the principles enunciated
in Euclid's Elements, and comprising the various forms of Plain
Slide-Valve and Expansion Gearing; together with Stephenson's, Gooch's,
and Allan's Link-Motions, as applied either to reversing or to variable
expansion combinations. By EDWARD J. COWLING WELCH, Memb. Inst.
Mechanical Engineers. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6_s._


_Cleaning and Scouring_: a Manual for Dyers, Laundresses, and for
Domestic Use. By S. CHRISTOPHER. 18mo, sewed, 6_d._


_A Glossary of Terms used in Coal Mining._ By WILLIAM STUKELEY GRESLEY,
Assoc. Mem. Inst. C.E., F.G.S., Member of the North of England Institute
of Mining Engineers. _Illustrated with numerous woodcuts and diagrams_,
crown 8vo, cloth, 5_s._


_A Pocket-Book for Boiler Makers and Steam Users_, comprising a variety
of useful information for Employer and Workman, Government Inspectors,
Board of Trade Surveyors, Engineers in charge of Works and Slips,
Foremen of Manufactories, and the general Steam-using Public. By MAURICE
JOHN SEXTON. Second edition, royal 32mo, roan, gilt edges, 5_s._


_Electrolysis_: a Practical Treatise on Nickeling, Coppering, Gilding,
Silvering, the Refining of Metals, and the treatment of Ores by means of
Electricity. By HIPPOLYTE FONTAINE, translated from the French by J. A.
BERLY, C.E., Assoc. S.T.E. _With engravings._ 8vo, cloth, 9_s._


_Barlow's Tables of Squares, Cubes, Square Roots, Cube Roots,
Reciprocals of all Integer Numbers up to 10,000._ Post 8vo, cloth, 6_s._


_A Practical Treatise on the Steam Engine_, containing Plans and
Arrangements of Details for Fixed Steam Engines, with Essays on the
Principles involved in Design and Construction. By ARTHUR RIGG,
Engineer, Member of the Society of Engineers and of the Royal
Institution of Great Britain. Demy 4to, _copiously illustrated with
woodcuts and 96 plates_, in one Volume, half-bound morocco, 2_l._ 2_s._;
or cheaper edition, cloth, 25_s._

     This work is not, in any sense, an elementary treatise, or history
     of the steam engine, but is intended to describe examples of Fixed
     Steam Engines without entering into the wide domain of locomotive
     or marine practice. To this end illustrations will be given of the
     most recent arrangements of Horizontal, Vertical, Beam, Pumping,
     Winding, Portable, Semi-portable, Corliss, Allen, Compound, and
     other similar Engines, by the most eminent Firms in Great Britain
     and America. The laws relating to the action and precautions to be
     observed in the construction of the various details, such as
     Cylinders, Pistons, Piston-rods, Connecting-rods, Cross-heads,
     Motion-blocks, Eccentrics, Simple, Expansion, Balanced, and
     Equilibrium Slide-valves, and Valve-gearing will be minutely dealt
     with. In this connection will be found articles upon the Velocity
     of Reciprocating Parts and the Mode of Applying the Indicator, Heat
     and Expansion of Steam Governors, and the like. It is the writer's
     desire to draw illustrations from every possible source, and give
     only those rules that present practice deems correct.


_A Practical Treatise on the Science of Land and Engineering Surveying,
Levelling, Estimating Quantities, etc._, with a general description of
the several Instruments required for Surveying, Levelling, Plotting,
etc. By H. S. MERRETT. Fourth edition, revised by G. W. USILL, Assoc.
Mem. Inst. C.E. _41 plates, with illustrations and tables_, royal 8vo,
cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._

     PRINCIPAL CONTENTS:

     Part 1. Introduction and the Principles of Geometry. Part 2. Land
     Surveying; comprising General Observations--The Chain--Offsets
     Surveying by the Chain only--Surveying Hilly Ground--To Survey an
     Estate or Parish by the Chain only--Surveying with the Theodolite--
     Mining and Town Surveying--Railroad Surveying--Mapping--Division
     and Laying out of Land--Observations on Enclosures--Plane
     Trigonometry. Part 3. Levelling--Simple and Compound Levelling--
     The Level Book--Parliamentary Plan and Section--Levelling with a
     Theodolite--Gradients--Wooden Curves--To Lay out a Railway Curve--
     Setting out Widths. Part 4. Calculating Quantities generally for
     Estimates--Cuttings and Embankments--Tunnels--Brickwork--Ironwork--
     Timber Measuring. Part 5. Description and Use of Instruments in
     Surveying and Plotting--The Improved Dumpy Level--Troughton's
     Level--The Prismatic Compass--Proportional Compass--Box Sextant--
     Vernier--Pantagraph--Merrett's Improved Quadrant--Improved
     Computation Scale--The Diagonal Scale--Straight Edge and Sector.
     Part 6. Logarithms of Numbers--Logarithmic Sines and Co-Sines,
     Tangents and Co-Tangents--Natural Sines and Co-Sines--Tables for
     Earthwork, for Setting out Curves, and for various Calculations,
     etc., etc., etc.


_Health and Comfort in House Building, or Ventilation with Warm Air by
Self-Acting Suction Power_, with Review of the mode of Calculating the
Draught in Hot-Air Flues, and with some actual Experiments. By J.
DRYSDALE, M.D., and J. W. HAYWARD, M.D. Second edition, with Supplement,
_with plates_, demy 8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_The Assayer's Manual_: an Abridged Treatise on the Docimastic
Examination of Ores and Furnace and other Artificial Products. By BRUNO
KERL. Translated by W. T. BRANNT. _With 65 illustrations_, 8vo, cloth,
12_s._ 6_d._


_Electricity_: its Theory, Sources, and Applications. By J. T. SPRAGUE,
M.S.T.E. Second edition, revised and enlarged, _with numerous
illustrations_, crown 8vo, cloth, 15_s._


_The Practice of Hand Turning in Wood, Ivory, Shell, etc._, with
Instructions for Turning such Work in Metal as may be required in the
Practice of Turning in Wood, Ivory, etc.; also an Appendix on Ornamental
Turning. (A book for beginners.) By FRANCIS CAMPIN. Third edition, _with
wood engravings_, crown 8vo, cloth, 6_s._

     CONTENTS:

     On Lathes--Turning Tools--Turning Wood--Drilling--Screw Cutting--
     Miscellaneous Apparatus and Processes--Turning Particular Forms--
     Staining--Polishing--Spinning Metals--Materials--Ornamental
     Turning, etc.


_Treatise on Watchwork, Past and Present._ By the Rev. H. L. NELTHROPP,
M.A., F.S.A. _With 32 illustrations_, crown 8vo, cloth, 6_s._ 6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     Definitions of Words and Terms used in Watchwork--Tools--Time--
     Historical Summary--On Calculations of the Numbers for Wheels
     and Pinions; their Proportional Sizes, Trains, etc.--Of Dial
     Wheels, or Motion Work--Length of Time of Going without Winding
     up--The Verge--The Horizontal--The Duplex--The Lever--The
     Chronometer--Repeating Watches--Keyless Watches--The Pendulum,
     or Spiral Spring--Compensation--Jewelling of Pivot Holes--
     Clerkenwell--Fallacies of the Trade--Incapacity of Workmen--
     How to Choose and Use a Watch, etc.


_Algebra Self-Taught._ By W. P. HIGGS, M.A., D.Sc., LL.D., Assoc. Inst
C.E., Author of 'A Handbook of the Differential Calculus,' etc. Second
edition, crown 8vo, cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     Symbols and the Signs of Operation--The Equation and the Unknown
     Quantity--Positive and Negative Quantities--Multiplication--
     Involution--Exponents--Negative Exponents--Roots, and the Use
     of Exponents as Logarithms--Logarithms--Tables of Logarithms
     and Proportionate Parts--Transformation of System of Logarithms--
     Common Uses of Common Logarithms--Compound Multiplication and
     the Binomial Theorem--Division, Fractions, and Ratio--Continued
     Proportion--The Series and the Summation of the Series--Limit
     of Series--Square and Cube Roots--Equations--List of Formulae, etc.


_Spons' Dictionary of Engineering, Civil, Mechanical, Military, and
Naval_; with technical terms in French, German, Italian, and Spanish,
3100 pp., and _nearly 8000 engravings_, in super-royal 8vo, in 8
divisions, 5_l._ 8_s._ Complete in 3 vols., cloth, 5_l._ 5_s._ Bound in
a superior manner, half-morocco, top edge gilt, 3 vols., 6_l._ 12_s._


_Notes in Mechanical Engineering._ Compiled principally for the use of
the Students attending the Classes on this subject at the City of London
College. By HENRY ADAMS, Mem. Inst. M.E., Mem. Inst. C.E., Mem. Soc. of
Engineers. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._


_Canoe and Boat Building_: a complete Manual for Amateurs, containing
plain and comprehensive directions for the construction of Canoes,
Rowing and Sailing Boats, and Hunting Craft. By W. P. STEPHENS. _With
numerous illustrations and 24 plates of Working Drawings._ Crown 8vo,
cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_Proceedings of the National Conference of Electricians, Philadelphia_,
October 8th to 13th, 1884. 18mo, cloth, 3_s._


_Dynamo-Electricity_, its Generation, Application, Transmission,
Storage, and Measurement. By G. B. PRESCOTT. _With 545 illustrations._
8vo, cloth, 1_l._ 1_s._


_Domestic Electricity for Amateurs._ Translated from the French of E.
HOSPITALIER, Editor of "L'Electricien," by C. J. WHARTON, Assoc. Soc.
Tel. Eng. _Numerous illustrations._ Demy 8vo, cloth, 9_s._

     CONTENTS:

     1. Production of the Electric Current--2. Electric Bells--
     3. Automatic Alarms--4. Domestic Telephones--5. Electric Clocks--
     6. Electric Lighters--7. Domestic Electric Lighting--8. Domestic
     Application of the Electric Light--9. Electric Motors--
     10. Electrical Locomotion--11. Electrotyping, Plating, and
     Gilding--12. Electric Recreations--13. Various applications--
     Workshop of the Electrician.


_Wrinkles in Electric Lighting._ By VINCENT STEPHEN. _With
illustrations._ 18mo, cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     1. The Electric Current and its production by Chemical means--
     2. Production of Electric Currents by Mechanical means--
     3. Dynamo-Electric Machines--4. Electric Lamps--5. Lead--
     6. Ship Lighting.


_The Practical Flax Spinner_; being a Description of the Growth,
Manipulation, and Spinning of Flax and Tow. By LESLIE C. MARSHALL, of
Belfast. _With illustrations._ 8vo, cloth, 15_s._


_Foundations and Foundation Walls for all classes of Buildings_, Pile
Driving, Building Stones and Bricks, Pier and Wall construction,
Mortars, Limes, Cements, Concretes, Stuccos, &c. _64 illustrations_. By
G. T. POWELL and F. BAUMAN. 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_Manual for Gas Engineering Students._ By D. LEE. 18mo, cloth 1_s._


_Hydraulic Machinery, Past and Present._ A Lecture delivered to the
London and Suburban Railway Officials' Association. By H. ADAMS, Mem.
Inst. C.E. _Folding plate._ 8vo, sewed, 1_s._


_Twenty Years with the Indicator._ By THOMAS PRAY, Jun., C.E., M.E.,
Member of the American Society of Civil Engineers. 2 vols., royal 8vo,
cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Annual Statistical Report of the Secretary to the Members of the Iron
and Steel Association on the Home and Foreign Iron and Steel Industries
in 1884._ Issued March 1885. 8vo, sewed, 5_s._


_Bad Drains, and How to Test them_; with Notes on the Ventilation of
Sewers, Drains, and Sanitary Fittings, and the Origin and Transmission
of Zymotic Disease. By R. HARRIS REEVES. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._


_Standard Practical Plumbing_; being a complete Encyclopaedia for
Practical Plumbers and Guide for Architects, Builders, Gas Fitters,
Hot-water Fitters, Ironmongers, Lead Burners, Sanitary Engineers, Zinc
Workers, &c. _Illustrated by over 2000 engravings._ By P. J. DAVIES.
Vol. I, royal 8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_Pneumatic Transmission of Messages and Parcels between Paris and
London, via Calais and Dover._ By J. B. BERLIER, C.E. Small folio,
sewed, 6_d._


_List of Tests_ (_Reagents_), arranged in alphabetical order, according
to the names of the originators. Designed especially for the convenient
reference of Chemists, Pharmacists, and Scientists. By HANS M. WILDER.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 4_s._ 6_d._


_Ten Years Experience in Works of Intermittent Downward Filtration._ By
J. BAILEY DENTON, Mem. Inst. C.E. Second edition, with additions. Royal
8vo, sewed, 4_s._


_A Treatise on the Manufacture of Soap and Candles, Lubricants and
Glycerin._ By W. LANT CARPENTER, B.A., B.Sc. (late of Messrs. C. Thomas
and Brothers, Bristol). _With illustrations._ Crown 8vo, cloth, 10_s._
6_d._


_The Stability of Ships explained simply, and calculated by a new
Graphic method._ By J. C. SPENCE, M.I.N.A. 4to, sewed, 3_s._ 6_d._


_Steam Making, or Boiler Practice._ By CHARLES A. SMITH, C.E. 8vo,
cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._

     CONTENTS:

     1. The Nature of Heat and the Properties of Steam--2. Combustion.--
     3. Externally Fired Stationary Boilers--4. Internally Fired
     Stationary Boilers--5. Internally Fired Portable Locomotive and
     Marine Boilers--6. Design, Construction, and Strength of Boilers--
     7. Proportions of Heating Surface, Economic Evaporation,
     Explosions--8. Miscellaneous Boilers, Choice of Boiler Fittings
     and Appurtenances.


_The Fireman's Guide_; a Handbook on the Care of Boilers. By TEKNOLOG.
foereningen T. I. Stockholm. Translated from the third edition, and
revised by KARL P. DAHLSTROM, M.E. Second edition. Fcap. 8vo, cloth,
2_s._


_A Treatise on Modern Steam Engines and Boilers_, including Land
Locomotive, and Marine Engines and Boilers, for the use of Students. By
FREDERICK COLYER, M. Inst. C.E., Mem. Inst M.E. _With 36 plates._ 4to,
cloth, 25_s._

     CONTENTS:

     1. Introduction--2. Original Engines--3. Boilers--4. High-Pressure
     Beam Engines--5. Cornish Beam Engines--6. Horizontal Engines--7.
     Oscillating Engines--8. Vertical High-Pressure Engines--9. Special
     Engines--10. Portable Engines--11. Locomotive Engines--12. Marine
     Engines.


_Steam Engine Management_; a Treatise on the Working and Management of
Steam Boilers. By F. COLYER, M. Inst. C.E., Mem. Inst. M.E. 18mo, cloth,
2_s._


_Land Surveying on the Meridian and Perpendicular System._ By WILLIAM
PENMAN, C.E. 8vo, cloth, 8_s._ 6_d._


_The Topographer, his Instruments and Methods_, designed for the use of
Students, Amateur Photographers, Surveyors, Engineers, and all persons
interested in the location and construction of works based upon
Topography. _Illustrated with numerous plates, maps, and engravings._ By
LEWIS M. HAUPT, A.M. 8vo, cloth, 18_s._


_A Text-Book of Tanning_, embracing the Preparation of all kinds of
Leather. By HARRY R. PROCTOR, F.C.S., of Low Lights Tanneries. _With
illustrations._ Crown 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._




  In super-royal 8vo, 1168 pp., _with 2400 illustrations_, in 3
  Divisions, cloth, price 13_s._ 6_d._ each; or 1 vol., cloth, 2_l._;
  or half-morocco, 2_l._ 8_s._

  A SUPPLEMENT
  TO
  SPONS' DICTIONARY OF ENGINEERING.

     Edited by ERNEST SPON, MEMB. SOC. ENGINEERS.

     Abacus, Counters, Speed Indicators, and Slide Rule.
     Agricultural Implements and Machinery.
     Air Compressors.
     Animal Charcoal Machinery.
     Antimony.
     Axles and Axle-boxes.
     Barn Machinery.
     Belts and Belting.
     Blasting. Boilers.
     Brakes.
     Brick Machinery.
     Bridges.
     Cages for Mines.
     Calculus, Differential and Integral.
     Canals.
     Carpentry.
     Cast Iron.
     Cement, Concrete, Limes, and Mortar.
     Chimney Shafts.
     Coal Cleansing and Washing.
     Coal Mining.
     Coal Cutting Machines.
     Coke Ovens. Copper.
     Docks. Drainage.
     Dredging Machinery.
     Dynamo-Electric and Magneto-Electric Machines.
     Dynamometers.
     Electrical Engineering, Telegraphy, Electric Lighting and its
       practical details, Telephones.
     Engines, Varieties of.
     Explosives. Fans.
     Founding, Moulding and the practical work of the Foundry.
     Gas, Manufacture of.
     Hammers, Steam and other Power.
     Heat. Horse Power.
     Hydraulics.
     Hydro-geology.
     Indicators. Iron.
     Lifts, Hoists, and Elevators.
     Lighthouses, Buoys, and Beacons.
     Machine Tools.
     Materials of Construction.
     Meters.
     Ores, Machinery and Processes employed to Dress.
     Piers.
     Pile Driving.
     Pneumatic Transmission.
     Pumps.
     Pyrometers.
     Road Locomotives.
     Rock Drills.
     Rolling Stock.
     Sanitary Engineering.
     Shafting.
     Steel.
     Steam Navvy.
     Stone Machinery.
     Tramways.
     Well Sinking.

  London: E. & F. N. SPON, 125, Strand.
  New York: 35, Murray Street.



  NOW COMPLETE.

  _With nearly 1500 illustrations_, in super-royal 8vo, in 5 Divisions,
  cloth. Divisions 1 to 4, 13_s._ 6_d._ each; Division 5, 17_s._ 6_d._;
  or 2 vols., cloth, L3 10_s._

  SPONS' ENCYCLOPAEDIA
  OF THE
  INDUSTRIAL ARTS, MANUFACTURES, AND COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS.

  EDITED BY C. G. WARNFORD LOCK, F.L.S.

     Among the more important of the subjects treated of, are the
     following:--

     Acids, 207 pp. 220 figs.
     Alcohol, 23 pp. 16 figs.
     Alcoholic Liquors, 13 pp.
     Alkalies, 89 pp. 78 figs.
     Alloys.
     Alum.
     Asphalt.
     Assaying.
     Beverages, 89 pp. 29 figs.
     Blacks.
     Bleaching Powder, 15 pp.
     Bleaching, 51 pp. 48 figs.
     Candles, 18 pp. 9 figs.
     Carbon Bisulphide.
     Celluloid, 9 pp.
     Cements.
     Clay.
     Coal-tar Products, 44 pp. 14 figs.
     Cocoa, 8 pp.
     Coffee, 32 pp. 13 figs.
     Cork, 8 pp. 17 figs.
     Cotton Manufactures, 62 pp. 57 figs.
     Drugs, 38 pp.
     Dyeing and Calico Printing, 28 pp. 9 figs.
     Dyestuffs, 16 pp.
     Electro-Metallurgy, 13 pp.
     Explosives, 22 pp. 33 figs.
     Feathers.
     Fibrous Substances, 92 pp. 79 figs.
     Floor-cloth, 16 pp. 21 figs.
     Food Preservation, 8 pp.
     Fruit, 8 pp.
     Fur, 5 pp.
     Gas, Coal, 8 pp.
     Gems.
     Glass, 45 pp. 77 figs.
     Graphite, 7 pp.
     Hair, 7 pp.
     Hair Manufactures.
     Hats, 26 pp. 26 figs.
     Honey.
     Hops.
     Horn.
     Ice, 10 pp. 14 figs.
     Indiarubber Manufactures, 23 pp. 17 figs.
     Ink, 17 pp.
     Ivory.
     Jute Manufactures, 11 pp., 11 figs.
     Knitted Fabrics--Hosiery, 15 pp. 13 figs.
     Lace, 13 pp. 9 figs.
     Leather, 28 pp. 31 figs.
     Linen Manufactures, 16 pp. 6 figs.
     Manures, 21 pp. 30 figs.
     Matches, 17 pp. 38 figs.
     Mordants, 13 pp.
     Narcotics, 47 pp.
     Nuts, 10 pp.
     Oils and Fatty Substances, 125 pp.
     Paint.
     Paper, 26 pp. 23 figs.
     Paraffin, 8 pp. 6 figs.
     Pearl and Coral, 8 pp.
     Perfumes, 10 pp.
     Photography, 13 pp. 20 figs.
     Pigments, 9 pp. 6 figs.
     Pottery, 46 pp. 57 figs.
     Printing and Engraving, 20 pp. 8 figs.
     Rags.
     Resinous and Gummy Substances, 75 pp. 16 figs.
     Rope, 16 pp. 17 figs.
     Salt, 31 pp. 23 figs.
     Silk, 8 pp.
     Silk Manufactures, 9 pp. 11 figs.
     Skins, 5 pp.
     Small Wares, 4 pp.
     Soap and Glycerine, 39 pp. 45 figs.
     Spices, 16 pp.
     Sponge, 5 pp.
     Starch, 9 pp. 10 figs.
     Sugar, 155 pp.       134 figs.
     Sulphur.
     Tannin, 18 pp.
     Tea, 12 pp.
     Timber, 13 pp.
     Varnish, 15 pp.
     Vinegar, 5 pp.
     Wax, 5 pp.
     Wool, 2 pp.
     Woollen Manufactures, 58 pp. 39 figs.

  London: E. & F. N. SPON, 125, Strand.
  New York: 35, Murray Street.



  Crown 8vo, cloth, with illustrations, 5_s._

  WORKSHOP RECEIPTS,
  FIRST SERIES.

  BY ERNEST SPON.

     SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

     Bookbinding.
     Bronzes and Bronzing.
     Candles.
     Cement.
     Cleaning.
     Colourwashing.
     Concretes.
     Dipping Acids.
     Drawing Office Details.
     Drying Oils.
     Dynamite.
     Electro-Metallurgy--(Cleaning, Dipping, Scratch-brushing,
       Batteries, Baths, and Deposits of every description).
     Enamels.
     Engraving on Wood, Copper, Gold, Silver, Steel, and Stone.
     Etching and Aqua Tint.
     Firework Making--(Rockets, Stars, Rains, Gerbes, Jets,
       Tourbillons, Candles, Fires, Lances, Lights, Wheels,
       Fire-balloons, and minor Fireworks).
     Fluxes.
     Foundry Mixtures.
     Freezing.
     Fulminates.
     Furniture Creams, Oils, Polishes, Lacquers, and Pastes.
     Gilding.
     Glass Cutting, Cleaning, Frosting, Drilling, Darkening, Bending,
       Staining, and Painting.
     Glass Making.
     Glues.
     Gold.
     Graining.
     Gums.
     Gun Cotton.
     Gunpowder.
     Horn Working.
     Indiarubber.
     Japans, Japanning, and kindred processes.
     Lacquers.
     Lathing.
     Lubricants.
     Marble Working.
     Matches.
     Mortars.
     Nitro-Glycerine.
     Oils.
     Paper.
     Paper Hanging.
     Painting in Oils, in Water Colours, as well as Fresco, House,
       Transparency, Sign, and Carriage Painting.
     Photography.
     Plastering.
     Polishes.
     Pottery--(Clays, Bodies, Glazes, Colours, Oils, Stains, Fluxes,
       Enamels, and Lustres).
     Scouring.
     Silvering.
     Soap.
     Solders.
     Tanning.
     Taxidermy.
     Tempering Metals.
     Treating Horn, Mother-o'-Pearl, and like substances.
     Varnishes, Manufacture and Use of.
     Veneering.
     Washing.
     Waterproofing.
     Welding.

  Besides Receipts relating to the lesser Technological matters and
  processes, such as the manufacture and use of Stencil Plates,
  Blacking, Crayons, Paste, Putty, Wax, Size, Alloys, Catgut, Tunbridge
  Ware, Picture Frame and Architectural Mouldings, Compos, Cameos, and
  others too numerous to mention.

  London: E. & F. N. SPON, 125, Strand.
  New York: 35, Murray Street.



  Crown 8vo, cloth, 485 pages, with illustrations, 5_s._

  WORKSHOP RECEIPTS,
  SECOND SERIES.

  BY ROBERT HALDANE.

     SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

     Acidimetry and Alkalimetry.
     Albumen.
     Alcohol.
     Alkaloids.
     Baking-powders.
     Bitters.
     Bleaching.
     Boiler Incrustations.
     Cements and Lutes.
     Cleansing.
     Confectionery.
     Copying.
     Disinfectants.
     Dyeing, Staining, and Colouring.
     Essences.
     Extracts.
     Fireproofing.
     Gelatine, Glue, and Size.
     Glycerine.
     Gut.
     Hydrogen peroxide.
     Ink.
     Iodine.
     Iodoform.
     Isinglass.
     Ivory substitutes.
     Leather.
     Luminous bodies.
     Magnesia.
     Matches.
     Paper.
     Parchment.
     Perchloric acid.
     Potassium oxalate.
     Preserving.

  =Pigments, Paint, and Painting=: embracing the preparation of
  _Pigments_, including alumina lakes, blacks (animal, bone, Frankfort,
  ivory, lamp, sight, soot), blues (antimony, Antwerp, cobalt, caeruleum,
  Egyptian, manganate, Paris, Peligot, Prussian, smalt, ultramarine),
  browns (bistre, hinau, sepia, sienna, umber, Vandyke), greens (baryta,
  Brighton, Brunswick, chrome, cobalt, Douglas, emerald, manganese,
  mitis, mountain, Prussian, sap, Scheele's, Schweinfurth, titanium,
  verdigris, zinc), reds (Brazilwood lake, carminated lake, carmine,
  Cassius purple, cobalt pink, cochineal lake, colcothar, Indian red,
  madder lake, red chalk, red lead, vermilion), whites (alum, baryta,
  Chinese, lead sulphate, white lead--by American, Dutch, French,
  German, Kremnitz, and Pattinson processes, precautions in making, and
  composition of commercial samples--whiting, Wilkinson's white, zinc
  white), yellows (chrome, gamboge, Naples, orpiment, realgar, yellow
  lakes); _Paint_ (vehicles, testing oils, driers, grinding, storing,
  applying, priming, drying, filling, coats, brushes, surface,
  water-colours, removing smell, discoloration; miscellaneous paints--
  cement paint for carton-pierre, copper paint, gold paint, iron paint,
  lime paints, silicated paints, steatite paint, transparent paints,
  tungsten paints, window paint, zinc paints); _Painting_ (general
  instructions, proportions of ingredients, measuring paint work;
  carriage painting--priming paint, best putty, finishing colour,
  cause of cracking, mixing the paints, oils, driers, and colours,
  varnishing, importance of washing vehicles, re-varnishing, how to
  dry paint; woodwork painting).

  London: E. & F. N. SPON, 125, Strand.
  New York: 35, Murray Street.



  JUST PUBLISHED.

  Crown 8vo, cloth, 480 pages, with 183 illustrations, 5_s._

  WORKSHOP RECEIPTS,
  THIRD SERIES.

  BY C. G. WARNFORD LOCK.

  Uniform with the First and Second Series.

     SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

     Alloys.
     Aluminium.
     Antimony.
     Barium.
     Beryllium.
     Bismuth.
     Cadmium.
     Caeesium.
     Calcium.
     Cerium.
     Chromium.
     Cobalt.
     Copper.
     Didymium.
     Electrics.
     Enamels and Glazes.
     Erbium.
     Gallium.
     Glass.
     Gold.
     Indium.
     Iridium.
     Iron and Steel.
     Lacquers and Lacquering.
     Lanthanum.
     Lead.
     Lithium.
     Lubricants.
     Magnesium.
     Manganese.
     Mercury.
     Mica.
     Molybdenum.
     Nickel.
     Niobium.
     Osmium.
     Palladium.
     Platinum.
     Potassium.
     Rhodium.
     Rubidium.
     Ruthenium.
     Selenium.
     Silver.
     Slag.
     Sodium.
     Strontium.
     Tantalum.
     Terbium.
     Thallium.
     Thorium.
     Tin.
     Titanium.
     Tungsten.
     Uranium.
     Vanadium.
     Yttrium.
     Zinc.
     Zirconium.

  London: E. & F. N. SPON, 125, Strand.
  New York: 35, Murray Street.



  WORKSHOP RECEIPTS,
  FOURTH SERIES,
  DEVOTED MAINLY TO HANDICRAFTS & MECHANICAL SUBJECTS.

  BY C. G. WARNFORD LOCK.

  250 Illustrations, with Complete Index, and a General Index to the
  Four Series, 5_s._

     Waterproofing--rubber goods, cuprammonium processes, miscellaneous
     preparations.

     Packing and Storing articles of delicate odour or colour, of a
     deliquescent character, liable to ignition, apt to suffer from
     insects or damp, or easily broken.

     Embalming and Preserving anatomical specimens.

     Leather Polishes.

     Cooling Air and Water, producing low temperatures, making ice,
     cooling syrups and solutions, and separating salts from liquors by
     refrigeration.

     Pumps and Siphons, embracing every useful contrivance for raising
     and supplying water on a moderate scale, and moving corrosive,
     tenacious, and other liquids.

     Desiccating--air-and water-ovens, and other appliances for drying
     natural and artificial products.

     Distilling--water, tinctures, extracts, pharmaceutical
     preparations, essences, perfumes, and alcoholic liquids.

     Emulsifying as required by pharmacists and photographers.

     Evaporating--saline and other solutions, and liquids demanding
     special precautions.

     Filtering--water, and solutions of various kinds.

     Percolating and Macerating.

     Electrotyping.

     Stereotyping by both plaster and paper processes.

     Bookbinding in all its details.

     Straw Plaiting and the fabrication of baskets, matting, etc.

     Musical Instruments--the preservation, tuning, and repair of
     pianos, harmoniums, musical boxes, etc.

     Clock and Watch Mending--adapted for intelligent amateurs.

     Photography--recent development in rapid processes, handy
     apparatus, numerous recipes for sensitizing and developing
     solutions, and applications to modern illustrative purposes.

  London: E. & F. N. SPON, 125, Strand.
  New York: 35, Murray Street.



  JUST PUBLISHED.

  In demy 8vo, cloth, 600 pages, and 1420 Illustrations, 6_s._

  SPONS'
  MECHANICS' OWN BOOK;

  A MANUAL FOR HANDICRAFTSMEN AND AMATEURS.

     CONTENTS.

     Mechanical Drawing--Casting and Founding in Iron, Brass, Bronze,
     and other Alloys--Forging and Finishing Iron--Sheetmetal
     Working--Soldering, Brazing, and Burning--Carpentry and Joinery,
     embracing descriptions of some 400 Woods, over 200 Illustrations of
     Tools and their uses, Explanations (with Diagrams) of 116 joints
     and hinges, and Details of Construction of Workshop appliances,
     rough furniture, Garden and Yard Erections, and House Building--
     Cabinet-Making and Veneering--Carving and Fretcutting--Upholstery--
     Painting, Graining, and Marbling--Staining Furniture, Woods,
     Floors, and Fittings--Gilding, dead and bright, on various
     grounds--Polishing Marble, Metals, and Wood--Varnishing--Mechanical
     movements, illustrating contrivances for transmitting motion--
     Turning in Wood and Metals--Masonry, embracing Stonework,
     Brickwork, Terracotta, and Concrete--Roofing with Thatch, Tiles,
     Slates, Felt, Zinc, &c.--Glazing with and without putty, and lead
     glazing--Plastering and Whitewashing--Paper-hanging--Gas-fitting--
     Bell-hanging, ordinary and electric Systems--Lighting--Warming--
     Ventilating--Roads, Pavements, and Bridges--Hedges, Ditches, and
     Drains--Water Supply and Sanitation--Hints on House Construction
     suited to new countries.

  London: E. & F. N. SPON, 125, Strand.
  New York: 35, Murray Street.





End of Project Gutenberg's Wrinkles in Electric Lighting, by Vincent Stephen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WRINKLES IN ELECTRIC LIGHTING ***

***** This file should be named 35015.txt or 35015.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/0/1/35015/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Harry Lame and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
