The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hubble-Shue, by Christian Carstairs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hubble-Shue

Author: Christian Carstairs

Release Date: January 22, 2011 [EBook #35039]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUBBLE-SHUE ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






THE HUBBLE-SHUE.


BY

MISS CARSTAIRS.


    Harry, harry, hobillischowe!
    Se quha is cummyn nowe.

    THE CRYING OF ANE PLAYE.


[THIRTY COPIES PRINTED.]

EDINBURGH:
Printed by ANDREW SHORTREDE, Thistle Lane.




INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.


If originality be a test of genius, the authoress of the _Hubble-Shue_
bids fair to rank highest amongst the dramatic writers of the last
century. This rare merit even the most fastidious critic must allow:
but her histrionic essay is, in another respect, equally remarkable. We
are told that obscurity is one of the sources of the sublime; and who
will presume to deny that this drama is not sufficiently obscure?
Perhaps the most remarkable feature in it is that singular, partially
intelligible mystification, which we in vain look for in other writers:
thus, when Gustard enters with his sword drawn, is it possible to
figure any thing more intelligible and natural than that the cat should
run in beneath the bed? But, on the other hand, who was Gustard?--why
was his sword drawn?--what did he want?--how came the cat there? are
questions, the solution of which is not easy. Then we have the
interesting Lady Gundie, who flits across the stage without saying a
word, like one of the phantom kings in Macbeth, leaving the beholder in
a state of the most feverish excitement. In short, so much is left to
the imagination, that the mind gets quite bewildered, and we regard
with most profound veneration a drama capable of producing such
extraordinary sensations.

Perhaps there is not in the forcible vernacular of our country, a more
touching description than the interesting child's graphic account of
the horrid crocodile devouring a yellow Indian for his luncheon, with
as much relish, and as little remorse, as the pitiless black men seized
upon the blessed missionary, and "eat him all up."[1] Hard must that
heart be, which cannot feel for the situation of the hapless
daughter--who but a Cannibal or a Whig would refuse a tear of
sympathy?--and who does not fondly hope that the charming little story
teller will be relieved by the "little senna," and "the puke" which the
tender apothecary, in the fulness of his heart, prescribes for her?
Touches such as these mark the poet. Were we, however, to dwell upon
all the beauties, our pages would swell into a large folio; but we must
restrain our inclinations, as we intend gratifying our readers with a
few extracts from the poetical lucubrations of the amiable writer, of
whose personal history, we regret to say, little is known.

      [1] The lamentable occurrence, to which allusion is here made, is
      as follows:--

      A venerable missionary was put ashore on one of the South Sea
      Islands, where he was most graciously received by the king,
      queen, and the rest of the royal family. During the time the
      vessel remained, which was only a few days, this useful person
      was fed most luxuriously, and every attention was paid to
      him--the result of which was, that in a short time he became
      uncommonly plump. The vessel which brought him, had occasion a
      few months afterwards to touch at the island, and inquiry was
      made for the excellent person who had been left there. But the
      king and court did not seem inclined to afford much information,
      merely contenting themselves with answering, "Squi wab squob
      squavarab skoi rig," which, being interpreted, runs thus, "Very
      fine man the missionary." At last the captain got the king and
      some of the chiefs to dinner, when his majesty, (after having got
      drunk, in answer to an inquiry after the missionary,) exclaimed,
      "Squi wab squob squavarab skoi rig, skadery shoy oy lig baggary
      bhum;" meaning, "Fine man the missionary--eat him all up one
      day."

      It turned out that the missionary, in consequence of good usage,
      had got so fat and sleek, that the king and chiefs could not
      resist the inclination, which, during the progress of his
      fattening had been increasing; so they gave a public feast, at
      which the missionary, cooked in a variety of ways, formed the
      standing dish.

Her name, it is understood, was Carstairs. She was by occupation a
governess, and was nearly related to the Bruce Carstairs, a family of
great respectability in Fifeshire.

In the year 1786, there was published "Original Poems, by a Lady,
dedicated to Miss Ann Henderson. A tribute to gratitude and
friendship." Edinburgh, 4to. To the copy presently before the editor,
the following note is attached: "These poems, neatly stitched in
marbled paper, price 6sh. Commissions to be sent to Mr Andrew Steel,[2]
writer, Adam's Court; Mr F. Fraser, writer, James's Court; and Mrs
Robertson, foot of New Street." Besides the internal evidence,
sufficient in itself to fix the authorship upon Miss Carstairs, she
has herself removed all dubiety by mentioning upon the first number,
that this poetical banquet has been prepared "by the author of the
Hubble-Shue."

      [2] Afterwards a Writer to the Signet--better known as the great
      Peat Moss Philosopher.

Where there is such a variety of sweets, selection is difficult, but we
will do our best. There is one charming little song entitled "The
Basket of Flowers," in which the sentiment and versification are alike
admirable. There is a touching simplicity about it, with which the
reader will doubtlessly be enraptured:--

    Profusely gay, they catch the eye,
    This one I chuse and most admire.
                                   &c.

    Such as the rose may MARY be,
    When youth is fled. She's good to me.
                                   &c.

    Stranger I came without a name,
    All these fine flowers she brought to me.
                                   &c.

    Softly, my lyre--that silken string,
    Tuned to a gift so sweet to sing.
                                   &c.

    The blushing rose, and jessamine,
    Sweet is that air--sweet lyre again.
                                   &c.

    Than blushing rose or jessamine,
    Dearer to me in friendship's name.
                                   &c.

    Softly, my lyre, that trembling string,
    Friendship so new, a fleeting thing!
                                   &c.

    No, strike! nor tremble, tremble so,
    Friendship and virtue thou art one.
                Friendship and virtue, &c.

The lamentable fate of the hapless Mary has been made the subject of a
series of fragments, from which it would be unpardonable not to give a
specimen. Can there be any thing more affecting than the following?

    --Had she, as thou! Lucretia--durst--
    But here the soul! superior by her faith,
    Triumph'd--and for her country and her son,
    Endured, in misery, all her cruel fate,
    Accursed marriage!--deep laid Malice. O MARY!
    Their vill'nous designs--were here accomplish'd,--
    And stabb'd thy fame! But time shall bring to light
    Their darkest deeds--and heal thy wounded name.
    --Avaunt thou!--Murray, Morton, Bothwell,
    And thou Elizabeth, great as a Queen,
    But deadly in thy hate--as desperate by thy love.
    Mary and Essex, victims of thy ire,
    Bright stars that fell by thy malignant breath,
    Yet, yet I weep for thee--thy woman's weakness,
                      And thy jealous mind,--
    O they were punishment enough--forgive,
    Forgive, O mighty God! forgive.

Many have written on this subject, but certainly none more effectively
than Miss Carstairs, although passages do occur in the magnificent
historical poem of Mary Queen of Scots, by Margaretta Wedderburn,[3]
which may admit of a comparison. We may instance that in which the
unfortunate Mary is made to say,

    In history, my foul catastrophe
    Is told by Dr Robertson, and others,
    In colours lively, delicate, and just.

      [3] Bannatyne Club Edition. Edin. 1811.

As every one must be familiar with a poem, which will be read when
Shakespeare and Byron are not, a simple reference only is necessary.
One of the first poets of the age has more recently enriched the pages
of the New Scots Magazine with verses on the same subject, yet we
must confess, in our humble estimation, that the Carstairs remains
inviolate--_virgo intacta_. That our readers, however, may judge
for themselves, we subjoin a stanza or two.

    I dwell upon a mournful theme; however dark it be,
    It is no vague, no empty dream, that visions such to me:
    Were all my numbers flowing rills, all glittering stars my dots,
    Yet could I never sing the ills of--Mary Queen of Scots!

    Oh! she was bright and beautiful--her charms her birth enhance;
    Descended from a hundred kings--the Dowager of France.
    Yet she was born in grief, to bear the trials Heaven allots--
    To which, "alas! all flesh is heir"--e'en Mary Queen of Scots!

    Yes, she was bright and beautiful--unfortunate and fair;
    The captive of a tyrant Queen, the victim of despair;
    What youthful heart from folly's free? what star hath not its spots?
    The virtues veil the faults we see in Mary Queen of Scots.

               *       *       *       *       *

    Away! away!--the breezes swell--the surging waters foam!
    "Farewell! beloved France; farewell, my country, and my home!
    "I'll never, never see thee more, tho' dear to all my thots:"[4]
    Thus sobb'd, as sunk the fading shore, poor Mary Queen of Scots.[5]

      [4] Poetice for thoughts.

      [5] Ascribed to the immortal quill of Mr Charles Doyne Sillery.
      See _New Scots Mag._ vol. ii. p. 168.

We cannot pass over the little gem entitled

    THE NIGHTINGALE.

    Oh! could my sweet plaint lull to rest,
    Soften one sigh--as thou dream'st,
    I'd sit the whole night on thy tree,
    And sing, ---- ---- sing, ---- ----
                   With the thorn at my breast.

We omit innumerable beauties to insert this sweet song to the tune of
"Here awa', there awa'."

    Farewell my Betty, and farewell my Annie,
    And farewell my Ammie, and farewell my friends.
                                   &c.

    Farewell to these plains and to innocent freedom,
    Believe me, my heart was akin to these scenes.
                                   &c.

    In each cheerful moment I meant you a pleasure,
    And ne'er gave offence, but it gave me more pain.
                                   &c.

    Through the lang muir I'll think of my Willie,
    And through the lang muir I'll think o' him again.
          Through the lang muir I'll think o' my Willie,
          And through the lang muir I'll think o't again.

While the foregoing exquisite lines still ring upon the ears of the
reader, the merit of the ensuing stanzas cannot be fully appreciated.

    VERSES UPON A MUFF.

    Altho' it may be black,
    Altho' it may be grey,
    Altho' it may be brown,
    'Tis all the same to me.

    For while it keeps my fingers warm,
    I care not for its colour,
    But I wish it as large as a sugar barrel,
    And as soft as a down pillow.

It is delightful to mark the strong _amor patriae_ displayed in the
following lines addressed to a young lady who was going to India:

    Shall we once more then meet on Albion's coast,
    Before, my dear, in India you're a toast?
    There gilded pleasures wait your jet-black eyes,
    And Asian youths for Scots Maria dies.
    Yes! they may die--and die--and die again,
    But ye's return, and wed a Scotish swain--
                                  Or wed him there.

We shall conclude our extracts with the following magnificent effusion,
the exact meaning of which kindred minds only can understand.

    _Sept._ 13, 1786.

    ----In a triumphal car,
    Round the Town-house of Berwick,
    The Genius of Tweed
    Drove the Genius of Scotland,
    From Berwick to town, on a mouthful of porter
    She begg'd at a door of a generous ostler.

The Editor has now completed this arduous undertaking, in which his
sole object has been to rescue from oblivion these remarkable relics;
and although so many years have been sacrificed without the prospect of
a corresponding return for the laborious exertion bestowed--severer
than was at first anticipated--he has steadfastly brought the work to
a conclusion under circumstances of considerable difficulty and
discouragement. In conclusion, he has only to observe, that it has all
along been his anxious study to furnish, in a scrupulously faithful and
accurate manner, an exact copy of the text, without using even the
slightest liberty with the masculine phraseology of the original.

_December_, 1833.




THE HUBBLE-SHUE.


DEDICATED

TO THE

HONOURABLE ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY.




THE HUBBLE-SHUE.




N.

'Tis false--'tis a mistake--there's not one word of truth in it.

M.

Never was a man so astonished--if he had been shot out of the mouth of
a cannon, he could not have been more confounded.

_Enter_ LADY GUNDIE.

Good God!--there is not one great name in the whole town that is not in
her list.

    No wonder than he was in a passion.
    She flew at him like a tiger.

N.

    No, no--he was in no passion.
    For God's sake let us hear some of her poems.

M.

Her poems!--some of them are pretty enough, to be sure--and feeling--as
one might say--(_takes a great snuff_)--But, for the dramatic piece,
certainly never was any thing so ridiculous.

N.

Her dramatic!--the thing she calls the _Scundum_ is ten times better
than the dramatic.

M.

Dare you, sir!--that's altogether an imposition--that verse was written
by her sister.

_Enter_ GUSTARD _with a drawn sword, and the Cat runs in beneath the
bed_.


SCENE II.

_A door opens, and discovers a long table, with twenty covers--a fine
sideboard, with a display of silver-plate, china, glasses, &c. The
company ushered in by a fine powdered footman_,--_The_ SCRIVENER _and
his_ WIFE--_their three_ DAUGHTERS--_a_ FAT MINISTER _and his_
DAUGHTER--_other two young_ LADIES--MRS UMPHREY, _a widow_--_a_ WEST
INDIAN STUDENT--_three_ LIEUTENANTS--_an_ IRISHMAN--_an old_ ENSIGN,
_and a_ COLONEL.

THE LADY OF THE HOUSE.

Do you choose a little soup, ma'am?

MRS ----

I am terribly fatigued--I would rather have a pate.

FAT MINISTER.

Hobbernob, Miss--Colonel, I fancy our bonny lasses at home are little
short of the three _tits_--you took at the battle of _Malplackuy_.

COLONEL.

I can remember yet how they blush'd, when they were set up amongst us
youngsters.

FAT MINISTER.

They would be educate in a nunnery.

COLONEL.

She had the most enchanting voice--the one with the dark hair.

ENSIGN.

It was the sweetest evening.

MRS UMPHREY.

Give me the pepper.

IRISHMAN.

Zoms--Miss--take care of your feathers--has the scoundrel spilt the
gravy down your back?

ENSIGN.

Colonel, do you remember the locket--on her white arm?

COLONEL.

And her mild blue eyes.

FAT MINISTER.

Ay, ay--He's wanting to introduce his story again; and to tell us how
she look'd when the soldiers crowded round the tent to listen to her
song.

COLONEL.

Sweet was her song.

      And soft the enchanted air,
    That angels paused, and hung
      Their golden harps.

ENSIGN.

She did not know at that time that her lover was wounded.

FAT MINISTER.

Come, Nan--give us one of your songs.

DAUGHTER.

Yes, papa.

    Down in the vale,
      The dew hung on the rose--

FAT MINISTER.

None of your vales, nor your dews and your roses--and your flowery
fields, and your myrtle groves.

    Play, "Up and waur them a', Willie."
    Miss, are you for a jig?

COLONEL.

Ladies, good-night--I have seen the time when I would have passed up
amongst the gayest--I am now an old fellow.

FAT MINISTER.

And has a tear for pity.

COLONEL.

Yes, sir; and a heart that can feel the happiness of others.

(_They all crowd round him._)

Oh, sir, you must not leave us--you must not go away.

(_The Company move to the Withdrawing Room._)

FAT MINISTER.

Come, Miss, give us your Italian--

MISS.

Yes, papa.

    Si li si ti o to,
    Ki li qui si o so,
      Fa la se scud.
    Qui a vi a vi a,
    Que a vi a ve a,
      Qui a vi a bo, &c.

_Enter_ MRS CONSUL _and her_ GRANDCHILD.

MRS CONSUL.

Madam, I beg you ten thousand pardons, it was not in my power to wait
upon you at dinner; there is no separating my grandchild and the little
black girl.

CHILD.

O mamma, I'm frightened!

MRS CONSUL.

Why are you frightened?

CHILD.

The little girl says, a great fish (a crocodile) came out of the water,
(the Ganges,) and devoured her father--and a fine gentleman came
running with a sword, and stabb'd the monster--and her father was all
bloody, and she would have been killed; but the fine gentleman took her
away, and they were carried by black mans with muslin on their head,
(turbans)--and the fine gentleman gave her to a great lady--All the
fine things could not make her forget her poor father--He was very
hungry, and as she lay on his arm, beneath the tree where the ugly
monster came, he was giving her a little rice--it is all--the last
mor--sel.

FAT MINISTER.

Hold your tongue, my bonny dear, and you and the black girl shall go to
the dancing school.

CHILD.

No, mamma.--(_Cries._)

MRS CONSUL.

No, my love.--(_One of the gentlemen takes her on his knee_--_dries her
eyes._)

(_A Footman enters._)

The coach is come, madam.

THE LADY OF THE HOUSE.

Madam, we are going to the play; will you be so obliging as make one of
the party? It will divert miss.

CHILD.

Take me home, mamma--take me to Cloy.

T.

A name for a dog.

MRS CONSUL.

Come, my dear--Excuse me, madam--my child is really not well--feel her
hand--I am afraid she's feverish.

(_The Apothecary steps aside, and whispers_--)

Madam, you had better give miss a little senna and a puke; if it
operates six times, it will be sufficient.

(_They go to the Playhouse._)

Mr Woods comes on the stage, and makes a genteel apology, that the
play, from an accident, must be put off for half an hour.

In the meantime, Mrs Kennedy (though not expressed in the bills)
obligingly appears, and sings--

    How sweet's the love
    That meets return.

Then a beautiful young girl, dressed in the character of Spring, sings,
and skimming along the stage,--

    When you hear a mournful tale,
      Laugh and hide your tears;
    When you hear a mournful tale,
      Laugh and hide your tears.
            La--a--a--a--laugh, &c.

"This is poor entertainment"--(_from one of the boxes._)

An orange from the footman's gallery hits the Irishman such a blow on
the nose.--He flies upon the stage, drawing his dagger--throws one of
the players heels o'er head--wounds Mr Hallion--makes such a hubbub,
the gentlemen from the pit are obliged to interfere.

The house in great confusion--the company, crowding to the door, with
great difficulty get to their coaches--a dreadful storm--a dark
night--a nabob's carriage driving like Jehu--the coachman, being drunk,
overturns one of the hackneys--they shriek frightfully, and the
minister roars like a bull.

The old Ensign, chancing to walk on foot, comes up, and helps to lug
them out.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hubble-Shue, by Christian Carstairs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUBBLE-SHUE ***

***** This file should be named 35039.txt or 35039.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/0/3/35039/

Produced by Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
