The Project Gutenberg EBook of Our Artist in Cuba, by George W. Carleton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Our Artist in Cuba
       Fifty drawings on wood. Leaves from the Sketch-book of a
       traveler, During the Winter of 1864-5.

Author: George W. Carleton

Release Date: February 19, 2011 [EBook #35332]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR ARTIST IN CUBA ***




Produced by Chuck Greif (from scanned images available at
the Internet Archive)









OUR ARTIST IN CUBA

[Illustration: CARLETON

DEL

hys Marke]




OUR

ARTIST IN CUBA.

FIFTY DRAWINGS ON WOOD.

LEAVES FROM

THE SKETCH-BOOK OF A TRAVELER,

DURING THE WINTER OF 1864-5,

BY GEO. W. CARLETON.

[Illustration: colophon]

NEW YORK:

_Carleton, Publisher,_ 413 _Broadway._

_London: S. Low, Son & Co._

MDCLXV.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1865, by

GEO. W. CARLETON,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States for the
Southern District of New York.




CONTENTS.

A PRELIMINARY WORD.

No.

SICK TRANSIT                           1

Two BOOBIES                            2

A COLORED HERCULES                     3

THE CUBAN JEHU                         4

IGLESIA DE SAN FRANCISCO               5

A CUBAN MOTIVE                         6

AN INFLUENZA                           7

FLEE FOR SHELTER                       8

THE RIDE                               9

A COCK-FIGHT                          10

RATHER COOL                           11

A SPANISH RETREAT                     12

TAKE YOUR PICK                        13

SPIDERS, RATS, AND COCKROACHES        14

BELLIGERENTS                          15

MATERFAMILIAS ET FILIUS               16

A CULINARY DEPARTMENT                 17

A BUNDLE OF CLOTHES                   18

A BUTTON-SMASHER                      19

WHITE PANTALOONS                      20

A CARNIVAL ACQUAINTANCE               21

BEAUTY AT THE BALL                    22

A DISAPPOINTMENT                      23

DOLCE FAR NIENTE                      24

LOCOMOTION                            25

THE SPANISH TONGUE                    26

AN UNWELCOME VISITOR                  27

AN AGREEABLE BATH                     28

A CELESTIAL MAID                      29

A STATUE ON A BUST                    30

A TAIL UNFOLDED                       31

PUT MONEY IN THY PURSE                32

SUGAR AND WATER                       33

GREEN FIELDS AND PASTURES NEW         34

A SEGAR WELL-LIGHTED                  35

WHERE SHALL REST BE FOUND             36

ALL ABOARD                            37

THE MATANZAS CAVE                     38

A HARD ROAD TO TRAVEL                 39

A SHADY RETREAT                       40

A SPANISH GROCER                      41

COLORED HELP                          42

VERY MOORISH                          43

CHACUN A SON GOUT                     44

NATURE'S SWEET RESTORER               45

AGRICULTURAL                          46

A COT IN THE VALLEY                   47

A COLORED BEAUTY                      48

CORNER STONES                         49

A SUDDEN DEPARTURE                    50




A PRELIMINARY WORD.

WITH many misgivings, the author of this little _brochure_ has been
persuaded to give the prominence of publication to a mere pocket-book
collection of way-side pen-and-ink sketches, the chance results of idle
moments, sandwiched with such Cuban events as paring oranges and sipping
from their cups of nectar--tearing through the narrow streets of Havana
in ragged volantes--listening in the soft moonlight, and arm-in-arm with
Cuban senoritas, to the Artillery band in the Plaza des Armas--assisting
with domino and false nose at the masquerades in the Tacon
Theatre--lounging with ices or delicious chocolate at the Cafe
Dominica--dallying with cigar and fragrant coffee, after the regulation
breakfast of codfish, garlic, and onions--snuffing up the perfumed air,
and strolling through the golden orange-groves of Cafetals--joining in
the battle, murder, and sudden death of Marinao
cock-fights--vagabondizing along the shady side of Calle Obispo--and so
forth, through all the _dulce far nientes_ of a stranger's drifting
life, among the lights and shadows of the Antilles' Queen.

The only merit the pictures possess, perhaps, is their faithfulness to
nature. Though chiefly caricatures, they represent such incidents and
scenes as every one, with both eyes open, sees, who visits Cuba; and
being sketched upon the spot, with all the crispy freshness of a first
impression, they possess a sort of photographic value, that, in spite of
their grotesqueness, may prove more lasting than the entertainment which
their humor offers.

NEW YORK, April, 1865.




THE START.--THE STEAMSHIP COLUMBIA.

AT SEA.

[Illustration: First day out.--The wind freshens up a trifle as we get
outside Sandy Hook; but our artist says he is'nt sea-sick, for he never
felt better in his life.]




IN THE GULF OF MEXICO.

[Illustration: A "Booby"--as seen _from_ the ship's deck.]

[Illustration: A Booby--as seen _on_ the ship's deck.]




ARRIVAL AT HAVANA.

[Illustration: A side elevation of the colored gentleman who carried our
luggage from the small boat to the Custom House.]




STREETS OF HAVANA.--CALLE MERCADERES.

[Illustration: The first volante driver that our artist saw in Havana.]




VIEW FROM OUR WINDOW AT THE HOTEL ALMY.

[Illustration: The old Convent and Bell Tower of the Church of San
Francisco,--now used as a Custom House.]




STREETS OF HAVANA.--CALLE TENIENTE RE.

[Illustration: A Cuban Cart and its Motive Power.--Ye patient Donkey.]




AT THE CAFE LOUVRE.

[Illustration: Manners and Customs of a Cuban with a Cold in his Head.]




THE [WICKED] FLEA OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: PART I.--The beast in a torpid condition.]

[Illustration: PART II.--When he "smells the blood of an Englishmun."]




THE NATIONAL VEHICLE OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: Manner and Custom of Harnessing ye Animiles to ye Cuban
Volante.]




A COCK-FIGHT IN CUBA.

[Illustration: I.--Chanticleer as he goes in.]

[Illustration: II.--Chanticleer considerably "played out."]




STREETS OF HAVANA.--CALLE LAMPARILLA.

[Illustration: The cool and airy style in which they dress the rising
colored generation of Havana.]




THE CUBAN TOOTH-PICK.

[Illustration: Two ways of carrying it--behind the ear, and in the
back-hair.]




THE CAPTAIN GENERAL'S QUINTA,

[Illustration: View of the Canal and Cocoa Tree; looking East from the
Grotto.]




THE DOMESTIC INSECTS OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: Agitation of the Better-Half of Our Artist, upon entering
her chamber and making their acquaintance.]




A LITTLE EPISODE IN THE CALLE BARRATILLO.

[Illustration: A slight difference arises between the housekeeper's cat
and the butcher's dog, who has just come out in his summer costume.]




STREETS OF HAVANA.--CALLE COMPOSTELLA,

[Illustration: The Free Negro.--An every-day scene,-when the weather is
fine.]




AN INTERIOR IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: Kitchen, chief-cook and bottle-washer in the
establishment of Mrs. Franke, out on the "Cerro."]




HEADS OF THE PEOPLE.

[Illustration: A portrait of the young lady, whose family (after
considerable urging) consents to take in our washing.]




PRIMITIVE HABITS OF THE NATIVES.

[Illustration: Washing in Havana.--$4.00 a dozen in gold.]




WASHING IN HAVANA..

[Illustration: I.--My pantaloons as they went _in_.]

[Illustration: II.--My pantaloons as they came _out_.]




CARNIVAL IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: A Masquerade at the Tacon Theatre.--Types of Costume,
with a glimpse of the "Cuban Dance" in the background.]




A MASK BALL AT THE TACON.

[Illustration: Our artist mixes in the giddy dance, and falls
desperately in love with this sweet creature---- but]




LATER IN THE EVENING,

[Illustration: When the "sweet creature" unmasks, our Artist suddenly
recovers from his fit of admiration. Alas! beauty is but mask deep.]




STREETS OF HAVANA--CALLE OBRAPIA.

[Illustration: The Cuban Wheelbarrow--In Repose.]




STREETS OF HAVANA--CALLE O'REILLY.

[Illustration: The Cuban Wheelbarrow--In action.]




FIRST HOUR!

[Illustration: SECOND HOUR!!]

[Illustration: THIRD HOUR!!!]

[Illustration: Our Artist forms the praiseworthy determination of
studying the Spanish language, and devotes three hours to the
enterprise.]




BED-ROOMS IN CUBA.

[Illustration: The Scorpion of Havana,--encountered in his native
jungle.]




SEA-BATHS IN HAVANA,

[Illustration: Our Artist having prepared himself for a jolly plunge,
inadvertently observes an insect peculiar to the water, and rather
thinks he won't go in just now.]




HOTELS IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: A cheerful Chinese Chambermaid (?) at the Fonda de
Ingleterra, outside the walls.]




HIGH ART IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: A gay (but slightly mutilated) old plaster-of-Paris girl,
that I found in one of the avenues of the Bishop's Garden, on the
"Cerro."]




LOCOMOTION IN THE COUNTRY.

[Illustration: A Cuban Planter going into town with his plunder.]




SHOPPING IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: Our Artist just steps around the corner, to look at a
"sweet thing in fans" that his wife has found.]

[Illustration: RESULT!]




THE NATIONAL BEVERAGE OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: Our Artist indulges in a _panale frio_ (a sort of
lime-ade), at the Cafe Dominica, and gets so "set up," that he vows he
won't go home till morning.]




THE LIZARDS OF CUBA.

[Illustration: Our Artist, on an entomological expedition in the
Bishop's Garden, is disagreeably surprised to find such sprightly
specimens.]




SMOKING IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: An English acquaintance of Our Artist wants a light for
his paper segar; whereupon the waiter, according to custom, brings a
live coal.]




THE MUSQUITOS OF HAVANA.

[Illustration: A midsummer's night dream.--Our Artist is just the least
bit disturbed in his rest, and gently remonstrates.]




PUBLIC SERVANTS IN CUBA.

[Illustration: A gay and festive Chinese brakeman, on the railroad near
Guines.--The shirt-collar-and-pair-of-spurs style of costume.]




ONE OF THE SENSATIONS IN CUBA.

[Illustration: The Great Cave near Matanzas.--Picturesque House over the
Entrance.]




THE GREAT CAVE NEAR MATANZAS.

[Illustration: A section of the interior--showing the comfortable manner
in which our artist followed the guide, inspected the stalactites, and
comported himself generally.]




THE OUTSKIRTS OF MATANZAS.

[Illustration: One of the Fortifications.--Sketched from the end of the
_Passeo_, on a day hot enough to give anything but a donkey the brain
fever.]




ARCHITECTURE IN MATANZAS.

[Illustration: A romantic little _tienda mista_ (grocery store) on a
corner, in the Calle Ona.]




A CAFFETAL NEAR MATANZAS.

[Illustration: Our Artist becomes dumb with admiration, at the ingenious
manner of toting little niggers.]




THE PICTURESQUE IN MATANZAS.

[Illustration: A singular little bit, out of the Calle Manzana.]




A SUGAR PLANTATION, NEAR THE YUMORI.

[Illustration: Our Artist essays to drink the milk from a green Cocoa;]

[Illustration: Fatal effect.--An uncomfortable sensation!]




A BED-CHAMBER IN MATANZAS.

[Illustration: First night at the "Gran Hotel Leon de Oro."--Our artist
is accommodated with quarters on the ground-floor, convenient to the
court-yard, and is lulled to sleep by a little domestic concert of cats,
dogs, donkeys, parrots and game-cocks.]




ECONOMY IS WEALTH.

[Illustration: Showing the manner in which one ox accomplishes the labor
of two, in San Felipe.]




THE SUBURBS OF CALABAZAR

[Illustration: A Planter's Hut, and three scraggly Palm Trees in the dim
distance.]




PLANTATIONS NEAR MARIANAS,

[Illustration: A Colored Beauty toting Sugar Cane from the field to the
grinding mill.]




ARCHITECTURE IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: A conglomerate _Esquiria_, on the corner of Calle Obispo
and Monserate.]




LAST NIGHT IN HAVANA.

[Illustration: Alarm of Our Artist and Wife, upon going to their room to
pack, and discovering that a Tarantula has taken possession of their
trunk.]








End of Project Gutenberg's Our Artist in Cuba, by George W. Carleton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR ARTIST IN CUBA ***

***** This file should be named 35332.txt or 35332.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/3/3/35332/

Produced by Chuck Greif (from scanned images available at
the Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
