The Project Gutenberg EBook of Third Biennial Report of the Oregon State
Highway Commission, by S. Benson, W. L. Thompson, R. A. Booth, Herbert Nunn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Third Biennial Report of the Oregon State Highway Commission
       Covering the Period December 1st, 1916 to November 30th, 1918

Author: S. Benson, W. L. Thompson, R. A. Booth, Herbert Nunn

Release Date: February 21, 2011 [EBook #35344]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OREGON STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION ***




Produced by Harry Lame, Jason Isbell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  +-----------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                       Transcriber's notes:                      |
  |                                                                 |
  | * Words in italics are represented between underscores: _text_. |
  | * Bold-faced words are represented between equal signs: =text=. |
  | * Several obvious typographical and lay-out errors have been    |
  |   corrected.                                                    |
  | * Inconsistencies in the original have been left as they were:  |
  |   geographical names in the tables are often spelled differently|
  |   from those in the text, table lay-out is often inconsistent,  |
  |   several words are used spaced, hyphenated and/or non-         |
  |   hyphenated, both per cent. and per cent are used, etc.        |
  | * In the Table of Contents, pages that have no page number in   |
  |   the original have been listed as --.                          |
  | * Several tables have been split and/or rearranged to fit the   |
  |   available width.
  | * Page 154, under table 'COST STATEMENT': '15 yds. of sand'     |
  |   should probably be '15 cu. yds. of sand'; ditto for 'rock'.   |
  | * Table B, page 56: the (¶) symbol is not explained in the      |
  |   original document.                                            |
  | * Table G: lowest price mentioned for riprap is $ 2.35 (last    |
  |   row), lowest price in column riprap is $ 2.75.                |
  +-----------------------------------------------------------------+




[Illustration: ON THE PACIFIC HIGHWAY IN THE SISKIYOU MOUNTAINS, JACKSON
COUNTY. MACADAMIZED IN 1917]




                   Third Biennial Report
                          of the
               Oregon State Highway Commission

           Covering the Period December 1st, 1916
                   to November 30th, 1918




               OREGON STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION

                    S. Benson, Chairman
  W. L. Thompson, Commissioner; R. A. Booth, Commissioner
            Herbert Nunn, State Highway Engineer


                       SALEM, OREGON:
                 STATE PRINTING DEPARTMENT
                            1919




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL


Salem, Oregon, December 1, 1918.

HONORABLE JAMES WITHYCOMBE, Governor of the State of Oregon,

Dear Sir: In compliance with Section 5, Article II, Chapter 237, Laws of
1917, we have the honor to submit herewith the report of the State
Highway Commission for the period December 1, 1916 to November 30, 1918.

The Commission desires at this time to express its appreciation of the
courtesies and assistance rendered to it by the various state officers
and county officials in the work of the past two years.

Respectfully submitted,

OREGON STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION,
S. Benson, Chairman
W. L. Thompson, Commissioner
R. A. Booth, Commissioner

Attest:
  Roy A. Klein, Secretary




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                  Page

  Letter of Transmittal to the Governor                              4

  Table of Contents                                                  5

  Report of the State Highway Commission                             7
    General Resume of the Work of the Biennium                       7
    Proposals Received on Construction Jobs                          9
    Bond Sales                                                      10
    Financial Statement                                             11

  State Highway Engineer's Report to the Highway Commission         13
    Letter of Transmittal                                           14
    Work Accomplished                                               17
    Moneys Available and Expended                                   17
    Paving                                                          18
    Macadamizing                                                    18
    Grading                                                         19
    Bridges                                                         19
    Elimination of Grade Crossings                                  21
    Federal Cooperation                                             22
    Post Road Projects                                              23
    Forest Road Projects                                            23
    The Pacific Highway                                             27
    The Columbia River Highway                                      28
    County Work Supervised by the Highway Department                29
    Construction Work by State Forces                               29
    State Highway Funds                                             30
    Equipment                                                       31
    Office Organization                                             32
    Cost Keeping                                                    34
    Employes in the Army Service                                    35

  Tabulated Statements of Expenditures and Costs                    39
    Allotments to Various Highway Funds                             40
    Summary of Fund Allotments and Fund Expenditures                40
    Expenditures Segregated by Counties                             41
    Expenditures Segregated Under the Heads of General
      Administrative, Surveys, Construction Engineering,
      Construction, Equipment, Etc.                                 41
    Expenditures for Construction Detailed by Jobs                  42
    Expenditures for Surveys Detailed by Jobs                       45
    Expenditures for Equipment, Bond Interest and Overhead          47
    Summary of County Funds Expended by the Department              48

  General Tabulated Information and Highway Maps                    51
    Miles of Highway Construction by the Department During 1917 and
      1918                                                          52
    Tabulation of Bridge Design and Construction                    54
    Miles of Location Surveys Made by the Department during 1917
      and 1918                                                      58
    Miles of Different Types of Roads in Each County                59
    Motor Vehicle Registration by Counties                          60
    County Bond Issues                                              60
    Tabulation of Contract Prices                                   --
    Yearly Expenditure of State Funds in Counties                   61
    Mileage Table of Main Travelled Roads                           62
    Map of Main Travelled Roads                                     --
    Official Designation of State Highways                          63
    Employes of the Highway Commission                              65
    Numbers and Mileages of State Highways                          66
    Map of State Highway System                                     67

  General Description of Work in Various Counties                   69
    Baker County                                                    69
    Benton County                                                   71
    Clackamas County                                                71
    Clatsop County                                                  75
    Columbia County                                                 80
    Coos County                                                     89
    Crook County                                                    89
    Curry County                                                    90
    Deschutes County                                                91
    Douglas County                                                  92
    Gilliam County                                                 100
    Grant County                                                   101
    Harney County                                                  104
    Hood River County                                              106
    Jackson County                                                 112
    Jefferson County                                               117
    Josephine County                                               117
    Klamath County                                                 122
    Lake County                                                    122
    Lane County                                                    122
    Lincoln County                                                 123
    Linn County                                                    123
    Malheur County                                                 124
    Marion County                                                  125
    Morrow County                                                  129
    Multnomah County                                               131
    Polk County                                                    132
    Sherman County                                                 132
    Tillamook County                                               133
    Umatilla County                                                135
    Union County                                                   138
    Wallowa County                                                 141
    Wasco County                                                   142
    Washington County                                              143
    Wheeler County                                                 146
    Yamhill County                                                 150




                          Third Biennial Report
                                 of the
                         State Highway Commission
                                 of the
                             State of Oregon
                                1917-1918


The law establishing this Commission was approved by Governor Withycombe
on February 19, 1917 and on March 1 the following appointments were
made: S. Benson, Portland, for the three-year period; W. L. Thompson,
Pendleton, two-year period; E. J. Adams, Eugene, one-year period. The
first meeting was held on March 6, 1917, when this Commission was
organized and S. Benson elected Chairman and G. Ed Ross, Secretary.

The former Commission, consisting of James Withycombe, Governor, Ben W.
Olcott, Secretary of State, and Thos. B. Kay, State Treasurer, held
meetings on December 15, 1916 and January 15, 1917 and on the
qualification of the members of the new commission, as provided in
Section 14, Article II, Chapter 237, Laws of 1917, transferred all
records, maps, equipment and property in its possession. The former
Commission, in view of proposed legislation providing for a new highway
code, made no appropriations nor were policies outlined, so that when
the new Commission entered upon its duties, it was not embarrassed by
policies made by its predecessors.

At a meeting on April 10, 1917, Herbert Nunn was appointed State Highway
Engineer. On April 1, 1918, Robert A. Booth, of Eugene, was appointed by
Governor Withycombe to succeed E. J. Adams. On August 6, 1918, Roy A.
Klein was appointed Secretary to succeed G. Ed Ross, resigned.

The Commission has held fifty-one meetings for the transaction of its
business. The State highway system as outlined in the law has been
adopted and the work of the biennium confined to the various units of
this system. Specifications covering hard surface pavement have been
prepared by the State Highway Engineer and adopted by the Commission, as
well as specifications for grading and bridge construction which have
been acceptable to the United States Office of Public Roads and are used
on all Federal Aid Projects in the State.

Surveys have been made on State highway routes to determine the best and
most economical location, at the request of the counties, and also
several important bridges have been designed and constructed under the
supervision of the Department. Engineers have been furnished at State
expense to supervise construction work being done by the counties on
State highways in several instances.

The program for 1917 depending upon the passage of the $6,000,000.00
Bonding Act, the working season remaining after ratification by the
voters was short, but engineering parties were sent out and the first
contract under this act was let on June 30, 1917. All except the smaller
contracts entered into were carried over into the 1918 working season.
No new paving or grading contracts of any magnitude have been awarded
this year due to the rising costs of material and scarcity of labor.

There was early seen the necessity of conserving labor and capital in
the national emergency and for that reason the Commission has been
unable to give aid to many meritorious projects submitted by various
sections of the State. At a meeting held on June 25, the Commission went
on record, as a war measure, to devote its resources to the completion
of the two trunk line highways, the Columbia River Highway and the
Pacific Highway, completing projects under construction, temporary
surfacing to keep trunk highways open or roads to develop resources
which are an aid in the prosecution of the war. Notwithstanding the
mandatory nature of the State law which created the Commission and
provides funds for work under it, the Commission believes this course
was warranted and that its action will be supported.

Due to the uncertainty of materials, supplies, labor conditions, etc.,
contractors have been unable to make satisfactory bids and on several
occasions no satisfactory bids being received, the Commission undertook
to do the work by day labor, in each case effecting a saving under the
low bid.

In a few cases, either no bids being received or the ones received being
considered excessive, work has been let on the cost plus basis with
definite cost limit set, beyond which no percentage would be paid. Three
of these force account jobs have later been taken over by the
Commission, as it was felt that the work could be handled more
economically with its own forces.

To determine the legality of the State and Federal co-operative bonds
for co-operation on post and forest roads, a friendly suit was brought
in the Supreme Court which was decided favorable to the issue.

The interpretation placed on the Federal Aid Road Law by the Secretary
of Agriculture requiring actual carriage of the mails or a reasonable
prospect before approving as eligible for Federal co-operation
eliminated from the classification practically all of the Columbia River
Highway and especially links in the Pacific Highway in Douglas county on
which it was desired to receive Federal aid.

Under the post road law seventeen projects have been agreed upon, and to
date ten have been approved, three disapproved, two pending and two in
preparation. Construction work has been started on two of these
projects. Under the forest road law fourteen projects have been
approved. Construction has been started on four of these projects.
Several will carry over into the 1920 program.

A railroad asphalt paving plant was purchased but not used during the
1918 season, since no bituminous pavements were constructed, under new
contracts, in that period. Three concrete pavers are owned by the
Commission, as well as three road rollers, four rock crushers, and six
auto trucks, besides considerable grading construction equipment. A
large part of this equipment has been in use this season and not only
has saved the cost of rented equipment but has been available at times
when it was impossible to get the same elsewhere.

A total of seventy-one projects have been advertised as follows. It will
be noted that the number of proposals exceeds the number of bidders
which may be explained by the fact that on paving work bidders have made
proposals on more than one type of pavement.

  =============================+================+===========+===========
             Project           |      Date      | Number of | Number of
                               |                | Proposals |  Bidders
  -----------------------------+----------------+-----------+-----------
  Sheridan Paving              | May   29, 1917 |     2     |     2
  Sheridan Grading             | May   29, 1917 |     8     |     2
  Cummings Hill Grading        | June  19, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Pendleton Paving             | June  29, 1917 |     8     |     4
  Rex-Tigard Grading           | July  20, 1917 |     5     |     4
  Rex-Tigard Paving            | July  20, 1917 |     9     |     4
  Clackamas-Marion Paving      | July  20, 1917 |     9     |     5
  Siskiyou Grading             | July  20, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Siskiyou Paving              | July  20, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Astoria-Svenson Grading      | July  20, 1917 |     4     |     4
  Astoria-Svenson Paving       | July  20, 1917 |     7     |     4
  Goble Section Grading        | July  30, 1917 |     2     |     2
  Rainier Hill Section Grading | July  30, 1917 |     4     |     4
  Cascade Locks Section Grading| July  30, 1917 |     3     |     3
  Viento Section Grading       | July  30, 1917 |     4     |     4
  Ruthton Hill Section Grading | July  30, 1917 |     7     |     7
  Columbia County Bridges, Wood| Aug.   7, 1917 |     5     |     5
  Columbia County Bridges,     |                |           |
    Concrete                   | Aug.   7, 1917 |     5     |     5
  Wasco County, Macadam        | Aug.   7, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Cummings Hill, Macadam       | Aug.   7, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Condon-Thirty Mile Creek,    |                |           |
    Macadam                    | Aug.   7, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Mult. County Line-Scappoose, |                |           |
    Paving                     | Aug.   7, 1917 |     3     |     2
  Bend-Lapine, Cindering       | Aug.   7, 1917 |     2     |     2
  Clatsop County Line-Goble,   |                |           |
    Macadam                    | Aug.   7, 1917 |     2     |     2
  New Era Grading              | Aug.   7, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Divide-Latham Macadam        | Aug.   7, 1917 |     -     |     -
  Pioneer Mountain Section,    |                |           |
    Grading                    | Aug.   7, 1917 |     -     |     -
  Lakeview-Paisley Macadam     | Aug.   7, 1917 |     -     |     -
  Svenson-Westport Macadam     | Aug.   7, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Tillamook-Cloverdale Paving  | Aug.   7, 1917 |     9     |     3
  Oregon City-Canby Paving     | Sept.  4, 1917 |     1     |     1
  Lane County Line-Comstock    |                |           |
    Grading                    | Sept.  5, 1917 |     2     |     2
  Comstock-Leona Grading       | Sept.  5, 1917 |     2     |     2
  Yoncalla-Oakland Grading     | Sept.  5, 1917 |     3     |     3
  Locust Hill Section Grading  | Sept. 25, 1917 |     4     |     4
  Wolf Creek-Grave Creek       |                |           |
    Grading                    | Nov.   6, 1917 |     9     |     9
  Myrtle Creek-Dillard Grading | Nov.  27, 1917 |     7     |     7
  Bridge Creek Section Grading | Nov.  27, 1917 |     2     |     2
  John Day Bridge              | Nov.  27, 1917 |     4     |     4
  Goble Creek Bridge           | Nov.  27, 1917 |     5     |     5
  Onion Flat Bridge            | Nov.  27, 1917 |     3     |     3
  Canemah-New Era Grading      | Dec.  10, 1917 |     4     |     4
  Tualatin Bridge              | Jan.   1, 1918 |     3     |     3
  Umpqua Bridge 21/2 miles south |                |           |
    of Dillard                 | Jan.   9, 1918 |     4     |     4
  Umpqua Bridge 1 mile north   |                |           |
    of Dillard                 | Jan.   9, 1918 |     5     |     5
  Pendleton-Echo Grading and   |                |           |
    Macadam                    | Feb.   5, 1918 |     3     |     3
  Echo-Morrow County Line      |                |           |
    Grading and Macadam        | Feb.   5, 1918 |     5     |     4
  Umpqua Bridge 21/2 miles south |                |           |
    Dillard                    | Feb.   5, 1918 |     4     |     4
  Hood River Bridge            | Mar.   5, 1918 |     4     |     4
  Umpqua Bridge 21/2 miles south |                |           |
    Dillard                    | Mar.   5, 1918 |     3     |     3
  Beaver Creek Bridge No. 11   | Mar.  23, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Half Viaduct Little Jack     |                |           |
    Falls                      | Mar.  23, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Svenson-Columbia County Line |                |           |
    Macadam                    | Mar.  23, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Sheridan-McMinnville Section |                |           |
    Paving                     | Mar.  23, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Graham Creek Bridge          | Mar.  23, 1918 |    ...    |    ...
  Plympton Creek Bridge        | Mar.  23, 1918 |    ...    |    ...
  Little Creek Bridge          | Mar.  23, 1918 |    ...    |    ...
  Big Creek Bridge             | Mar.  23, 1918 |    ...    |    ...
  Clatsop County Line-Tide     |                |           |
    Creek Macadam              | Mar.  23, 1918 |    ...    |    ...
  2 half viaducts in Columbia  |                |           |
    County                     | Mar.  23, 1918 |    ...    |    ...
  Stone Wall Construction      |                |           |
    Columbia County            | Mar.  23, 1918 |    ...    |    ...
  Cascade Locks Section Gravel | May   14, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Salem-Aurora Paving unit     |                |           |
    No. 1                      | June  25, 1918 |     3     |     2
  Salem-Aurora Paving unit     |                |           |
    No. 2                      | June  25, 1918 |     3     |     2
  Fanno Creek Bridge           | July   9, 1918 |     6     |     6
  Elgin-Minam Section Grading  | July   9, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Union-Telocaset Section      |                |           |
    Grading                    | July   9, 1918 |     4     |     4
  Elgin-Minam Section Grading  | July   9, 1918 |     3     |     3
  Ashland Paving               | July   9, 1918 |     3     |     2
  Divide-Comstock Macadam      | July   9, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Divide Overhead Crossing     | Sept. 10, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Divide Overhead Crossing     |                |           |
    Grading                    | Sept. 10, 1918 |     1     |     1
  Marshfield-Coquille Macadam  | Oct.   8, 1918 |     2     |     2
                               |                +-----------+-----------
                               |                |   216     |   182
  -----------------------------+----------------+-----------+-----------

Under the provisions of the Six Million Dollar Bonding Act, bonds to the
amount of $2,190,000.00 par value have been sold. These bonds bear four
per cent interest and mature in from five to twenty-five years from date
of issue. An average of six proposals were made for each issue.

  ===========+==========+===========+===============+==========+==========
    Date of  |  Date of |  Numbers  |    Highest    |Par Value |Price Paid
     Sales   |   Bonds  |           |     Bidder    |          |
  -----------+----------+-----------+---------------+----------+----------
   Aug.   7, | Aug.  1, |    1- 520 | Lumbermen's   | $ 500,000| $ 471,300
     1917    |   1917   |           |   Trust       |          |
             |          |           |   Company     |          |
   Sept. 12, | Sept. 1, |  521-1040 | E. H. Rollins |   500,000|   472,130
     1917    |   1917   |           |   & Sons      |          |
   Mar.  15, | April 1, | 1041-1560 | Henry Teal    |   500,000|   455,850
     1918    |   1918   |           |               |          |
   July   9, | July  1, | 1561-2280 | E. H. Rollins |   690,000|   643,770
     1918    |   1918   |           |   & Sons and  |          |
             |          |           |   A. B. Leach |          |
             |          |           |               +----------+----------
   Totals                                           |$2,190,000|$2,043,050
  --------------------------------------------------+----------+----------

Under the provisions of Chapter 175 of the Laws of 1917, (Bean-Barrett)
bonds to meet Federal co-operation are authorized. Four hundred thousand
dollars par value of these bonds were sold August 18, 1918 by the Board
of Control to the highest bidder, Clark-Kendall & Co., whose proposal
was $381,160.00. These bonds are four per cent and mature in from four
to eight years.

The work accomplished during the biennium may be summed up as follows:

  50 miles of hard surface.
  111.8 miles of broken stone or gravel surface.
  134.5 miles of graded roadbed.
  40 bridges.

With the close of the war and the prospect of declining prices of
material and a more plentiful supply of labor, the Commission looks
forward to 1919 as a year in which a great deal can be accomplished and
at this date a tentative program has been prepared providing for
improvement of the State Highways in every county of the State.

The report of the State Highway Engineer to the Commission is hereto
appended, showing in detail the work accomplished and the expenditures
during the biennium.


FINANCIAL STATEMENT OREGON STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION

STATEMENT FOR THE BIENNIUM ENDING NOVEMBER 30, 1918

  ONE-QUARTER MILL TAX FUND--
    Balance on hand December 1,
      1916                         $ 94,418.14
    Turnover January 1, 1917        219,690.98
    Turnover January 1, 1918        232,151.39
                                   -----------
  Total receipts                                $  546,260.51
  Expenditures from 1/4 mill tax
    fund to Nov. 30, 1918                          528,789.99
                                               --------------
  Balance on hand December 1,
    1918                                                      $  17,470.52

  AUTOMOBILE LICENSE FUND--
    Turnover October 1, 1917       $150,000.00
    Turnover April 1, 1918          300,000.00
    Turnover October 1, 1918        125,000.00
                                   -----------
  Total receipts                                 $ 575,000.00
  Total expenditures to Nov. 30,
    1918                                           281,902.67
                                                 ------------
  Balance, December 1, 1918                                    $293,097.33

  SIX MILLION DOLLAR BOND FUND--
    August 7, 1917, $500,000.00
      bonds                        $471,300.08
    Accrued interest                  2,333.33
    Sept. 12, 1917, $500,000.00
    bonds                           472,130.00
    Accrued interest                  1,833.33
    March 15, 1918, $500,000.00
      bonds                         455,850.00
    Accrued interest                    222.22
    July 9, 1918, $690,000.00
      bonds                         643,770.00
    Accrued interest                  2,606.54
                                   -----------
  Total receipts from bond sales                $2,050,045.42
  Expenditures to November 30, 1918              2,049,025.47
                                                 ------------
                                                              ------------
  Balance on hand December 1, 1918                              $ 1,019.95

  STATE AND FEDERAL CO-OPERATIVE BONDS--
    August 18, 1917, sold
      $400,000.00                  $388,040.00
    Accrued interest                  2,844.44
                                   -----------
                                   $390,884.44
    Expenditure of Board of
    Control this issue                  400.00
                                   -----------
    Turnover by Board of Control
    to State Highway Commission                  $ 390,484.44
    Expenditures to Nov. 30, 1918                   28,539.55
                                                 ------------
  Balance on hand December 1, 1918                             $361,944.89


SUMMARY

  =======+===========+===========+=============+============+=============
         |           |           |             |  Federal   |
         |           |           |             |Co-operative|
         |   1/4-Mill  |    Auto   | Six Million |   Bonds    |Bean-Barrett
         |           |           |             | State and  |
  -------+-----------+-----------+-------------+------------+-------------
  Total  |$546,260.51|$575,000.00|$2,050,045.42| $390,484.44|$3,561,790.37
  Funds  |           |           |             |            |
  Expend-| 528,789.99| 281,902.67| 2,049,025.47|   28,539.55| 2,888,257.68
  itures |           |           |             |            |
         +-----------+-----------+-------------+------------+-------------
  Balance| $17,470.52|$293,097.33|$    1,019.95| $361,944.89|$  673,532.69
  -------+-----------+-----------+-------------+------------+-------------

[Illustration: LITTLE JACK FALLS ON THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY BETWEEN
GOBLE AND RAINIER IN COLUMBIA COUNTY]




                              Report of the
                        State Highway Engineer
                                 to the
                       State Highway Commission
                                 of the
                            State of Oregon
                               1917-1918

                  Herbert Nunn, State Highway Engineer


LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL

Salem, Oregon, December 18, 1918.

TO THE HONORABLE STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION, S. BENSON, Chairman, W. L.
THOMPSON, Commissioner, R. A. BOOTH, Commissioner.

Gentlemen:

I have the honor to submit report covering the operations of the Highway
Department for the fiscal years ending November 30, 1917, and November
30, 1918.

In view of the fact that the State Highway Department did not complete
its organization until late in the season of 1917 and due to the further
fact that practically all contracts were awarded after the first day of
July, 1917, it was impossible to place before the State Highway
Commission a report which would be of any particular value to the
general public at the end of the last fiscal year. Therefore, it has
been decided to submit the two fiscal years under one cover in order
that the public may have at its command a statement of public highway
expenditures and the accomplishments of the State Highway Department
under the supervision of the State Highway Commission.

It was considered advisable by the Highway Commission to award contracts
and get work under way as early in 1917 as the necessarily late
organization of the Department would permit. The matter of preparing
estimates and calling for bids was therefore carried out as rapidly as
possible, using the data and surveys of the previous administration as a
basis for estimates.

It is believed that by awarding the contracts during the year 1917,
approximately twenty per cent was saved on all construction for the
reason that the shortage in labor and material did not become serious in
the State of Oregon until late in that season.

I wish to call the attention of the Commission to the law which requires
the State Highway Commission to make county surveys upon the State
highway system within the boundaries of any county making application. I
believe the law to be a good one, inasmuch as it furnishes free to
counties engineering skill which they cannot afford and places at their
command an organization which is in a position to carry out preliminary
location and estimates. The law states that this work shall be charged
to the counties under any future appropriation which may be made to
them.

The law limiting the expenditures of the State Highway Department for
engineering and administrative purposes to ten per cent of the total
moneys appropriated for construction, is sufficient for all purposes of
the State Highway Department, as an examination of the tabulated report
will show. However, as there are no separate funds set aside for the
county work as above noted, it has been necessary for this Department to
charge in all such work against our own engineering forces, and when I
state to you that the total sum for strictly county work, as requested
by the county courts, amounts to $137,954.74 in two years, you will see
that the Department is carrying a rather heavy burden which in reality
does not belong to it. So far the Department has been able to carry the
burden and still live within the ten per cent, but at any time the
counties increase their construction and engineering work and request
our supervision, this might exceed the lawful limit which we are
allowed. I recommend that this law be made clearer and that certain
funds be set aside for engineering work handled by the State Highway
Department for counties.

In order to anticipate the large amount of construction for 1919, the
State Highway Department has worked a rather large engineering force
throughout the summer of 1918 and will continue it through the winter of
1918 and 1919. This preliminary work is absolutely necessary in order to
award contracts early in the spring of 1919. The Federal Government
requires very carefully prepared plans and estimates for all future
Government work and this has been anticipated also, and practically
every project has been completed as to engineering features and
submitted to the Federal Government for approval.

Respectfully submitted,

HERBERT NUNN, State Highway Engineer.




                              Report of the
                         State Highway Engineer
                                 To the
                     Oregon State Highway Commission
                  December 1, 1916, to November 30, 1918


WORK ACCOMPLISHED

During the two-year period covered by this report, conditions have been
unusually unfavorable for highway construction work. Labor and materials
of all kinds have been difficult to secure, wages and prices have been
very high, transportation facilities have been inadequate and many other
conditions have operated to interfere with highway construction. During
the last year public sentiment has been opposed to the prosecution of
construction work and the restrictions imposed by the Federal Government
have prevented the undertaking of any extensive program of road
improvement. For these reasons the Highway Department has not handled
nearly the amount of work that it would have handled under normal
conditions, but nevertheless a great stride has been made in the
development of Oregon's good roads system, and the Department feels that
a fairly good showing has been made. The actual construction work
undertaken and completed during the two years consists of fifty miles of
paving, one hundred and eleven and eight-tenths miles of macadamizing,
one hundred and thirty-four and five-tenths miles of grading and forty
bridges and large culverts.

In addition to this actual construction work the Department has made
surveys of nine hundred and two miles of State roads and has prepared
designs for forty-two bridges for county authorities.


MONEYS AVAILABLE AND EXPENDED

From December 1, 1916, to November 30, 1918, the State Highway
Department has had available for expenditure a total of $4,271,515.16 of
State and County funds. Of this amount $3,597,982.47 has been expended.
These amounts distributed over funds are as follows:

  =================================+===============+===============
              Funds                |    Amounts    |    Amounts
                                   |   Available   |    Expended
  ---------------------------------+---------------+---------------
  State Funds:                     |               |
    One-quarter mill tax fund      | $  546,260.51 | $  528,789.99
    Automobile license fund        |    575,000.00 |    281,902.67
    Six million dollar bond fund   |  2,050,045.42 |  2,049,025.47
    State and Federal Co-operative |    390,484.44 |     28,539.55
      bond fund                    |               |
                                   +---------------+---------------
      Total State funds            | $3,561,790.37 | $2,888,257.68
  County funds                     |    709,724.79 |    709,724.79
                                   +---------------+---------------
      Grand total                  | $4,271,515.16 | $3,597,982.47
  ---------------------------------+---------------+---------------


PAVING

A total of fifty miles of pavement was completed by the Department
during the 1917 and 1918 seasons. Had it not been for the entrance of
the United States into the war, this mileage would have been more than
doubled, but with need of paving materials, labor and capital for war
uses, the Commission felt that it must curtail its paving program to the
greatest possible extent. To this end, only three miles of pavement was
started during the 1918 season, whereas under normal conditions the
mileage of new work would have been greatly in excess of the forty-seven
miles undertaken in 1917.

The sections of pavement completed are as follows:

  Clackamas County--                               Miles
    Oregon City to Canby                            7.5
  Clatsop County--
    Astoria to Svensen                              3.5
  Columbia County--
    Scappoose to Multnomah County Line              2.5
  Jackson County--
    Ashland Hill Section                            0.8
  Tillamook County--
    Tillamook-Cloverdale Section                    5.0
  Umatilla County--
    Pendleton to Adams                             10.0
    Pendleton to State Hospital                     1.0
  Washington County--
    Multnomah County Line to Yamhill County Line   12.5
  Yamhill County--
    Newberg to Washington County Line               3.2
    Sheridan east                                   4.0
                                                   ----
        Total miles paved                          50.0

All of the above pavements are sixteen feet in width, and despite the
fact that the prices of material and labor increased greatly during the
period between the inauguration of the six million dollar paving program
and the actual commencement of work, the cost of these paved roads has
been only slightly in excess of $1,000.00 per mile per foot width
contemplated at the time the six million dollar bond issue was voted.
The actual cost of the fifty miles of completed pavement was
approximately $872,500.00 which gives a unit cost of $1,090.00 per mile
per foot width.

Each of the sections paved is described in full in an article under the
heading of the particular county in which it is located.


MACADAMIZING

One hundred and twelve miles of State roads have been surfaced with
broken stone and gravel macadam. Practically all of this surfacing is
sixteen feet wide; there are, however, a few short stretches of
nine-foot width necessitated by the coming on of wet weather before the
full sixteen-foot width could be completed. The total quantity of broken
stone and gravel placed in these 112 miles of surface was 247,925 cubic
yards, an average of 2,210 cubic yards per mile, which quantity of
material per mile gives an average loose thickness of eight and one-half
inches for macadam sixteen feet wide. The Department's specifications
call for a minimum thickness of six inches. In many places, however,
particularly on the lower Columbia River work it was found necessary to
place as much as eighteen and twenty-four inches of rock before a
satisfactory foundation could be secured.

The sections upon which broken stone or gravel surfacing was placed are
as follows:

  Clatsop County--                                 Miles
    Astoria to Columbia County Line                24.4
  Columbia County--
    Clatsop County Line to Goble                   27.2
  Deschutes County--
    Bend-Lapine Section (cinder macadam)           12.5
  Douglas County--
    Divide to Leona                                 7.0
  Gilliam County--
    Condon to Thirty Mile Creek                     6.7
  Hood River County--
    Cascade Locks to Hood River                    18.0
  Jackson County--
    Siskiyou Mountain Section                       6.5
  Lake County--
    Lakeview-Paisley Section                        4.0
  Lane County--
    Divide-Cottage Grove Section                    1.0
  Wheeler County--
    Cummins Hill Section                            4.5
                                                  -----
       Total miles of macadam surfacing           111.8

A complete description of each of the above sections will be found in
the chapter devoted to the county in which the work was performed.


GRADING

The grading work of the Highway Department is confined to the building
of those sections of State roads which are so located that the counties
in which they occur are not directly interested in their construction or
which are so expensive that county funds are inadequate for their
construction. The total number of miles graded during the last two-year
period was 134.5 miles, most of which was on the Pacific and Columbia
River highways.

While the grading work was greatly curtailed during 1918 on account of
war conditions, work was continued in those localities where resident
labor was available and where the work interfered in no way with more
essential war industries.

A complete tabulation of the grading jobs is given elsewhere in this
report, and a detailed outline of each is given under the respective
county headings. A few of the more important grading jobs are as
follows:

                                                                   Miles
  Grading between Cascade Locks and Hood River in Hood River County 14.2
  Elimination of Roberts Mountain grades in Douglas County          12.8
  Grading of Rice Hill section between Oakland and Yoncalla         10.4
  Elimination of Wolf Creek-Grave Creek grades in Josephine County   4.9
  Reduction of Cummins Hill grade in Wheeler County                  3.5
  Grading between Oregon City and New Era in Clackamas county        4.5


BRIDGES

The State Highway Department has, during the period covered by this
report, prepared designs for ninety-six bridges and fourteen special
culverts. Of these structures sixty bridges and ten culverts have been
constructed at a total cost to State and Counties of $617,388.09.

The structures paid for out of State funds consist of twenty-two
reinforced concrete bridges, ten wood bridges, and seven culverts. The
total expenditure of State funds for these bridges and culverts was
$239,044.85.

[Illustration: REINFORCED CONCRETE BRIDGE OVER HOOD RIVER, NEARING
COMPLETION, ON THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY AT HOOD RIVER CITY. BUILT IN
1918.]

The structures paid for out of county funds consist of thirteen
reinforced concrete bridges, fourteen wood and steel bridges, and four
culverts; the total cost of these structures being $378,343.24.

Of the structures paid for by the counties, the State Highway Department
supervised the construction for three reinforced concrete bridges, four
steel and wood bridges, and one culvert; the cost of which totaled
$288,743.24.

A complete tabulation of the bridges designed and constructed is given
in another part of this report, and complete descriptions of the more
important structures will be found in the articles devoted to the
particular counties in which the structures are located.

The $250,000.00 intercounty bridge across the Willamette River at Salem
was completed, and has attracted more than local attention. While the
cost of this structure was borne by Marion and Polk Counties the design
and construction engineering were handled by this Department.

The reinforced concrete arch bridge at Hood River, the largest concrete
bridge yet constructed in this State was designed and built under State
supervision, although the County also contributed toward its cost.

Among the proposed bridges of considerable magnitude for which county
officials have requested designs from this Department may be mentioned
the Deschutes and Oregon City. The former will be located between the
present toll bridge and the railroad bridge across the Deschutes River
and will thus obviate the necessity of toll payments. It will consist of
a series of reinforced concrete arches. The Oregon City bridge will
replace the old suspension bridge across the Willamette. Studies are
being made and comparisons of various types of bridges and locations of
site are being made.

During the war period, both for patriotic and economic reasons the
employment of steel bridges was discontinued and wooden truss bridges
used instead. Now that the demand for steel for war purposes has
subsided, and there are indications of a decline in the price of
structural steel in the near future, the resumption of use of that
material in the construction of bridges will probably be more general.


ELIMINATION OF GRADE CROSSINGS

The Department is working consistently for the elimination of dangerous
grade crossings. No less than ten grade crossings have been done away
with as far as through traffic on State Roads is concerned, during the
past two years. Most of these eliminations have been brought about by
holding roads on the same side of railway tracks instead of crossing
over and back. Two of the eliminations, however, were brought about by
grade separations; one near Rex in Washington County and another near
Ashland in Jackson County, both of these grade separations being
undercrossings.

An agreement was also reached whereby a reinforced concrete overhead
crossing will be constructed to eliminate a very dangerous grade
crossing on the Pacific Highway near Divide, in Lane County. This
structure would have been built in 1918, but on account of the
requirements of material for war purposes, the United States Highway
Council ordered the construction delayed. It will undoubtedly be
constructed during the 1919 season.


FEDERAL CO-OPERATION

In 1916, the United States Congress enacted a law making available
$85,000,000.00 of Federal Government moneys for co-operation with the
several States in the construction and improvement of roads. Of this
amount, $75,000,000.00 is appropriated for co-operation on "Post Roads,"
roads over which either rural or star post routes are operated, and
$10,000,000.00 is appropriated for co-operation on "Forest Roads," roads
within or partly within National Forests.

During the five year period prior to July 1, 1921, there will become
available to the State of Oregon from the Government Funds set aside by
this Act the following amounts:

  ===============================+================+================
                                 |      For       |       For
                                 |   Post Roads   |   Forest Roads
  -------------------------------+----------------+----------------
  July 1, 1916, to July 1, 1917  |$    78,687.00  | $  127,794.00
  July 1, 1917, to July 1, 1918  |    157,375.00  |    127,794.00
  July 1, 1918, to July 1, 1919  |    236,062.00  |    127,794.00
  July 1, 1919, to July 1, 1920  |    314,749.00  |    127 794.00
  July 1, 1920, to July 1, 1921  |    393,437.00  |    127,794.00
                                 +----------------+----------------
    Totals                       |$ 1,180,310.00  | $  638,970.00
  -------------------------------+----------------+----------------

Total amount of government funds apportioned to the State of Oregon for
co-operative work. $1,819,280.00.

With the funds thus apportioned to the State, the Government will
co-operate on approved road projects to not to exceed fifty per cent of
their cost. Therefore, the State, or the State co-operating with the
Counties, must provide amounts at least equal to the amounts set aside
by the Federal Government in order to avail itself of the funds
apportioned to it.

In 1917, the State Legislature passed a bill accepting the terms of the
Federal Government's co-operative offer and authorizing the issue of
bonds to the amount of $1,819,280.00 to provide the funds necessary to
match the Government funds. There is thus available for expenditure on
post and forest roads in the State during the five years prior to July
1, 1921, the following amounts:

  For Post Road Projects:
    Federal Government Funds     $1,180,310.00
    State Funds                   1,180,310.00
                                --------------   $2,360,620.00
  For Forest Road Projects:
    Federal Government Funds      $ 638,970.00
    State Funds                     638,970.00
                                --------------    1,277,940.00
                                                --------------
      Total                                      $3,638,560.00

For Post Road Projects the plans are prepared, contracts let and work
supervised by the State Highway Department, subject, of course, to
approval and acceptance by the Secretary of Agriculture through the
Federal Office of Public Roads and Rural Engineering. For Forest Road
Projects, the plans are prepared, contracts let and work supervised by
the Federal Office of Public Roads and Rural Engineering acting for the
Secretary of Agriculture. The State Highway Department is, therefore,
directly responsible for the work done on Post Road Projects, whereas on
Forest Road Projects the responsibility rests with the Office of Public
Roads and Rural Engineering, the State Highway Department simply
approving the projects and auditing the claims presented by the Federal
Government against the State's share of the funds.

It is the policy of the Highway Department to match the Government Funds
with equal amounts from State Funds only, any County Funds which may be
available being used to increase the total amounts available rather than
to reduce the amount of State co-operation. On projects approved to
November 30, 1918, the amount of these additional funds provided by
counties is approximately $325,000.00.


POST ROAD PROJECTS

Up to November 30, 1918, fifteen Post Road Projects had been submitted
to the Office of Public Roads for approval. Of these fifteen projects
nine have received approval, three have been rejected as not complying
with the government requirements as regards rural and star route mail
service over them, and three are pending action by the Secretary of
Agriculture. The rejected projects were the Wolf Creek-Grave Creek
project in Josephine county, the Canyonville-Galesville project in
Douglas County, and the Myrtle Creek-Dillard project also in Douglas
County. The first and third of these projects have since been
constructed without government co-operation, and the second is under
construction as a "Forest Road."

Construction is now under way on two Post Road Projects both of which
are in Union County. These are the Elgin-Minam project, estimated to
cost $41,151.00, and the Union-Telocaset project, estimated to cost
$30,000.00. The contracts for the construction of both jobs were let on
July 9, 1918, to Union County, represented by the County Court, the
lowest bidder. Subsequent to the letting, however, the Attorney General
gave the opinion that the County Court had no legal authority to enter
into a contract of this nature, and in order to facilitate matters and
prevent delay in construction the State Highway Commission on September
10, 1918, agreed to take the work over at the prices bid by the County,
the County agreeing to reimburse the State in case the cost of the work
exceeded the bid prices.

The total estimated cost of all projects agreed upon to date is
$1,409,993.24 of which $627,496.62 is to be paid by the Federal
Government, $627,496.62 by the State, and $155,000.00 by the Counties
interested. On page 24 is given a tabulation of the Post Road Projects
approved, giving the estimated cost of each project with the respective
amounts to be paid by the State, the Federal Government and the
Counties.


FOREST ROAD PROJECTS

The Federal authorities and the State Highway Commission have to date
agreed upon co-operation on fourteen Forest Road Projects. The total
estimated cost of these fourteen projects is $1,246,204.65; $538,231.78
to be provided by the Government, $538,231.78 by the State, and
$169,741.09 by the Counties.

Construction is already under way on three of the Forest Projects,
namely: the Canyonville-Galesville section of the Pacific Highway in
Douglas County, the Three Rivers Project in Tillamook County, and the
Ochoco Canyon Project in Crook County.


POST ROAD PROJECTS

PROJECTS AGREED UPON TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918

  =========+=======+========+=============+===================================
           |Project| Miles  |             |          Funds Provided
  Projects |Number |  and   |  Estimated  +-----------+-----------+-----------
           +----+  |  Kind  |    Total    |    By     |    By     |     By
                |  | of Work|    Cost     |Government |   State   |  Counties
  --------------+--+--------+-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------
  Baker         |  |        |             |           |           |
  County:       |  |        |             |           |           |
   Baker-Middle |10|17.0    |$   71,235.45|$ 28,117.73|$ 28,117.72|$ 15,000.00
    Bridge      |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    section     |  |grading |             |           |           |
   Sag Section  | 9|4.9     |    41,926.00|  17,963.00|  17,963.00|   6,000.00
    of Baker-   |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    Baker-      |  |grading |             |           |           |
    Cornucopia  |  |and     |             |           |           |
    Road        |  |gravel  |             |           |           |
   Canyon       |11|4.5     |    22,498.00|   8,249.00|   8,249.00|   6,000.00
    Section of  |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    Baker-      |  |grading |             |           |           |
    Cornucopia  |  |        |             |           |           |
    Road        |  |        |             |           |           |
                |  |        |             |           |           |
  Grant County: |  |        |             |           |           |
   John Day to  |13|7.2     |   143,817.14|  71,908.57|  71,908.57|      ...
   Fiske Creek  |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
   Section      |  |grading |             |           |           |
                |  |and     |             |           |           |
                |  |gravel  |             |           |           |
   Hall Hill to |14|2.2     |    43,282.47|  21,641.23|  21,641.24|      ...
    Prairie     |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    City        |  |grading |             |           |           |
    Section     |  |and     |             |           |           |
                |  |gravel  |             |           |           |
                |  |        |             |           |           |
  Harney County:|  |        |             |           |           |
   Burns-Crane  |15|6.0     |    48,000.00|  20,000.00|  20,000.00|   8,000.00
    Project     |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
                |  |grading |             |           |           |
                |  |and     |             |           |           |
                |  |gravel  |             |           |           |
  Malheur       |  |        |             |           |           |
  County:       |  |        |             |           |           |
   Project to be|  |        |   100,000.00|  40,000.00|  40,000.00|  20,000.00
   selected     |  |        |             |           |           |
                |  |        |             |           |           |
  Marion        |  |        |             |           |           |
  County:       |  |        |             |           |           |
   Salem-       | 7|18.0    |   347,232.60| 173,616.30| 173,616.30|      ...
    Aurora      |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    Project     |  |grading |             |           |           |
                |  |        |             |           |           |
  Union County: |  |        |             |           |           |
   Elgin-Minam  | 5|9.3     |    41,151.00|  20,575.50|  20,575.50|      ...
    Project     |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
                |  |grading |             |           |           |
   Union-       | 8|6.0     |    30,000.00|  15,000.00|  15,000.00|      ...
    Telocaset   |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    Project     |  |grading |             |           |           |
                |  |        |             |           |           |
  Wasco County: |  |        |             |           |           |
   The Dalles-  |..|2.0     |    44,000.00|  20,000.00|  20,000.00|   4,000.00
    Three Mile  |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    Creek       |  |paving  |             |           |           |
    Project     |  |        |             |           |           |
                |  |        |             |           |           |
  Wheeler       |  |        |             |           |           |
  County:       |  |        |             |           |           |
   Fossil-      | 4|9.5     |    36,733.40|  18,366.70|  18,366.70|      ...
    Sarvice     |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    Creek       |  |grading |             |           |           |
    Project     |  |        |             |           |           |
                |  |        |             |           |           |
  Wheeler and   |  |        |             |           |           |
   Grant        |  |        |             |           |           |
   Counties:    |  |        |             |           |           |
    Sarvice     | 6|48.5    |   400,433.80| 157,216.90| 157,216.90|  86,000.00
     Creek-     |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
     Valades    |  |grading |             |           |           |
     Ranch      |  |        |             |           |           |
     Project    |  |        |             |           |           |
                |  |        |             |           |           |
  Yamhill       |  |        |             |           |           |
  County:       |  |        |             |           |           |
   Grande       |12|2.8     |    39,683.38|  14,841.69|  14,841.69|  10,000.00
    Ronde       |  |miles-- |             |           |           |
    Project     |  |grading |             |           |           |
                |  |and     |             |           |           |
                |  |gravel  |             |           |           |
  --------------+--+--------+-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------
        Total estimated cost|$1,409,993.24|           |           |
          of all Projects   |             |           |           |
        Federal Government  |             |$627,496.62|           |
          Funds             |             |           |           |
        State Funds         |             |           |$627,496.62|
        County Funds        |             |           |           |$155,000.00
  --------------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------

The Canyonville-Galesville section is what is generally known as Cow
Creek Canyon, one of the worst stretches on the Pacific Highway. This
section is 9.7 miles in length, and is to be graded sixteen feet wide;
the estimated total cost being $211,000.00. The work is under contract
to John Hampshire & Co., of Grants Pass.

The Three Rivers Project is 10.35 miles in length and lies between Hebo
and Dolph on the Portland-Tillamook Highway in Tillamook County. The
County of Tillamook, represented by its County Court was the low bidder
on this work, but before the contract was entered into, the Attorney
General ruled that the County Court had no authority to contract work of
this kind. The State Highway Department having available the necessary
equipment and desiring to get this important piece of road work under
way, agreed with the Federal Government to take the work over at the
prices bid by Tillamook County.

A tabulation of Forest Road Projects approved to date and giving the
estimated cost and amounts of County, State and Government Funds is
given below.


FOREST ROAD PROJECTS

PROJECTS APPROVED TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918

  =====================+=============+===================================
                       |             |          Funds Provided
                       |  Estimated  +-----------+-----------+-----------
       Projects        |    Total    |     By    |    By     |    By
                       |    Cost     | Government|   State   |  County
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------
  Clackamas County:    |             |           |           |
    Zigzag Section of  |             |           |           |
      Mt. Hood Road    |$   48,000.00|$ 24,000.00|$ 24,000.00|     ...
                       |             |           |           |
  Crook County:        |             |           |           |
    Ochoco Canyon      |    52,500.00|  17,500.00|  17,500.00|  17,500.00
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Curry County:        |             |           |           |
    Curry-Coos Project |   110,000.00|  55,000.00|  55,000.00|     ...
                       |             |           |           |
  Deschutes-Lane       |             |           |           |
    Counties:          |             |           |           |
    McKenzie Pass      |   190,455.00|  82,078.00|  82,078.00|  26,299.00
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Douglas County:      |             |           |           |
    Canyonville-       |   211,000.00|  94,000.00|  94,000.00|  23,000.00
      Galesville       |             |           |           |
    Tiller Trail       |   123,603.00|  48,439.00|  48,439.00|  26,725.00
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Lake County:         |             |           |           |
    Lapine-Lakeview    |    79,419.00|  39,709.50|  39,709.50|     ...
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Jackson County:      |             |           |           |
    Medford-Crater     |             |           |           |
      Lake Project     |    72,372.00|  34,436.00|  34,436.00|   3,500.00
                       |             |           |           |
  Josephine County:    |             |           |           |
    Grants Pass-       |             |           |           |
      Crescent City    |    31,476.00|  15,738.00|  15,738.00|     ...
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Klamath County:      |             |           |           |
    Anna Creek Section |             |           |           |
      of Crater Lake   |     6,780.40|   3,390.20|   3,390.20|     ...
      Road             |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Lane County:         |             |           |           |
    Eugene-Florence    |   123,951.25|  41,317.08|  41.317.08|  41,317.09
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Tillamook County:    |             |           |           |
    Three Rivers       |   122,000.00|  50,250.00|  50,250.00|  21,500.00
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Wallowa County:      |             |           |           |
    Flora-Enterprise   |    29,648.00|  12,324.00|  12,324.00|   5,000.00
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       |             |           |           |
  Wheeler County:      |             |           |           |
    Ochoco Canyon      |    45,000.00|  20,050.00|  20,050.00|   4,900.00
      Project          |             |           |           |
                       +-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------
    Total estimated    |$1,246,204.65|           |           |
      cost of all      |             |           |           |
      Projects         |             |           |           |
    Federal Govt. Funds|             |$538,231.78|           |
    State Funds        |             |           |$538,231.78|
    County Funds       |             |           |           |$169,741.09
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------

[Illustration: MOUNT ASHLAND FROM THE PACIFIC HIGHWAY IN JACKSON COUNTY.
ELEVATION OF HIGHWAY 4,480 FEET]


THE PACIFIC HIGHWAY

The Pacific Highway running from Portland, through Oregon City, Salem,
Albany, Eugene, Roseburg, Grants Pass, Medford and Ashland to the
California line, is probably the most important through highway in the
State. Along it are situated nine of the most important cities of the
State. It traverses the immensely productive valleys of the Willamette,
the Umpqua and the Rogue Rivers. It is the intercommunicating road for
nine of the thirty-five counties of the State, and passes through the
county seats of all but one of the nine. It is the only continuous and
direct road along the Pacific Coast west of the Cascade Mountains, and
connecting as it does the metropoli of the three Pacific Coast States it
is the most important interstate highway in the West. From the
standpoint of the tourist, Oregon would not be on the map if it had no
Pacific Highway. It is the road that makes Oregon accessible to tourists
from other states.

Being the most important highway in the State, the Pacific Highway
should be the best highway in the State. To make it the best and at the
same time to bring it up to the standard of the same highway in the
adjacent states of Washington and California is one of the ends toward
which the Highway Commission has been working during the past two years.
During that time 53.3 miles of the very worst stretches of this highway
have been newly graded to trunk highway standards. This grading has
eliminated practically all of those heavy and dangerous grades which
have made Oregon notorious for bad roads and which have kept thousands
of auto tourists from visiting the State. In addition to grading 53.3
miles on the Pacific Highway, the Highway Commission has put down 8.3
miles of pavement and 14.5 miles of macadam, the total cost of all of
these improvements being $971,000.00. As a part of the 1919 program, the
Highway Commission has already appropriated for the improvement of the
Pacific Highway the sum of $1,147,000.00, with which it is planned to
build 46 miles of pavement and 38 miles of macadam surface.

The particular sections of the Pacific Highway constructed during 1917
and 1918, together with their mileages and total costs are given below.
All of these sections are completed with the exception of the
Canyonville-Galesville Forest Road Project which is well under way.

  ================================================+=====+===========
                  Sections                        |Miles| Total Cost
  ------------------------------------------------+-----+-----------
  Grading (including bridges)--                   |     |
    Oregon City to New Era                        |  4.0|$ 75,000.00
    Divide to Leona                               |  7.0|  50,000.00
    Yoncalla to Oakland                           | 10.8| 101,100.00
    Myrtle Creek to Dillard                       | 12.8| 165,500.00
    Canyonville to Galesville                     |  9.7| 211,000.00
    Wolf Creek to Grave Creek                     |  4.9|  68,300.00
    Grants Pass to Jackson County Line            |  3.3|  13,000.00
    Ashland Undercrossing                         |   .8|   9,800.00
                                                  |     |
  Macadam--                                       |     |
    Cottage Grove to Divide                       |  1.0|   6,100.00
    Divide to Leona                               |  7.0|  64,000.00
    Siskiyou to California Line                   |  6.5|  56,300.00
                                                  |     |
  Paving--                                        |     |
    Oregon City to Canby                          |  7.5| 135,000.00
    Ashland Hill Section                          |   .8|  15,900.00
                                                  +-----+-----------
    Total cost of improvements completed and under|     |
      way on Pacific Highway, 1917-1918           |     |$971,000.00
  ------------------------------------------------+-----+-----------


THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY

The Columbia River Highway is second only to the Pacific Highway as a
commercial necessity in the state of Oregon; furthermore, the Columbia
River Highway is the only connecting link between Eastern and Western
Oregon that can be kept open for vehicular traffic throughout the entire
year.

From a scenic standpoint, the Columbia River Highway has now become
world famous, not only because of its wonderful natural advantages of
location, but because of the high standard of construction. A large part
of this combined commercial and scenic road is now open to traffic and
the coming year will see the elimination of the last almost impassable
barrier--the summit between Hood River and Mosier, a piece of
construction 5.8 miles in length which will cost approximately $350,000
for the grading alone.

The Columbia River Highway parallels the Columbia River from the Pacific
Ocean to Umatilla, a distance of 320 miles, thence southeast an
additional 40 miles to Pendleton, where it connects with the Old Oregon
Trail. The Old Oregon Trail continues southeast for a distance of 190
miles, crossing the Idaho-Oregon line at Huntington; making a continuous
highway 550 miles in length.

At this date, the grading of the Columbia River Highway is practically
complete from Astoria to Hood River, a total distance of 174 miles, and
the greater part of it is now either paved or macadamized.

The cost of work completed on the Columbia River Highway between Astoria
and Portland during the period covered by this report, after all
payments are made will be approximately $866,000.00, of which amount
$832,078.35 has been expended to date. The work accomplished consists of
9.4 miles of grading, 51.6 miles of macadamizing, 6 miles of paving, 15
reinforced concrete bridges and one covered wood draw bridge.

On the upper Columbia River Highway between Hood River and Cascade
Locks, 14.2 miles have been graded, 18 miles gravelled, and a number of
reinforced concrete bridges built, among which is the Hood River bridge
at Hood River, costing $48,000.00. The total cost of the work completed
between Hood River and Cascade Locks will amount to $466,000.00.

The sections improved during this period, with their mileages and costs
are as follows:

  ====================================+=====+=============
             Sections                 |Miles|  Total Cost
  ------------------------------------+-----+-------------
  Grading--                           |     |
    Cascade Locks to Hood River       | 14.2|$  355,000.00
    Goble to Clatskanie               |  8.2|    78,500.00
    Astoria to Svensen                |  1.2|    15,000.00
                                      |     |
  Bridges--                           |     |
    Hood River Bridge                 |     |    48,000.00
    Beaver Valley Bridges             |     |    32,000.00
    John Day River Bridge             |     |    25,000.00
    Other Bridges                     |     |    31,000.00
                                      |     |
  Paving--                            |     |
    Astoria to Svensen                |  3.5|    65,000.00
    Scappoose to Multnomah County Line|  2.5|    37,500.00
                                      |     |
  Macadamizing--                      |     |
    Astoria to Svensen                |  5.5|    30,000.00
    Svensen to Columbia County Line   | 18.9|   215,000.00
    Clatsop County Line to Goble      | 27.2|   335,000.00
    Cascade Locks to Hood River       | 18.0|    65,000.00
                                      +-----+-------------
      Total Expenditures 1917 and 1918|     |$1,332,000.00
  ------------------------------------+-----+-------------

During 1919, work will be undertaken on the Columbia River Highway to
the amount of $1,400,000.00, comprising 10 miles of pavement, 85 miles
of gravel macadam and 80 miles of grading. This work when completed will
provide a surfaced highway between Astoria and Pendleton.


COUNTY WORK SUPERVISED BY THE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT

That the Counties of the State have confidence in the Highway Department
and recognize the ability of the Department to get results is evidenced
by the fact that $709,724.79 of county funds have been voluntarily
turned over to the Department during 1917 and 1918 to be expended under
its supervision.

This, $709,724.79, is the actual amount of money paid out by Counties on
vouchers audited and approved by the Department. In addition to this a
large amount of work has been done by Counties under the supervision of
the Department, for which payment was made direct by the Counties
without being audited by the Highway Department. No record of the total
amount thus expended is available, but it is estimated to be about
$200,000.00. No part of this amount is included in any of the
tabulations of expenditures given in this report. The cost of
engineering and supervision of work handled in this manner, has been
paid by the Highway Department and is included in Table VI of the
Financial Report as "Engineering County Construction."

For co-operation on Post and Forest Road Projects, a total of
$325,000.00 of County Funds have already been pledged. Of this amount
$155,000.00 will be expended under State supervision, and $170,000.00
under Federal Government supervision.


CONSTRUCTION WORK BY STATE FORCES

While the major part of the work supervised by the State Highway
Department is handled under the contract system, it has been found to be
good business for the Department to go into competition with contractors
and where satisfactory bids are not received to proceed to handle the
work with State forces.

During 1917 and 1918, the Department handled in this manner the
construction of 45.5 miles of macadam surfacing, 3.0 miles of concrete
paving, and 27.3 miles of grading.

Although war conditions prevailed during the past year and every
possible obstacle had to be surmounted, the work done with State forces
made a creditable showing when compared with cost plus and contract
jobs. Especially is this true of paving work where a comparison of costs
with bid prices show a very substantial saving to the State, as
illustrated by the following table:

  ===================+======+==========+==========+===========+==========
                     |Length| Prelimi- |Cost Based|Actual Cost|Saving to
                     |  in  |   nary   | on Lowest| With State|  State
                     | Miles| Estimate | Bid Price|   Forces  |
                     |      |  of Cost |          |           |
  -------------------+------+----------+----------+-----------+----------
  Sheridan Paving    |  2.2 |$42,535.50|$52,438.00|$40,065.61 |$12,372.39
  Ashland Hill Paving|   .8 | 16,962.00| 19,858.66| 15,908.03 |  3,950.63
                     +------+----------+----------+-----------+----------
   Total             |  3.0 |$59,497.50|$72,296.66|$55,973.64 |$16,323.02
  -------------------+------+----------+----------+-----------+----------

Highway construction by the State Highway Department with its own forces
has its limitation, however, in spite of the fact that it is often
possible to do work at less cost than by contract. The Oregon State
Highway Department is by law and of necessity an engineering
organization and, in order to have the best success in handling
construction work, it is necessary to have a distinct organization.

In the hiring of men for handling such construction, it is necessary for
the State to compete with contractors for the higher priced and more
experienced men, and the contractor is often in a position to offer more
salary than the State. Furthermore, it is necessary for the State to
carry large quantities of expensive equipment which is idle at least a
part of the year, and, in fact, the amount of equipment necessary to
handle all of the State work by force account would represent too large
a portion of the year's available money for road work.

In handling its construction work direct, however, the Department has
the advantage of not being required to make a profit on the work,
neither has it to pay interest on the necessary moneys to carry payrolls
and other incidentals, neither is there any loss in retained percentage.
The State does not have to carry a construction bond and, in fact, there
are many reasons why a state should handle its construction direct,
cheaper than by contract.

There is much to be said on both sides of the question, but the
Department at this time does not believe that it is justified in
attempting to handle all of the State work, believing that only under
certain conditions where the State does not receive reasonable bids the
work should be handled direct.

The State Highway Department has many large construction jobs under
contract at one time, and it is obvious, even to the layman, that an
organization to handle all of this work with State forces is impossible
under the present laws of the State of Oregon, and the Department
recommends that force account be limited to such cases as are mentioned
above and work for which the quantities and cost can not be closely
estimated in advance of construction, such as maintenance work and light
grading.


STATE HIGHWAY FUNDS

The funds at the disposal of the Highway Department are divided as
follows:

       *       *       *       *       *

=The State Highway Fund= provides for one-quarter mill tax on the
assessed valuation of the State. This fund amounted to $219,690.98 in
1917; $232,151.39 in 1918 and in 1919 will equal $246,883.47. The money
available in this fund provides a sufficient sum for the salaries and
expenses of the State Highway Department, and the cost of maintaining
State highways which have been constructed or improved. It is provided
also, that with the proceeds of this fund, the Commission may enter into
co-operative agreements with any County for the survey, construction,
improvement or maintenance of any State highway upon such basis or
contribution as may be agreed upon. The Bridge Department is maintained
out of this fund and furnishes designs for structures desired by the
counties.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Automobile License Fund.= Under the provision of Section 12,
Chapter 423, Laws of 1917, the Secretary of State is directed to
transfer to an account under the jurisdiction of the State Highway
Commission, the receipts from the automobile license fees, less the cost
of administration. The law provides that these funds be transferred on
April 1 and October 1 of each year. The 1918 receipts from this fund
were $425,000.00 and with the rapid increase of the number of
automobiles, it is expected that this amount will be increased from year
to year. The fund provides for the payment of principal and interest, as
the same shall become due, on the bonded indebtedness of the State of
Oregon, contracted for road purposes under the provisions of the Six
Million Dollar Bonding Act and the State and Federal Road Bonding Act.
The unexpended balance may be expended on such State highway projects as
the Commission approves.

This fund is also used for co-operative work in counties where the Six
Million Dollar Fund may not be used and on State Highways not eligible
for improvement under the Post and Forest Road Acts.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Six Million Dollar Road Bond Fund= provides for the issuance of six
million dollars in bonds during the next five years. It provides for the
sale of one million dollars in bonds in 1917; two million dollars in
1918, and the balance as the Commission may think advisable. The primary
purpose of this act was to provide paving on the main highways of the
State, contingent upon the counties preparing the road bed according to
the plans of the State Highway Engineer.

It also provides funds for the grading of the road bed on the Columbia
River Highway in Clatsop, Columbia and Hood River Counties and on the
Pacific Highway in Jackson County.

At this date a total of $2,190,000 par value of bonds have been sold.

       *       *       *       *       *

=State and Federal Co-operative Road Bonds.= Under the Federal Aid Road
Act there is provided for expenditure by the Federal Government during
the next five years, $1,180,310.85 for the construction of Post Roads in
the State of Oregon and there is also available during the same period
the sum of $638,970.00 for the construction of highways within or partly
within the National Forests of the State. The purpose of this Act is to
meet Federal Aid in an equal amount and under this provision a total of
$1,819,280.85 in bonds is authorized to be issued by the Board of
Control and placed in a special fund to be used in carrying out the
provisions of this Act. A total of $400,000.00 par value of these bonds
have been sold.


EQUIPMENT

The State Highway Department owns construction and hauling equipment to
the approximate value of $100,000.00. This equipment is too varied and
extensive to be shown in detail in this report. However, it includes six
heavy auto trucks, two light auto trucks, twenty-two touring cars, three
concrete mixers, two gasoline locomotives, three road rollers, one Brown
hoist, one asphalt paving plant, three rock crushers and an extensive
supply of camp equipment, small tools, drills, steel, pipe, etc.

Most of this equipment is in fine working condition and adaptable to
general highway work and has been used during the past year. However, we
have on hand a certain amount of machinery which was bought for special
purposes in former years, and while it has no doubt made a saving
sufficient to justify its original cost, the Department has no more use
for it and it would be advantageous to the Department if this equipment
could be disposed of and the money invested in more necessary machinery.
Under present conditions, the State law makes it necessary to return any
money from the sale of materials, supplies or equipment into the General
Fund of the State, and it is impossible to get this money back into
highway funds without a special act of the Legislature. Despite this
fact, however, some equipment was disposed of during the past year and
the money turned into the General Fund.

If the State Highway Department is to proceed with any considerable
amount of work with State forces, it will be necessary to purchase some
additional equipment so that the work may be prosecuted more
economically, especially is this true of concrete bridge work and
general maintenance work. These are special types of work and special
types of equipment are necessary to handle them properly.

During the past year a great amount of equipment has been rented from
private contractors and in case of short jobs and on special types of
work, this is economical, but on long jobs, it is much more economical
to purchase the necessary machinery as the amount paid out in rentals
for a period of six or eight months is a considerable portion of the
purchase price.

During the past season a warehouse was built by the Department for the
purpose of housing construction equipment. This warehouse is located on
State property near the Penitentiary. It is 40 by 80 feet in size and
has railroad facilities.

All idle equipment and left over material is shipped to Salem, for
storage, at the close of the season. There the equipment is overhauled,
repaired, repainted, and placed in readiness for the next season's work.
The warehouse was built by the Department with day labor.

It will probably be advisable during the coming year to erect two more
units to the warehouse to take care of a larger amount of equipment and
provide for repair shop and garage.

A garage was rented at 660 North Capitol Street, Salem, and an efficient
automobile mechanic was placed in charge. By this means the automobiles
of the Department are kept in good repair, oiled and tires vulcanized.
Facilities are provided also for overhauling and repainting, which
effects a considerable saving.


OFFICE ORGANIZATION

The work handled in the offices of the State Highway Department is of
four classes, each requiring specialized training, and, in a way, of
little or no relation to each other. For this reason, the office
organization consists of four different offices or departments: the
General Office, the Auditing Department, the Office Engineering
Department and the Bridge Department. The work of these departments is
outlined in the following paragraphs.

       *       *       *       *       *

=General Office.=--All business of the Highway Commission and all
business of the Department with the public is transacted through the
General Office. Under the direction of the Secretary of the Commission
and the First Assistant Engineer, this office handles all
correspondence, the issuance of bonds, the execution of contracts, the
purchase of supplies and equipment, and all general office detail.

The seal of the State Highway Commission and the minutes of the
Commission meetings are in the custody of the Secretary. All mail is
received and distributed through the Secretary's office, and in it filed
all correspondence, legal documents, etc. This office also keeps a
record of all State equipment and takes care of the charging out of
rental and depreciation on same.

The purchase of office, engineering and construction supplies and
equipment is handled by this department and a considerable saving is
realized by buying in quantities. On all stock supplies, each job is
charged with the amount furnished and similarly rental on our own
engineering instruments and automobiles is charged, so that the cost of
each job may be determined. On construction projects which are furnished
with our own trucks, road rollers, etc., each piece of equipment is
rented out to the job in the same manner. A record is kept of the rental
charged on each piece of equipment so that its value can be determined
at any time.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Auditing Department.=--This department, working under the supervision
of the Auditor, handles all claims against the Commission, verifies each
one, prepares the vouchers to cover, sends them out to claimants to be
certified, and mails out the warrants when received from the Secretary
of State. All vouchers drawn from the counties for co-operative work or
projects over which the Commission has supervision, are also audited in
this department. In 1917 there were 1,782 State vouchers passed,
aggregating a total of $682,321.98; in 1918, 3,371 were passed,
aggregating $2,205,935.70. In 1917 there were 544 County vouchers
totaling $270,162.37, and in 1918, 410 vouchers totaling $439,562.79. A
total of all such vouchers for the biennium aggregating $3,597,982.84.

Employes of the Commission are paid by payroll warrants drawn in favor
of the State Highway Engineer and bank checks issued against the same.
The total number of paychecks issued in 1917 was 2,771, and in 1918
there was a total of 7,350.

It will be noted that in the past two years the Commission has done
considerable work by day labor and the above statement includes all
direct employes. It is desirable to expedite payment of labor claims,
especially to men who quit on short notice. The present law requires
that claims be prepared in voucher form, approved by the Commission for
payment and then sent to the Secretary of State for audit. The warrant
when received is deposited in a bank and a paycheck issued. It is
recommended that a revolving payroll fund be created on which pay checks
could be drawn and sent out immediately as requested. These could later
be listed and the payroll voucher prepared in the usual manner in favor
of the State Highway Engineer. The warrant when received, to be refunded
to the payroll fund which would be kept intact. The State Highway
Engineer should furnish a payroll bond to cover. This fund could also be
used for emergency claims to take advantage of trade discounts and
permit the payment of small claims which it is desired to pay promptly.

In the numerous cases in which the Commission has taken over the work to
do with its own forces, the necessary bookkeeping and detail records for
handling material, supplies and labor payrolls have been carried by this
office. On several force account jobs each invoice and payroll of the
contractor has been carefully checked and verified before being paid.

The record of both State and County funds have been audited by reputable
certified public accountants and found correct.

Mr. G. Ed Ross served in the capacity of Auditor until his resignation
in July, 1918, when his duties were taken over by Roy A. Klein,
Assistant Engineer.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Office Engineering Department.=--In the Office Engineering Department
are handled the numerous office details in connection with the
engineering work of the Department. The more important of these duties
are the working up of maps, profiles, specifications and estimates for
new projects; the checking of monthly and final estimates for payments
on contract work; the filing of engineering records of all kinds; the
keeping of cost distribution and the compilation of reports, statistics
and other data.

During the past year this department, in addition to its other work,
prepared and had published a road map of the State of Oregon. This map
shows all of the main traveled roads of the State and is believed to be
the most authentic as well as the most complete road map of Oregon yet
published. A small reproduction of the map is contained in this report.
Single copies of a larger size, 13 by 22 inches will be supplied upon
application.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Bridge Department.=--The Bridge Department prepares designs, plans,
specifications and estimates for all bridges and similar structures. The
inspection and the supervision of construction of bridges is also in
charge of this department.

The laws of the State require that bridge designs be prepared for
counties by the Highway Department, upon the request of County Courts.
Twelve counties have taken advantage of this law during the past two
years and have called upon the Department for designs for a total of
thirty-four bridges and six culverts, and of these structures
twenty-seven bridges and four culverts have been built.

A total of ninety-five bridges and fifteen culverts were designed by the
Bridge Department, of which fifty-nine bridges and eleven culverts have
been constructed.


COST KEEPING

The keeping of an accurate segregation of expenditures and a detailed
distribution of costs for an organization handling the amount of work
and the character of work handled by the Highway Department is a matter
of the greatest importance. The Highway Department seldom has under way
less than eighty or ninety separate and distinct jobs. These jobs are
scattered all over the State, and few of them are of sufficient size to
warrant the employment of timekeepers on the jobs to keep exact records
of expenditures and costs. The records for all of these jobs must be
kept in the main office where it is impossible for those keeping the
records to be personally familiar with the details of the numerous
expenditures made on each of the many jobs.

To secure proper records of expenditures, therefore, a system of cost
keeping must be used which requires little attention from the engineers
and superintendents in charge of the various jobs, and at the same time
gives sufficient information to those keeping the records in the main
office to enable them to segregate all expenditures so that detailed
information as regards total expenditures, monthly expenditures,
expenditures from different funds, expenditures for different purposes,
unit costs, etc., are readily available at any time, and in such form
that all jobs may be combined to give total expenditures of various
kinds, so that the Department is always Informed as to the financial
status of each job and of all jobs.

The system of cost keeping now in use by the Department has been evolved
from a number of other systems in use on work of a similar nature, and
is a system specially devised to meet the requirements of the
Department. For every cent expended by the Highway Department or under
its supervision, there appears in the cost records, entries which give
at a glance the name of the County in which the expenditure is
incurred, the name of the particular job, whether it is an engineering
cost or a construction cost, the particular part of the work involved,
the fund from which it is paid, and a reference to the original invoice
or statement upon which the payment is made. These records are so
arranged and so summarized each month that almost any desired
combination of costs is available, such as the totals for each county,
for each job, for each fund, for engineering, for construction, for
surveys, for administration, for construction engineering, etc.

The expenditure tabulations given in various parts of this report, and
especially those in the part devoted to the Financial Report, give a
good idea of the results being obtained with the system in use although
they do not give the detail which is readily available in the records
themselves.


EMPLOYES IN THE UNITED STATES ARMY SERVICE

The State Highway Department is very proud of its representation in the
Army Service and in recognition of the patriotism of those employes who
have gone to the Front, the Department has maintained a Service Flag
upon which there are now sixty stars. The men represented by these stars
are listed on the following Roll of Honor:


HONOR ROLL

    Name and Company                                        Former Position
                                                            with Department

    Abbott, Charles H., 23d Engineers                             Inspector
    Brown, Merle, Batt. F, 5th Field Artillery                     Chainman
    Chittick, Ernest                                               Chainman
    Chrisman, William                                              Chainman
    Coats, Solomon                                                 Chainman
    Conway, M. A., Navy                                          Timekeeper
    Cook, Harold, Private, S. A. T. C., Willamette University   Blueprinter
    Cooley, Lorrin D., Company Mechanic, 11th Co., Coast           Chainman
      Artillery
    Cowgill, W. C. Jr., 1st Provisional Co., 32d          Resident Engineer
      Engineers
    Cutler, Oscar, 472d Engineer Reg.                     Locating Engineer
    Glass, D. G., 2d Lieut., Co. D, 42d Engineers         Locating Engineer
    Grabenhorst, Eugene B., Private, Co. P, 5th Bn.,          Instrumentman
      22d Engineers
    Green, E. R. Private, Co. A, 23d Engineers            Resident Engineer
    Greenwood, P. S.                                             Transitman
    Grey, Ulric R., Camp 4-C, Spruce Squadron                 Instrumentman
    Hale, E. E.                                                    Chainman
    Harris, Milton, 2d Lieut.                                    Transitman
    Hodgman, K. E., Captain, Spruce Division, Signal      Resident Engineer
      Corps
    Hyatt, Waldron, 22d Co., 1st Regiment, U. S. Marine Corps Instrumentman
    Ingels, Hollis G., H. Q. Co., 62d Inf.                         Levelman
    Ingram, R. C., Corporal, Co. L, 23d Engineers                 Draftsman
    Isakson, C. O., 1st Lieut., 12th Engineers                Instrumentman
    Jones, Melville S., Master Engineer, Co. C, 116th Engineers    Computer
    Judd, Henry C., 3d Co., Coast Artillery                        Chainman
    Junken, Fred S., Navy                                            Rodman
    Kelley, C. C., 1st Lieut., Co. E, 2d Bn., 20th        District Engineer
      Engineers
    Kinsey, Claude, Co. A, 20th Engineers                     Instrumentman
    Lawrence, Perry, Amb. Co. No. 361                           Topographer
    Lytle, K. D., Co. C, 43d Engineers                           Transitman
    McClintock, John, Hospital Unit, Coast Artillery               Chainman
    McClintock, Leon, Hospital Unit, Coast Artillery                 Rodman
    May, Aloys H.                                            Transit Rodman
    Metzger, Floyd S., Co. C. Q. M. Unit No. 305                 Timekeeper
    Miller, E. V.                                                 Draftsman
    Miller, Ralph W. E., Corporal, Co. I, 62d Infantry           Costkeeper
    Minton, Joseph, Co. M, 162d Infantry                             Rodman
    Moe, Forrest L., 9th Co. Coast Artillery                       Chainman
    Moore, Don H., Co. A, 116th Engineers                          Chainman
    Moore, Merton, Co. A, 116th Engineers                          Chainman
    Moore, Royal, Co. C, S. A. T. C., U. of California             Chainman
    Morgan, Silas B.                                                 Rodman
    Murdock, R. B., 2d Lieut., Co. C, 42d Engineers       District Engineer
    Murphy, Thomas, Hospital Corps, 40th Division                  Chainman
    Noble, Chas. S., Y. M. C. A.                          Locating Engineer
    Nunn, Roy, Sergeant, H. Q. Co., 166th Depot Brig.     Resident Engineer
    Oerding, Chas., Engineers                                      Chainman
    Oerding, Harry, Co. A, 20th Engineers                          Chainman
    Quine, Ralph, Hospital Unit, Coast Artillery                   Chainman
    Reiter, C. G., 1st Lieut.                             Locating Engineer
    Rynning, P. B., Co. H, 23d Engineers                  Resident Engineer
    Schaffenberg, H.                                               Chainman
    Smith, Frederic W., Co. C, Q. M. Unit No. 305                Timekeeper
    Smith, Thos. P.                                                Stakeman
    Stretchberry, Ray, 17th Co., 23d Engineers                       Rodman
    Sutter, L. R., Co. F, 4th Engineers                            Chainman
    Tilley, Walker B., Co. K, 18th Railway Engineers          Instrumentman
    Welborn, Forrest, Sergeant, 44th Machine Gun Company              Clerk
    Wilson, Otis E.                                               Inspector
    Withycombe, Earl, 20th Engineers                      Resident Engineer
    Vester, Albert                                                 Chainman


SUMMARY

The classification of employes lost to the Department through enlistment
in the Army is as follows:

  District engineers   2
  Locating engineers   4
  Resident engineers   6
  Transitmen           9
  Draftsmen            2
  Levelmen             1
  Computers            2
  Topographers         1
  Timekeepers          3
  Inspectors           2
  Office clerks        1
  Blue Printer         1
  Rodmen               6
  Chainmen            20
                      --
    Total number      60

[Illustration: REINFORCED CONCRETE HALF VIADUCT ON THE COLUMBIA RIVER
HIGHWAY BETWEEN GOBLE AND RAINIER IN COLUMBIA COUNTY, CONSTRUCTED IN
1918]




                            Financial Report

                    Fund Allotments and Expenditures
                        During the Fiscal Period

                 December 1, 1916, to November 30, 1918


  Grand Total of Funds Allotted        $4,271,515.16
  Grand Total of Expenditures           3,597,982.47
                                       -------------
  Balance on hand December 1st, 1918   $  673,532.69

The details of fund allotments and expenditures are set forth in tables
as follows:

  Table I.     Fund Allotments from all sources.

  Table II.    Summary of Fund Allotments and Fund Expenditures.

  Table III.   Expenditures Segregated by Counties.

  Table IV.    Expenditures Segregated under the Headings of General
               Administrative, Surveys, Construction Engineering,
               Construction, Equipment and Unclassified.

  Table V.     Expenditures for Construction Detailed by Jobs.

  Table VI.    Expenditures for Surveys Detailed by Jobs.

  Table VII.   Expenditures for Equipment, Bond Interest and Overhead.

  Table VIII.  Summary of County Funds Expended by Department.


TABLE I

FUND ALLOTMENTS FROM ALL SOURCES--DECEMBER 1ST, 1916, TO NOVEMBER 30TH,
1918

    _One-Quarter Mill Tax Fund_--
  Balance on hand Dec. 1, 1916              $ 94,418.14
  Turnover January 1, 1917                   219,690.98
  Turnover January 1, 1918                   232,151.39
                                            -----------
    Total                                                $  546,260.51

    _Automobile License Fund_--
  Turnover October 1, 1917                  $150,000.00
  Turnover April 1, 1918                     300,000.00
  Turnover October 1, 1918                   125,000.00
                                            -----------
    Total                                                $  575,000.00

    _Six Million Dollar Bond Fund_--
  Bond Sale, August 7, 1917                 $471,300.00
  Accrued Interest                             2,333.33
  Bond Sale, September 12, 1917              472,130.00
  Accrued Interest                             1,833.33
  Bond Sale, March 15, 1918                  455,850.00
  Accrued Interest                               222.22
  Bond Sale, July 9, 1918                    643,770.00
  Accrued Interest                             2,606.54
                                            -----------
    Total                                                $2,050,045.42

    _State and Federal Co-operative Bond Fund_--
  Bond Sale, August 18, 1917                $388,040.00
  Accrued Interest                             2,844.44
  Less expenditures by Board of Control          400.00
                                            -----------
    Total                                                $  390,484.44

    _County Funds_--
  Payments on Vouchers drawn by Department                  709,724.79
                                                           -----------
  Grand Total Funds Allotted to Highway
    Department, December 1, 1916 to November
    30, 1918                                              4,271,515.16

(For description of the several funds provided for the work of the
Highway Department see pages 30 and 31.)


TABLE II

SUMMARY OF FUND ALLOTMENTS AND FUND EXPENDITURES--DECEMBER 1ST, 1916, TO
NOVEMBER 30TH, 1918

  ==============================+=============+=============+===========
                                |             |             |  Balance
             Funds              |  Allotments | Expenditures| December,
                                |             |             |  1, 1918
  ------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-----------
  One Quarter Mill Tax Fund     | $ 546,260.51| $ 528,789.99|$ 17,470.52
  Automobile License Fund       |   575,000.00|   281,902.67| 293,097.33
  Six Million Dollar Bond Fund  | 2,050,045.42| 2,049,025.47|   1,019.95
  State and Federal Co-operative|             |             |
     Bond Fund                  |   390,484.44|    28,539.55| 361,944.89
  ------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-----------
     Total State Funds          |$3,561,790.37|$2,888,257.68|$673,532.69
                                |             |             |
  County Funds                  |   709,724.79|   709,724.79|    ...
  ------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-----------
     Grand Total                |$4,271,515.16|$3,597,982.47|$673,532.69
  ------------------------------+-------------+-------------+-----------


TABLE III

EXPENDITURES SEGREGATED BY COUNTIES (INCLUDING COUNTY FUNDS EXPENDED
UNDER STATE SUPERVISION)--DECEMBER 1ST, 1916, TO NOVEMBER 30TH, 1918

  ===========+===============+===============+===============
    County   |  State Funds  |  County Funds |     Total
  -----------+---------------+---------------+---------------
  Baker      |   $  7,578.68 |        ...    |   $  7,578.68
  Benton     |         47.56 |   $    479.20 |        526.76
  Clackamas  |    155,861.10 |     43,091.14 |    198,952.24
  Clatsop    |    344,387.23 |        ...    |    344,387.23
  Columbia   |    488,302.15 |        ...    |    488,302.15
  Coos       |     16,967.68 |    170,781.83 |    187,749.51
  Crook      |      3,053.72 |        ...    |      3,053.72
  Curry      |      5,629.24 |        ...    |      5,629.24
  Deschutes  |     20,716.37 |        ...    |     20,716.37
  Douglas    |    159,769.58 |    173,550.18 |    333,320.76
  Gilliam    |     35,999.48 |        ...    |     35,999.48
  Grant      |      7,468.78 |        291.10 |      7,759.88
  Harney     |      1,873.45 |        ...    |      1,873.45
  Hood River |    433,928.22 |      3,968.49 |    437,896.71
  Jackson    |     86,619.88 |        ...    |     86,619.88
  Josephine  |     77,998.14 |        ...    |     77,998.14
  Klamath    |        819.23 |        ...    |        819.23
  Lake       |     15,391.67 |        ...    |     15,391.67
  Lane       |     14,529.52 |        ...    |     14,529.52
  Lincoln    |      2,997.47 |        ...    |      2,997.47
  Linn       |        791.07 |          5.00 |        796.07
  Malheur    |        866.65 |        ...    |        866.65
  Marion     |      5,083.59 |    223,794.99 |    228,878.58
  Morrow     |     10,863.10 |      1,009.44 |     11,872.54
  Polk       |        802.92 |     17,200.70 |     18,008.62
  Sherman    |      3,052.14 |        ...    |      3,052.14
  Tillamook  |     68,274.29 |     26,009.84 |     94,284.13
  Umatilla   |    173,942.50 |      3,542.75 |    177,485.25
  Union      |     32,188.17 |         78.59 |     32,266.76
  Wallowa    |        765.07 |        ...    |        765.07
  Wasco      |      4,313.79 |         19.45 |      4,333.24
  Washington |    246,769.05 |      9,395.00 |    256,164.05
  Wheeler    |     69,214.78 |     18,233.60 |     87,448.38
  Yamhill    |    124,958.84 |     18,273.49 |    143,232.33
             +---------------+---------------+---------------
   Total     | $2,621,825.11 |   $709,724.79 | $3,331,549.90
  -----------+---------------+---------------+---------------


TABLE IV

EXPENDITURES SEGREGATED UNDER THE HEADINGS OF GENERAL ADMINISTRATION,
SURVEYS, CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING, CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND
UNCLASSIFIED.

  =========================+===============+===============+============
      Classification       |     Total     |     State     |   County
                           |               |     Funds     |    Funds
  -------------------------+---------------+---------------+------------
  General Administration   |               |               |
    and Supervision        | $   97,621.82 | $   97,621.82 |      ...
  Surveys and Engineering  |               |               |
    County Work            |    144,086.67 |    137,954.74 | $  6,131.93
  Construction Engineering |    127,805.58 |    127,803.08 |        2.50
  Construction             |  3,059,657.65 |  2,356,067.29 |  703,590.36
  Equipment                |     86,717.55 |     86,717.55 |      ...
  Unclassified (Interest   |               |               |
    on Bonds, etc.)        |     82,093.20 |     82,093.20 |      ...
                           +---------------+---------------+------------
  Grand Total Expenditures | $3,597,982.47 | $2,888,257.68 | $709,724.79
  -------------------------+---------------+---------------+------------


TABLE V

EXPENDITURES FOR CONSTRUCTION WORK DETAILED BY JOBS--DECEMBER 1ST, 1916,
TO NOVEMBER 30TH, 1918

  ==================================+=============================+
                                    |           TOTALS            |
                                    +--------------+--------------+
                                    |  Estimated   |   Expended   |
             JOBS                   |    total     |   to date    |
                                    | cost of job  |              |
  ----------------------------------+--------------+--------------+
  Clackamas County:                 |              |              |
    Paving--Oregon City to Canby    |  $135,000.00 |  $102,114.85 |
    Grading--Canemah Hill Section   |    27,500.00 |    24,037.20 |
    Grading and Rock Crushing--New  |    66,000.00 |    63,047.79 |
      Era                           |              |              |
    Grading--Multnomah Co. Line to  |     5,746.80 |     7,746.68 |
      Oswego                        |              |              |
  Clatsop County:                   |              |              |
    Grading and Paving--Astoria to  |   236,000.00 |    96,955.97 |
      Svensen                       |              |              |
    Macadamizing--Svensen to        |   216,000.00 |   210,079.16 |
      Columbia Co. Line             |              |              |
    John Day River Bridge east of   |    25,000.00 |    21,051.52 |
      Astoria                       |              |              |
    Plympton Creek Bridge at        |     6,413.19 |     6,413.19 |
      Westport                      |              |              |
    Big Creek Bridge near Knappa    |     8,446.70 |     8,446.70 |
    Little Creek Culvert near Knappa|       929.69 |       929.60 |
    Miscellaneous charges on work   |       247.94 |       247.94 |
      prior to 1917                 |              |              |
  Columbia County:                  |              |              |
    Paving--Multnomah Co. Line to   |    37,652.59 |    37,652.59 |
      Scappoose                     |              |              |
    Macadam--Clatsop Co. Line to    |   121,000.00 |   118,922.90 |
      Clatskanie                    |              |              |
    Macadam--Clatskanie to Delena   |   142,000.00 |   136,560.40 |
    Macadam--Delena to Goble        |    49,955.08 |    49,955.08 |
    Macadam--Goble Section          |    23,000.00 |    21,478.97 |
    Grading--Goble Section          |    46,262.64 |    46,262.64 |
    Grading--Rainier Hill Section   |     6,350.61 |     6,350.61 |
    Grading--Beaver Valley Section  |    20,978.22 |    20,978.22 |
    Grading--Deer Island Section    |     2,398.10 |     2,398.10 |
    Concrete Viaduct, Cribbing and  |     9,039.86 |     9,039.86 |
      Masonry Wall, near Prescott   |              |              |
    Beaver Valley Bridges           |    32,000.00 |    29,808.58 |
    Scappoose Culvert               |     1,834.60 |     1,834.60 |
    Goble Creek Bridge near Goble   |     5,907.14 |     5,907.14 |
    Graham Creek Culvert near       |       804.49 |       804.49 |
      Clatskanie                    |              |              |
  Coos County:                      |              |              |
    Coast Highway and Myrtle Point- |   180,235.18 |   180,235.18 |
      Coquille Road                 |              |              |
  Crook County:                     |              |              |
    Ochoco Canyon Forest Road       |    52,500.00 |     3,053.72 |
      Project (Federal Government   |              |              |
      cooperates on this project to |              |              |
      the amount of $17,500.00)     |              |              |
  Deschutes County:                 |              |              |
    Cinder Macadam--Bend to LaPine  |    20,183.60 |    20,183.60 |
  Douglas County:                   |              |              |
    Grading--Divide to Comstock     |    19,146.74 |    19,146.74 |
    Grading and Macadam--Comstock   |    80,000.00 |    79,092.87 |
      to Leona                      |              |              |
    Grading--Oakland to Yoncalla    |   101,096.12 |   101,096.12 |
    Grading--Myrtle Creek to Dillard|   120,000.00 |    88,376.99 |
    Macadamizing--Divide to Comstock|    15,185.09 |    15,185.09 |
    Maintenance--Glendale to Stage  |        74.65 |        74.65 |
      Road Pass                     |              |              |
    Umpqua River Bridges near       |    45,500.00 |    24,802.85 |
      Dillard                       |              |              |
  Gilliam County:                   |              |              |
    Macadam--Condon to Thirty Mile  |    32,500.00 |    31,096.05 |
      Creek                         |              |              |
  Hood River County:                |              |              |
    Grading--Cascade Locks Section  |   152,904.85 |   152,904.85 |
    Grading--Viento Section         |   102,750.00 |    86,933.00 |
    Grading--Ruthton Hill Section   |   107,000.00 |    90,257.53 |
    Macadam--Cascade Locks to Hood  |    68,000.00 |    62,895.48 |
      River                         |              |              |
    Hood River Bridge               |    48,000.00 |    40,528.29 |
  Jackson County:                   |              |              |
    Macadam--Siskiyou to California |    56,252.98 |    56,252.98 |
      Line                          |              |              |
    Ashland Under-crossing          |     9,768.88 |     9,768.88 |
    Paving--Ashland Hill Section    |    15,908.03 |    15,908.03 |
    Maintenance--Siskiyou Section   |       748.34 |       748.34 |
  Josephine County:                 |              |              |
    Grading--Wolf Creek to Grave    |    68,301.53 |    68,301.53 |
      Creek                         |              |              |
    Grading--Locust Hill Section    |     4,869.97 |     4,869.97 |
    Miscellaneous charges on        |       409.43 |       409.43 |
      construction in 1916          |              |              |
  Lake County:                      |              |              |
    Grading and Macadam--Lakeview   |    15,391.67 |    15,391.67 |
      to Paisley                    |              |              |
  Lane County:                      |              |              |
    Macadam--Divide to Cottage Grove|     6,099.86 |     6,099.86 |
    Construction prior to 1917      |       424.44 |       424.44 |
  Lincoln County:                   |              |              |
    Grading--Pioneer Mountain       |     2,054.05 |     2,054.05 |
      Section                       |              |              |
  Marion County:                    |              |              |
    Salem Bridge over Willamette    |   223,902.99 |   223,902.99 |
      River                         |              |              |
  Polk County:                      |              |              |
    Approach to Salem Bridge        |     4,548.10 |     4,548.10 |
    Reinforced Concrete Bridge at   |    10,755.68 |    10,755.68 |
      Dallas                        |              |              |
    Reinforced Concrete Bridge      |     1,898.17 |     1,898.17 |
      between Monmouth and Dallas   |              |              |
    Charges on work prior to 1917   |       418.69 |       418.69 |
  Tillamook County:                 |              |              |
    Grading and Paving--Tillamook   |   109,250.00 |    89,213.74 |
      to Hebo                       |              |              |
    Grading--Three Rivers Forest    |   122,000.00 |     2,076.78 |
      Road Project (The Federal     |              |              |
      Government cooperates on this |              |              |
      project to the amount of      |              |              |
      $50,250.00.)                  |              |              |
  Umatilla County:                  |              |              |
    Paving--Wild Horse Creek Section|   162,626.56 |   162,626.56 |
  Union County:                     |              |              |
    Grading--La Grande to Hot Lake  |     5,000.16 |     5,000.16 |
    Grading--Elgin-Minam Post Road  |    41,151.00 |     3,838.44 |
      Project (The Federal          |              |              |
      Government cooperates on this |              |              |
      project to the amount of      |              |              |
      $20,575.50)                   |              |              |
    Grading--Union-Telocaset Post   |    30,000.00 |    16,642.29 |
      Road Project (The Federal     |              |              |
      Government cooperates on this |              |              |
      project to the amount of      |              |              |
      $15,000.00.)                  |              |              |
  Washington County:                |              |              |
    Grading and Paving--Multnomah   |   332,000.00 |   278,976.93 |
      Co. Line to Newberg           |              |              |
    Onion Flat Trestle near Sherwood|     8,372.22 |     8,372.22 |
    Tualatin River Bridge near      |    12,968.60 |    12,968.60 |
      Tigardville                   |              |              |
    Fanno Creek Bridge near Tigard  |     1,882.81 |     1,882.81 |
  Wheeler County:                   |              |              |
    Grading--Cummins Hill Section   |    14,532.35 |    14,532.35 |
    Macadam--Cummins Hill Section   |    34,000.00 |    32,465 44 |
    Grading--Bridge Creek Section   |    24,235.45 |    24,235.45 |
    Resurfacing between Fossil and  |    15,000.00 |       444.88 |
      Condon                        |              |              |
  Yamhill County:                   |              |              |
    Grading Rex to Newberg          |     6,153.05 |     6,153.05 |
    Sheridan Paving, 1917           |    38,216.04 |    38,216.04 |
    Sheridan Paving, 1918           |    40,065.61 |    40,065.61 |
    Completion of Sour Grass Cut-off|     5,111.19 |     5,111.19 |
                                    +--------------+--------------+
                                    |$3,795,861.61 |$3,187,463.23 |
  ----------------------------------+--------------+--------------+

  ==================================+=============================+
                                    |         STATE FUNDS         |
                                    +--------------+--------------+
                                    |   State's    |  Expended    |
             JOBS                   |   share of   |    from      |
                                    |  estimated   | State funds  |
                                    |     cost     |   to date    |
  ----------------------------------+--------------+--------------+
  Clackamas County:                 |              |              |
    Paving--Oregon City to Canby    |  $135,000.00 |  $102,114.85 |
    Grading--Canemah Hill Section   |     2,500.00 |     1,944.67 |
    Grading and Rock Crushing--New  |    50,240.09 |    47,287.88 |
      Era                           |              |              |
    Grading--Multnomah Co. Line to  |       507.98 |       507.98 |
      Oswego                        |              |              |
  Clatsop County:                   |              |              |
    Grading and Paving--Astoria to  |   236,000.00 |    96,955.97 |
      Svensen                       |              |              |
    Macadamizing--Svensen to        |   216,000.00 |   210,079.16 |
      Columbia Co. Line             |              |              |
    John Day River Bridge east of   |    25,000.00 |    21,051.52 |
      Astoria                       |              |              |
    Plympton Creek Bridge at        |     6,413.19 |     6,413.19 |
      Westport                      |              |              |
    Big Creek Bridge near Knappa    |     8,446.70 |     8,446.70 |
    Little Creek Culvert near Knappa|       929.69 |       929.69 |
    Miscellaneous charges on work   |       247.94 |       247.94 |
      prior to 1917                 |              |              |
  Columbia County:                  |              |              |
    Paving--Multnomah Co. Line to   |    37,652.59 |    37,652.59 |
      Scappoose                     |              |              |
    Macadam--Clatsop Co. Line to    |   121,000.00 |   118,922.90 |
      Clatskanie                    |              |              |
    Macadam--Clatskanie to Delena   |   142,000.00 |   136,560.40 |
    Macadam--Delena to Goble        |    49,955.08 |    49,955.08 |
    Macadam--Goble Section          |    23,000.00 |    21,478.97 |
    Grading--Goble Section          |    46,262.64 |    46,262.64 |
    Grading--Rainier Hill Section   |     6,350.61 |     6,350.61 |
    Grading--Beaver Valley Section  |    20,978.22 |    20,978.22 |
    Grading--Deer Island Section    |     2,398.10 |     2,398.10 |
    Concrete Viaduct, Cribbing and  |     9,039.86 |     9,039.86 |
      Masonry Wall, near Prescott   |              |              |
    Beaver Valley Bridges           |    32,000.00 |    29,808.58 |
    Scappoose Culvert               |     1,834.60 |     1,834.60 |
    Goble Creek Bridge near Goble   |     5,907.14 |     5,907.14 |
    Graham Creek Culvert near       |       804.49 |       804.49 |
      Clatskanie                    |              |              |
  Coos County:                      |              |              |
    Coast Highway and Myrtle Point- |     9,453.35 |     9,453.35 |
      Coquille Road                 |              |              |
  Crook County:                     |              |              |
    Ochoco Canyon Forest Road       |    17,500.00 |     3,053.72 |
      Project (Federal Government   |              |              |
      cooperates on this project to |              |              |
      the amount of $17,500.00)     |              |              |
  Deschutes County:                 |              |              |
    Cinder Macadam--Bend to LaPine  |    20,183.60 |    20,183.60 |
  Douglas County:                   |              |              |
    Grading--Divide to Comstock     |     2,027.30 |     2,027.30 |
    Grading and Macadam--Comstock   |     5,650.28 |     4,743.15 |
      to Leona                      |              |              |
    Grading--Oakland to Yoncalla    |    17,565.28 |    19,015.10 |
    Grading--Myrtle Creek to Dillard|   120,000.00 |    88,376.99 |
    Macadamizing--Divide to Comstock|    15,185.09 |    15,185.09 |
    Maintenance--Glendale to Stage  |        74.65 |        74.65 |
      Road Pass                     |              |              |
    Umpqua River Bridges near       |    45,500.00 |    24,802.85 |
      Dillard                       |              |              |
  Gilliam County:                   |              |              |
    Macadam--Condon to Thirty Mile  |    32,500.00 |    31,096.05 |
      Creek                         |              |              |
  Hood River County:                |              |              |
    Grading--Cascade Locks Section  |   152,904.85 |   152,904.85 |
    Grading--Viento Section         |   102,750.00 |    86,933.00 |
    Grading--Ruthton Hill Section   |   107,000.00 |    90,257.53 |
    Macadam--Cascade Locks to Hood  |    68,000.00 |    62,895.48 |
      River                         |              |              |
    Hood River Bridge               |    43,968.49 |    36,559.80 |
  Jackson County:                   |              |              |
    Macadam--Siskiyou to California |    56,252.98 |    56,252.98 |
      Line                          |              |              |
    Ashland Under-crossing          |     9,768.88 |     9,768.88 |
    Paving--Ashland Hill Section    |    15,908.03 |    15,908.03 |
    Maintenance--Siskiyou Section   |       748.34 |       748.34 |
  Josephine County:                 |              |              |
    Grading--Wolf Creek to Grave    |    68,301.53 |    68,301.53 |
      Creek                         |              |              |
    Grading--Locust Hill Section    |     4,869.97 |     4,869.97 |
    Miscellaneous charges on        |       409.43 |       409.43 |
      construction in 1916          |              |              |
  Lake County:                      |              |              |
    Grading and Macadam--Lakeview   |    15,391.67 |    15,391.67 |
      to Paisley                    |              |              |
  Lane County:                      |              |              |
    Macadam--Divide to Cottage Grove|     6,099.86 |     6,099.86 |
    Construction prior to 1917      |       424.44 |       424.44 |
  Lincoln County:                   |              |              |
    Grading--Pioneer Mountain       |     2,054.05 |     2,054.05 |
      Section                       |              |              |
  Marion County:                    |              |              |
    Salem Bridge over Willamette    |       108.00 |       108.00 |
      River                         |              |              |
  Polk County:                      |              |              |
    Approach to Salem Bridge        |       ...    |       ...    |
    Reinforced Concrete Bridge at   |         1.25 |         1.25 |
      Dallas                        |              |              |
    Reinforced Concrete Bridge      |       ...    |       ...    |
      between Monmouth and Dallas   |              |              |
    Charges on work prior to 1917   |       418.69 |       418.69 |
  Tillamook County:                 |              |              |
    Grading and Paving--Tillamook   |    74,925.00 |    63,203.90 |
      to Hebo                       |              |              |
    Grading--Three Rivers Forest    |    50,250.00 |     2,076.78 |
      Road Project (The Federal     |              |              |
      Government cooperates on this |              |              |
      project to the amount of      |              |              |
      $50,250.00.)                  |              |              |
  Umatilla County:                  |              |              |
    Paving--Wild Horse Creek Section|   162,626.56 |   162,626.56 |
  Union County:                     |              |              |
    Grading--La Grande to Hot Lake  |     5,000.16 |     5,000.16 |
    Grading--Elgin-Minam Post Road  |    20,575.50 |     3,838.44 |
      Project (The Federal          |              |              |
      Government cooperates on this |              |              |
      project to the amount of      |              |              |
      $20,575.50)                   |              |              |
    Grading--Union-Telocaset Post   |    15,000.00 |    16,642.29 |
      Road Project (The Federal     |              |              |
      Government cooperates on this |              |              |
      project to the amount of      |              |              |
      $15,000.00.)                  |              |              |
  Washington County:                |              |              |
    Grading and Paving--Multnomah   |   322,605.00 |   269,581.93 |
      Co. Line to Newberg           |              |              |
    Onion Flat Trestle near Sherwood|     8,372.22 |     8,372.22 |
    Tualatin River Bridge near      |    12,968.60 |    12,968.60 |
      Tigardville                   |              |              |
    Fanno Creek Bridge near Tigard  |     1,882.81 |     1,882.81 |
  Wheeler County:                   |              |              |
    Grading--Cummins Hill Section   |     7,005.15 |     7,005.15 |
    Macadam--Cummins Hill Section   |    34,000.00 |    32,465.44 |
    Grading--Bridge Creek Section   |    14,235.45 |    14,235.45 |
    Resurfacing between Fossil and  |    15,000.00 |       444.88 |
      Condon                        |              |              |
  Yamhill County:                   |              |              |
    Grading Rex to Newberg          |       ...    |       ...    |
    Sheridan Paving, 1917           |    28,216.04 |    28,216.04 |
    Sheridan Paving, 1918           |    37,945.17 |    37,945.17 |
    Completion of Sour Grass cut-off|     5,111.19 |     5,111.19 |
                                    +--------------+--------------+
                                    |$2,937,207.78 |$2,483,870.37 |
  ----------------------------------+--------------+--------------+


  ==================================+=========================+============
                                    |       COUNTY FUNDS      |Construction
                                    +------------+------------+ engineering
                                    | County's   |  Expended  |    cost
             JOBS                   | share of   |    from    | Included in
                                    | estimated  |County funds|  preceding
                                    |   cost     |   to date  |   columns
  ----------------------------------+------------+------------+-----------
  Clackamas County:                 |            |            |
    Paving--Oregon City to Canby    |$    ...    |$    ...    |$  2,444.57
    Grading--Canemah Hill Section   |  25,000.00 |  22,092.53 |   1,944.67
    Grading and Rock Crushing--New  |  15,759.91 |  15,759.91 |   3,552.82
      Era                           |            |            |
    Grading--Multnomah Co. Line to  |   5,238.70 |   5,238.70 |     507.98
      Oswego                        |            |            |
  Clatsop County:                   |            |            |
    Grading and Paving--Astoria to  |     ...    |     ...    |   5,906.19
      Svensen                       |            |            |
    Macadamizing--Svensen to        |     ...    |     ...    |   4,443.18
      Columbia Co. Line             |            |            |
    John Day River Bridge east of   |     ...    |     ...    |     734.91
      Astoria                       |            |            |
    Plympton Creek Bridge at        |     ...    |     ...    |     255.08
      Westport                      |            |            |
    Big Creek Bridge near Knappa    |     ...    |     ...    |     140.99
    Little Creek Culvert near Knappa|     ...    |     ...    |      37.02
    Miscellaneous charges on work   |     ...    |     ...    |      25.00
      prior to 1917                 |            |            |
  Columbia County:                  |            |            |
    Paving--Multnomah Co. Line to   |     ...    |     ...    |   1,364.28
      Scappoose                     |            |            |
    Macadam--Clatsop Co. Line to    |     ...    |     ...    |     554.62
      Clatskanie                    |            |            |
    Macadam--Clatskanie to Delena   |     ...    |     ...    |   5,998.96
    Macadam--Delena to Goble        |     ...    |     ...    |   2,902.35
    Macadam--Goble Section          |     ...    |     ...    |     548.12
    Grading--Goble Section          |     ...    |     ...    |   2,925.64
    Grading--Rainier Hill Section   |     ...    |     ...    |     468.88
    Grading--Beaver Valley Section  |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
    Grading--Deer Island Section    |     ...    |     ...    |     163.30
    Concrete Viaduct, Cribbing and  |     ...    |     ...    |     580.53
      Masonry Wall, near Prescott   |            |            |
    Beaver Valley Bridges           |     ...    |     ...    |     922.54
    Scappoose Culvert               |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
    Goble Creek Bridge near Goble   |     ...    |     ...    |      77.47
    Graham Creek Culvert near       |     ...    |     ...    |      31.98
      Clatskanie                    |            |            |
  Coos County:                      |            |            |
    Coast Highway and Myrtle Point- | 170,781.83 | 170,781.83 |  14,612.33
      Coquille Road                 |            |            |
  Crook County:                     |            |            |
    Ochoco Canyon Forest Road       |  17,500.00 |     ...    |     ...
      Project (Federal Government   |            |            |
      cooperates on this project to |            |            |
      the amount of $17,500.00)     |            |            |
  Deschutes County:                 |            |            |
    Cinder Macadam--Bend to LaPine  |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
  Douglas County:                   |            |            |
    Grading--Divide to Comstock     |  17,119.44 |  17,119.44 |   2,029.80
    Grading and Macadam--Comstock   |  74,349.72 |  74,349.72 |   4,766.13
      to Leona                      |            |            |
    Grading--Oakland to Yoncalla    |  83,530.84 |  82,081.02 |   5,864.31
    Grading--Myrtle Creek to Dillard|     ...    |     ...    |   7,499.22
    Macadamizing--Divide to Comstock|     ...    |     ...    |     302.09
    Maintenance--Glendale to Stage  |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
      Road Pass                     |            |            |
    Umpqua River Bridges near       |     ...    |     ...    |     839.18
      Dillard                       |            |            |
  Gilliam County:                   |            |            |
    Macadam--Condon to Thirty Mile  |     ...    |     ...    |   1,292.39
      Creek                         |            |            |
  Hood River County:                |            |            |
    Grading--Cascade Locks Section  |     ...    |     ...    |   8,744.41
    Grading--Viento Section         |     ...    |     ...    |   4,513.24
    Grading--Ruthton Hill Section   |     ...    |     ...    |   4,074.19
    Macadam--Cascade Locks to Hood  |     ...    |     ...    |     826.18
      River                         |            |            |
    Hood River Bridge               |   4,031.51 |   3,968.49 |   1,410.63
  Jackson County:                   |            |            |
    Macadam--Siskiyou to California |     ...    |     ...    |     962.27
      Line                          |            |            |
    Ashland Under-crossing          |     ...    |     ...    |     275.21
    Paving--Ashland Hill Section    |     ...    |     ...    |     630.87
    Maintenance--Siskiyou Section   |     ...    |     ...    |
  Josephine County:                 |            |            |
    Grading--Wolf Creek to Grave    |     ...    |     ...    |   4,872.94
      Creek                         |            |            |
    Grading--Locust Hill Section    |     ...    |     ...    |     162.88
    Miscellaneous charges on        |     ...    |     ...    |     219.23
      construction in 1916          |            |            |
  Lake County:                      |            |            |
    Grading and Macadam--Lakeview   |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
      to Paisley                    |            |            |
  Lane County:                      |            |            |
    Macadam--Divide to Cottage Grove|     ...    |     ...    |     175.84
    Construction prior to 1917      |     ...    |     ...    |      30.64
  Lincoln County:                   |            |            |
    Grading--Pioneer Mountain       |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
      Section                       |            |            |
  Marion County:                    |            |            |
    Salem Bridge over Willamette    | 223,794.99 | 223,794.99 |     265.26
      River                         |            |            |
  Polk County:                      |            |            |
    Approach to Salem Bridge        |   4,548.10 |   4,548.10 |     ...
    Reinforced Concrete Bridge at   |  10,754.43 |  10,754.43 |      55.10
      Dallas                        |            |            |
    Reinforced Concrete Bridge      |   1,898.17 |   1,898.17 |     ...
      between Monmouth and Dallas   |            |            |
    Charges on work prior to 1917   |     ...    |     ...    |      15.79
  Tillamook County:                 |            |            |
    Grading and Paving--Tillamook   |  34,325.00 |  26,009.84 |   6,391.47
      to Hebo                       |            |            |
    Grading--Three Rivers Forest    |  21,500.00 |     ...    |     ...
      Road Project (The Federal     |            |            |
      Government cooperates on this |            |            |
      project to the amount of      |            |            |
      $50,250.00.)                  |            |            |
  Umatilla County:                  |            |            |
    Paving--Wild Horse Creek Section|     ...    |     ...    |   2,609.88
  Union County:                     |            |            |
    Grading--La Grande to Hot Lake  |     ...    |     ...    |     821.68
    Grading--Elgin-Minam Post Road  |     ...    |     ...    |     377.80
      Project (The Federal          |            |            |
      Government cooperates on this |            |            |
      project to the amount of      |            |            |
      $20,575.50)                   |            |            |
    Grading--Union-Telocaset Post   |     ...    |     ...    |   1,183.22
      Road Project (The Federal     |            |            |
      Government cooperates on this |            |            |
      project to the amount of      |            |            |
      $15,000.00.)                  |            |            |
  Washington County:                |            |            |
    Grading and Paving--Multnomah   |   9,395.00 |   9,395.00 |   9,445.56
      Co. Line to Newberg           |            |            |
    Onion Flat Trestle near Sherwood|     ...    |     ...    |     197.87
    Tualatin River Bridge near      |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
      Tigardville                   |            |            |
    Fanno Creek Bridge near Tigard  |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
  Wheeler County:                   |            |            |
    Grading--Cummins Hill Section   |   7,527.20 |   7,527.20 |   1,402.73
    Macadam--Cummins Hill Section   |     ...    |     ...    |   1,313.82
    Grading--Bridge Creek Section   |  10,000.00 |  10,000.00 |     635.30
    Resurfacing between Fossil and  |     ...    |     ...    |     ...
      Condon                        |            |            |
  Yamhill County:                   |            |            |
    Grading Rex to Newberg          |   6,163.05 |   6,153.05 |     ...
    Sheridan Paving, 1917           |  10,000.00 |  10,000.00 |   1,131.35
    Sheridan Paving, 1918           |   2,120.44 |   2,120.44 |   1,166.85
    Completion of Sour Grass cut-off|     ...    |     ...    |     157.39
                                    +------------+------------+-----------
                                    |$755,328.33 |$703,592.86 |$127,805.58
  ----------------------------------+------------+------------+-----------


SUMMARY

                              Estimated total cost     Expended to date

  State                              $2,937,207.78        $2,483,870.37
  County                                755,328.33           703,592.86
  Federal Government                    103,325.50               ...
                                     -------------        -------------
      Totals                         $3,795,861.61        $3,187,463.23


TABLE VI

EXPENDITURES FOR SURVEYS AND ENGINEERING COUNTY CONSTRUCTION DETAILED BY
JOBS--DECEMBER 1, 1916, TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918

  ==================================+============+===========+============
                                    |             EXPENDITURES
                JOBS                +------------+-----------+------------
                                    |  By State  | By County |   Total
  ----------------------------------+------------+-----------+------------
  Baker County                      |            |           |
    Survey, Baker-Middle Bridge     |$  2,806.77 |   ...     | $ 2,806.77
      Section                       |            |           |
    Survey, Middle Bridge-Black     |   2,422.54 |   ...     |   2,422.54
      Bridge Section                |            |           |
    Survey, Canyon Sec. of Baker-   |     928.08 |   ...     |     928.08
      Cornucopia Road               |            |           |
    Survey, Sag Section of Baker-   |     719.61 |   ...     |     719.61
      Cornucopia Road               |            |           |
    Survey Unity to Baker           |     645.29 |   ...     |     645.29
                                    |            |           |
  Benton County                     |            |           |
    Reconnaissance                  |      47.56 |   ...     |      47.56
    Survey, Corvallis to Polk       |     ...    | $ 479.20  |     479.20
      County Line                   |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Clackamas County                  |            |           |
    Survey, Zig Zag Creek Forest    |     427.30 |   ...     |     427.30
      Road Project                  |            |           |
    Survey, Oswego to Oregon City   |     972.85 |   ...     |     972.85
    Survey, Oregon City to New Era  |   1,429.28 |   ...     |   1,429.28
    Survey, Canby to Aurora         |   1,176.29 |   ...     |   1,176.29
                                    |            |           |
  Clatsop County                    |            |           |
    Reconnaissance, Coast & Col.    |     471.05 |   ...     |     471.05
      River Highways                |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Columbia County                   |            |           |
    Reconnaissance, Columbia River  |     170.93 |   ...     |     170.93
      Highway                       |            |           |
    Survey, Columbia City to        |     177.04 |   ...     |     177.04
      Scappoose                     |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Coos County                       |            |           |
    Survey, Coast Hwy. & Myrtle     |   5,737.58 |   ...     |   5,737.53
      Point-Coquille Road           |            |           |
    Survey, Myrtle Point to Douglas |   1,456.80 |   ...     |   1,456.80
      County Line                   |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Curry County                      |            |           |
    Survey, Coast Highway           |   5,629.24 |   ...     |   5,629.24
                                    |            |           |
  Deschutes County                  |            |           |
    Survey, Harney County Line West |     532.77 |   ...     |     532.77
      Seven Miles                   |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Douglas County                    |            |           |
    Survey, Canyon Creek Pass to    |     197.89 |   ...     |     197.89
      Johns Ranch                   |            |           |
    Survey, Johns Ranch to Jacques  |     829.03 |   ...     |     829.03
      Ranch                         |            |           |
    Survey, Brockway to Round       |     280.00 |   ...     |     280.00
      Prairie                       |            |           |
    Survey, Roseburg to Coos County |   2,665.93 |   ...     |   2,665.93
      Line                          |            |           |
    Survey, Canyonville-Galesville  |     442.99 |   ...     |     442.99
      Forest Project                |            |           |
    Miscell. Surveys and            |     808.61 |   ...     |     808.61
      Reconnaissance                |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Gilliam County                    |            |           |
    Survey, John Day River to       |   3,865.66 |   ...     |   3,865.66
      Blalock                       |            |           |
    Survey and Engineering County   |     981.27 |   ...     |     981.27
      Const. John Day River to      |            |           |
      Arlington                     |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Grant County                      |            |           |
    Survey, Big Basin Section of    |   4,322.92 |   291.10  |   4,614.02
      John Day Highway              |            |           |
    Survey, & Engineering County    |   1,596.28 |   ...     |   1,596.28
      Const. Fisk Creek to Hall Hill|            |           |
    Survey, Hall Hill to Prairie    |     384.19 |   ...     |     384.19
      City                          |            |           |
    Survey, John Day to Fisk Creek  |   1,165.39 |   ...     |   1,165.39
                                    |            |           |
  Harney County                     |            |           |
    Survey, Burns to Crane          |     922.55 |   ...     |     922.55
    Survey, Sage Hen to Burns       |     719.74 |   ...     |     719.74
    Survey, Deschutes Co. Line East |     231.16 |   ...     |     231.16
      Seven Miles                   |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Hood River County                 |            |           |
    Survey, Hood River to Mosier    |   6,877.56 |   ...     |   6,877.56
      (Two Routes)                  |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Jackson County                    |            |           |
    Survey, Ashland to Klamath Falls|   2,789.87 |   ...     |   2,789.87
    Survey, Medford to Crater Lake  |   1,151.78 |   ...     |   1,151.78
                                    |            |           |
  Josephine County                  |            |           |
    Survey, Wolf Creek to Grave     |   1,110.70 |   ...     |   1,110.70
      Creek                         |            |           |
    Survey, Grave Creek to Grants   |   2,038.11 |   ...     |   2,038.11
      Pass                          |            |           |
    Survey, Wolf Creek to Stage Road|     151.33 |   ...     |     153.33
      Pass                          |            |           |
    Engineering County Const. Grants|   1,117.07 |   ...     |   1,117.07
      Pass to Jackson County Line   |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Klamath County                    |            |           |
    Reconnaissance, Klamath Falls   |     124.58 |   ...     |     124.58
      to Olene                      |            |           |
    Survey, Klamath Falls to        |     377.21 |   ...     |     377.21
      Chiloquin                     |            |           |
    Survey, Chiloquin to Sand Creek |     172.95 |   ...     |     172.95
    Survey, Anna Creek Forest Road  |     144.49 |   ...     |     144.49
      Project                       |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Lane County                       |            |           |
    Survey, Goshen to Cottage Grove |   1,051.48 |   ...     |   1,051.48
    Survey, Eugene to Florence      |   6,555.84 |   ...     |   6,555.84
    Survey for Overhead Crossing at |     233.25 |   ...     |     233.25
      Divide                        |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Lincoln County                    |            |           |
    Surveys for Bridge at Toledo and|     293.42 |   ...     |     293.42
      Waldport                      |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Linn County                       |            |           |
    Survey, Albany to Jefferson     |     791.07 |      5.00 |     796.07
                                    |            |           |
  Malheur County                    |            |           |
    Reconnaissance                  |      93.02 |    ...    |      93.02
    Survey, Cow Valley-Brogan       |     773.63 |    ...    |     773.63
      Section                       |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Marion County                     |            |           |
    Survey, Salem-Aurora            |   2,463.75 |    ...    |   2,463.75
    Survey, Salem-Jefferson         |   2,511.84 |    ...    |   2,511.84
                                    |            |           |
  Morrow County                     |            |           |
    Survey, Columbia River Highway  |   2,546.77 |  1,009.44 |   3,556.01
    Survey, Oregon-Washington       |   6,831.56 |    ...    |   6,831.56
      Highway                       |            |           |
    Engineering County Const.       |   1,428.47 |    ...    |   1,428.47
      Oregon-Washington Highway     |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Polk County                       |            |           |
    Survey Between Monmouth and     |     115.30 |    ...    |     115.30
      Dallas                        |            |           |
    Survey Near Eola                |      67.43 |    ...    |      67.43
    Survey, Independence to Benton  |     220.25 |    ...    |     220.25
      County Line                   |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Sherman County                    |            |           |
    Survey, Columbia River Highway  |   2,995.64 |    ...    |   2,995.64
                                    |            |           |
  Tillamook County                  |            |           |
    Survey, Tillamook to Hebo       |     807.03 |    ...    |     807.03
    Survey, Neskowin to Salmon River|   2,628.59 |    ...    |   2,628.59
                                    |            |           |
  Umatilla County                   |            |           |
    Survey, Pendleton to Kamela     |   5,624.73 |  1,575.29 |   7,200.02
    Survey, Pendleton to Umatilla   |   3,759.87 |  1,684.76 |   5,444.63
    Survey, Pendleton to Gilliam    |   1,793.58 |    282.70 |   2,076.28
      Co. Line via Pilot Rock       |            |           |
    Engineering County Const.,      |      81.26 |    ...    |      81.26
      Pendleton to Poor Farm        |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Union County                      |            |           |
    Survey, La Grande to Kamela     |   2,737.34 |     78.59 |   2,815.93
    Survey, La Grande to Minam      |   2,834.18 |    ...    |   2,834.18
    Survey, Union to Telocaset      |     364.64 |    ...    |     364.64
    Survey, La Grande to Union      |     714.62 |    ...    |     714.62
                                    |            |           |
  Wallowa County                    |            |           |
    Survey, Flora-Enterprise Forest |     765.07 |    ...    |     765.07
      Road Project                  |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Wasco County                      |            |           |
    Survey, Seuferts to Deschutes   |   1,757.29 |    ...    |   1,757.29
      River                         |            |           |
    Design Culvert over Three Mile  |            |     19.45 |      19.45
      Creek                         |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Washington County                 |            |           |
    Survey, Multnomah Co. Line to   | $ 2,036.55 |    ...    |  $ 2,036.55
      Newberg                       |            |           |
    Survey and Engineering County   |   2,326.94 |    ...    |    2,326.94
      Const. Beaverton to Gaston    |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Wheeler County                    |            |           |
    Survey, John Day River Highway  |   7,492.22 |   $706.40 |    8,198.62
    Survey, Mitchell to Dayville    |   5,451.58 |    ...    |    5,451.58
    Survey, Fossil to Gilliam County|     791.47 |    ...    |      791.47
      Line                          |            |           |
    Survey, Ochoco Canyon Forest    |     242.26 |    ...    |      242.26
      Road Project                  |            |           |
    Engineering County Const.       |     550.51 |    ...    |      550.51
      Sarvice Creek Summit Section  |            |           |
    Engineering County Const. Fossil|     507.20 |    ...    |      507.20
      to Gilliam County Line        |            |           |
    Engineering County Const.       |      28.62 |    ...    |       28.62
      Sigfrit Hill Section          |            |           |
                                    |            |           |
  Yamhill County                    |            |           |
    Survey, McMinnville to Dayton   |     655.03 |    ...    |      655.03
    Survey, Grand Ronde Section     |   2,631.41 |    ...    |    2,631.41
                                    |            |           |
  Miscellaneous                     |            |           |
    Reconnaissance Surveys in       |   1,200.04 |     ...   |    1,200.04
      various Counties              |            |           |
                                    +------------+-----------+------------
  Total expenditure for Surveys and |$137,954.74 | $6,131.99 | $144,086.67
     Engineering County             |            |           |
       Construction Work            |            |           |
  ----------------------------------+------------+-----------+------------


TABLE VII

GENERAL EXPENDITURES--DECEMBER 1, 1916, TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918

  Administrative and General Supervision:
    General Administrative                            $  14,706.67
    State Highway Commissioners                           4,863.11
    Auditing Department                                  14,770.77
    Purchasing Department                                   531.17
    Office Engineering Department                         9,636.90
    Bridge Department                                    15,054.48
    Pendleton Office                                     10,917.05
    Roseburg Office                                         819.59
    State Highway Engineer and Assistants                26,322.08
                                                      ------------
      Total                                           $  97,621.82

  Equipment and Stock:
    Equipment (This item represents all expenditures
      for purchase and maintenance of heavy equipment
      less monthly rentals charged against jobs)      $  78,775.26
    Stock (This item represents all expenditures for
      supplies and materials bought and held for
      distribution, less deductions made as supplies
      and materials are shipped out and charged to
      jobs)                                               5,721.08
    Construction of New Warehouse at Salem                2,221.21
                                                      ------------
      Total                                           $  86,717.55

  Unclassified:
    Interest and other costs on bonds                 $  82,083.05
    Miscellaneous                                            10.15
                                                      ------------
      Total                                           $  82,093.20


TABLE VIII

COUNTY FUNDS EXPENDED BY STATE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT--DECEMBER 1, 1916 TO
NOVEMBER 30, 1918.

  County                                         Amount on    Totals for
                                                  Each Job   Each County

  Benton County
    Survey--Independence to Corvallis           $   479.20   $    479.20

  Clackamas County
    Grading--New Era to Canemah                  37,852.44        ...
    Grading--Multnomah County Line to Oswego      5,238.70     43,091.14

  Coos County
    Grading--Coast Highway & Coquille-Myrtle    160,781.83    160,781.83
      Point Rd.

  Douglas County
    Grading--Divide to Comstock                  17,119.44        ...
    Grading and Macadam--Comstock to Leona       74,349.72        ...
    Grading--Oakland to Yoncalla                 82,081.02    173,550.18

  Grant County
    Survey--John Day River Highway                  291.10        291.10

  Hood River County
    Hood River Bridge                             3,968.49      3,968.49

  Linn County
    Survey--Albany to Jefferson                       5.00          5.00

  Marion County
    Salem Bridge                                223,794.99    223,794.99

  Morrow County
    Survey of Columbia River Highway              1,009.44      1,009.44

  Polk County
    Approach to Salem Bridge                      4,548.10        ...
    Dallas Bridge                                10,754.43        ...
    Bridge between Monmouth and Dallas            1,898.17     17,200.70

  Tillamook County
    Grading & Paving--Tillamook to Cloverdale    26,009.84     26,009.84

  Umatilla County
    Surveys--Pendleton to Echo                    1,684.76        ...
    Surveys--Pendleton to Pilot Rock                282.70        ...
    Surveys--Pendleton to Kamela                  1,575.29      3,542.75

  Union County
    Surveys--La Grande to Kamela                     78.59         78.59

  Wasco County
    Design for Three Mile Creek Bridge               19.45         19.45

  Washington County
    Grading--Multnomah Co. Line to Newberg        9,395.00      9,395.00

  Wheeler County
    Grading--Cummins Hill Section                 7,527.20        ...
    Grading--Bridge Creek Section                10,000.00        ...
    Surveys--John Day River Highway                 706.40     18,233.60

  Yamhill County
    Grading--Rex to Newberg                       6,153.05        ...
    Sheridan Paving, 1917                        10,000.00        ...
    Sheridan Paving, 1918                         2,120.44     18,273.49
                                                             -----------
  Total County Funds Expended by Department                  $709,724.79

The above tabulated amounts cover only those expenditures made on
vouchers drawn by the Highway Department. The Department has supervised
a very large amount of County construction upon which payment has been
made direct by the County, which payments are not included above.

[Illustration: REINFORCED CONCRETE CRIBBING NEAR PRESCOTT ON THE
COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY IN COLUMBIA COUNTY. BUILT IN 1918]




                      General Tabulated Information
                                 and
                             Highway Maps


TABLES

  Table A--Miles of Highway Construction Completed by the Highway
              Department during 1917 and 1918.
  Table B--Tabulation of Bridge Design and Construction.
  Table C--Miles of Location Surveys made by the Department during 1917
              and 1918.
  Table D--Miles of Different Types of Roads in each County.
  Table E--Motor Vehicle Registration by Counties.
  Table F--County Bond Issues.
  Table G--Tabulation of Contract Prices.
  Table H--Yearly Expenditure of State Funds in Counties.
  Table I--Mileage Table of Main Traveled Roads.
  Table J--Official Designation of State Highways.
  Table K--Employes of the State Highway Department.
  Table L--Numbers and Mileages of State Highways.


MAPS

  Map  I.--Main Traveled Roads of the State.
  Map II.--State Highway System.


TABLE A

MILES OF HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTED BY HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT 1917-1918

  ========================+========+========+========+========+========
                          |        |  Bitu- | Broken |        |
           Jobs           |Concrete| minous |  Stone | Gravel | Grading
                          |Pavement|Pavement| Macadam|Macadam |
  ------------------------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------
  Clackamas County--      |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...
    Oregon City to Canby  |   ...  |   7.5  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...
    New Era to Oregon City|   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   4.5
    Multnomah County Line |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |    .2
      to Oswego           |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Clatsop County--        |        |        |        |        |
    Astoria to Svensen    |   ...  |   3.5  |   5.5  |   ...  |   1.2
    Svensen to Westport   |   ...  |   ...  |  17.2  |   1.7  |   ...
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Columbia County--       |        |        |        |        |
    Multnomah County Line-|   ...  |   2.5  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...
      Scappoose           |        |        |        |        |
    Westport to Clatskanie|   ...  |   ...  |   8.6  |   ...  |   ...
    Clatskanie to Delena  |   ...  |   ...  |   9.0  |   ...  |   ...
    Delena to Goble       |   ...  |   ...  |   7.6  |   ...  |   ...
    Goble Section         |   ...  |   ...  |   2.0  |   ...  |   2.0
    Beaver Valley Section |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   4.0
    Rainier Hill Section  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   2.2
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Coos County--           |        |        |        |        |
    Marshfield to Curry   |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |  20.0
      County Line         |        |        |        |        |
    Coquille to Myrtle    |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   3.0
      Point               |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Deschutes County--      |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...
    Bend to Lapine        |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |  12.5  |   ...
      (cinder macadam)    |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Douglas County--        |        |        |        |        |
    Myrtle Creek to       |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |  12.8
      Dillard             |        |        |        |        |
    Oakland to Yoncalla   |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |  10.4
    Divide to Comstock    |   ...  |   ...  |   2.4  |   ...  |   2.4
    Comstock to Leona     |   ...  |   ...  |   4.6  |   ...  |   4.6
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Gilliam County--        |        |        |        |        |
    Mayville to Wheeler   |   ...  |   ...  |   1.0  |   ...  |   ...
      County Line         |        |        |        |        |
    Condon to Thirty Mile |   ...  |   ...  |   5.7  |   ...  |   ...
      Creek               |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Hood River County--     |        |        |        |        |
    Cascade Locks Section |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   8.2
    Viento Section        |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   3.6
    Ruthton Hill Section  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   2.4
    Cascade Locks to Hood |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |  18.0  |   ...
      River               |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Jackson County--        |        |        |        |        |
    Siskiyou Mountain     |   ...  |   ...  |   6.5  |   ...  |   ...
      Section             |        |        |        |        |
    Ashland Undercrossing |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |    .8
    Ashland Paving        |    .8  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Josephine County--      |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...
    Wolf Creek to Grave   |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   4.9
      Creek               |        |        |        |        |
    Grants Pass-Jackson   |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   3.3
      County Line         |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Lake County--           |        |        |        |        |
    Lakeview to Paisley   |   ...  |   ...  |   4.0  |   ...  |   6.4
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Lane County--           |        |        |        |        |
    Divide to Cottage     |   ...  |   ...  |   1.0  |   ...  |   ...
      Grove               |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Lincoln County--        |        |        |        |        |
    Pioneer Mountain      |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   1.0
      Section             |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Tillamook County--      |        |        |        |        |
    Tillamook-Cloverdale  |   ...  |   5.0  |   ...  |   ...  |   5.0
      Paving              |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Umatilla County--       |        |        |        |        |
    Pendleton-Adams       |   ...  |  10.0  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...
      Section             |        |        |        |        |
     Pendleton-West       |   ...  |   1.0  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Union County--          |        |        |        |        |
    Elgin to Minam        |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |    .8
    Union to Telocaset    |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   3.0
    La Grande to Hot Lake |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   3.7
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Washington County--     |        |        |        |        |
    Multnomah County Line |   ...  |  12.5  |   ...  |   ...  |  12.5
      to Newberg          |        |        |        |        |
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Wheeler County          |        |        |        |        |
    Cummins Hill Section  |   ...  |   ...  |   3.5  |   ...  |   3.5
    Fossil-Cummins Hill   |   ...  |   ...  |   1.0  |   ...  |   ...
      Section             |        |        |        |        |
    Bridge Creek Section  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |    .9
                          |        |        |        |        |
  Yamhill County--        |        |        |        |        |
    Sheridan Paving       |   4.0  |   ...  |   ...  |   ...  |   4.0
    Multnomah County Line,|   ...  |   3.2  |   ...  |   ...  |   3.2
        Newberg Paving    |        |        |        |        |
  ------------------------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------
        Totals            |   4.8  |  45.2  |  79.6  |  32.2  | 134.5
  ------------------------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------


TABLE B

BRIDGE AND CULVERT DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION DECEMBER 1ST, 1916, TO
NOVEMBER 30TH, 1918

  ====================+===================+===============================
                      |                   |Total Length of Bridge
                      |                   |and Approaches (Feet)
                      |                   |    +--------------------------
                      |                   |    |Width of Roadway (Feet)
                      |                   |    |   +----------------------
                      |                   |    |   |Loading (See Footnote)
                      |                   |    |   |      +---------------
                      |Structure No.      |    |   |      |  TOTAL COST
                      |   +---------------+    |   |      | Actual Cost
    Name of Structure |   |   Type of     |    |   |      | if Complete;
                      |   |   Structure   |    |   |      |  Estimated
                      |   |               |    |   |      |if Uncompleted
  --------------------+---+---------------+----+---+------+--------------
  Benton:             |   |               |    |   |      |
    Culvert on West   |207|Double 5'x5'   |  12| 24|Heavy |[1]$    800.00
      Side Highway,   |   |R. C. Culvert  |    |   |      |
      41/2 Mi. No. of   |   |               |    |   |      |
      Corvallis       |   |               |    |   |      |
    Culvert on West   |208|Double 6'x8'   |  14| 24|Heavy |[1]   1,300.00
      Side Highway, 5 |   |R. C. Culvert  |    |   |      |
      Mi. No. of      |   |               |    |   |      |
      Corvallis       |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Mill  |230|Reinforced     |  85| 20|Heavy |[1]   7,000.00
      Race South of   |   |concrete bridge|    |   |      |
      Corvallis       |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Clatsop:            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Drawbridge over   |148|2-108' Wood    | 296| 18|Heavy |[2]  25,000.00
       John Day River |   |Spans          |    |   |      |
                      |   |1-40' Lift Span|    |   |      |
    Plympton Creek    |185|R. C. Thru Span|  60| 20|Heavy |[2]   6,413.19
       Bridge at      |   |               |    |   |      |
       Westport       |   |               |    |   |      |
    Big Creek Bridge  |186|R. C. Bridge   |  90| 20|Heavy |[2]   8,446.70
      near Knappa     |   |6'x12' R. C.   |    |   |      |
    Little Creek      |198|  Culvert      |  14| 24|Heavy |[2]     929.69
      Culvert near    |   |               |    |   |      |
      Knappa          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over       |214|20' R. C.      |  20| 20|Heavy |[1]   1,600.00
      McDonald's Log  |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      Chute on Colum- |   |               |    |   |      |
      bia River Hwy.  |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Columbia:           |   |               |    |   |      |
    Beaver Creek      |132|90' R. C.      |  90| 20|Heavy |[1]   5,000.00
      Bridge No. 1    |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Beaver Creek      |134|70' R. C.      |  70| 20|Heavy |[1]   4,300.00
      Bridge No. 2    |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Beaver Creek      |136|70' R. C.      |  70|}  |      |
      Bridge No. 3    |   |Bridge         |    |}  |      |
    Beaver Creek      |138|70' R. C.      |  70|}  |      |
      Bridge No. 4    |   |Bridge         |    |}  |      |
    Beaver Creek      |140|60' R. C.      |  60|}  |      |
      Bridge No. 5    |   |Bridge         |    |}  |      |
    Beaver Creek      |142|70' R. C.      |  70|}  |      |
      Bridge No. 6    |   |Bridge         |    |}20|Heavy |[2]  32,000.00
    Beaver Creek      |144|60' R. C.      |  60|}  |      |
      Bridge No. 7    |   |Bridge         |    |}  |      |
    Beaver Creek      |146|50' R. C.      |  50|}  |      |
      Bridge No. 8    |   |Bridge         |    |}  |      |
    Beaver Creek      |157|70' R. C.      |  70|}  |      |
      Bridge No. "A"  |   |Bridge         |    |}  |      |
    Beaver Creek      |155|105' R. C.     | 105|}  |      |
      Bridge No. "B"  |   |Bridge         |    |}  |      |
    Beaver Creek      |150|30' R. C.      |  30| 20|Heavy |[1]   3,600.00
      Bridge No. 10   |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Beaver Creek      |152|30' R. C.      |  30| 20|Heavy |[2]   3,600.00
      Bridge No. 11   |   |               |    |   |      |
    Culvert near      |188|8'x10'         |  12| 24|Heavy |[2]   1,834.60
      Scappoose on    |   |R. C. Culvert  |    |   |      |
      Columbia River  |   |               |    |   |      |
      Highway         |   |               |    |   |      |
    Graham Creek      |184|Double 6'x6'   |  14| 24|Heavy |[2]     804.49
      Culvert near    |   |R. C. Box      |    |   |      |
      Clatskanie      |   |               |    |   |      |
    Goble Creek Bridge|191|90' R. C.      |  90| 20|Heavy |[2]   5,907.14
      at Goble        |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Half viaduct near |236|R. C.          |  75| 20|Heavy |[2]   2,000.00
      Little Jack     |   |Half Viaduct   |    |   |      |
      Falls           |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Coos:               |   |               |    |   |      |
    Overhead Railway  |110|R. C. Viaduct  | 114| 18|Heavy |[3]  10,000.00
      Crossing at     |   |               |    |   |      |
      Overland        |   |               |    |   |      |
    45' Wooden Truss  |111|Wooden truss   |  45| 24|Medium|[3]     500.00
    Haynes Slough     |113|40' Lift (Wood)|  60| 16|Medium|[3]   4,000.00
      Bridge          |   |               |    |   |      |
    North Slough      |114|40' Lift (Wood)|  60| 16|Medium|[3]   4,000.00
      Bridge          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Isthmus Slough    |115|80' Draw Span  | 180| 16|Medium|[3]  12,500.00
      Bridge          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Larson Slough     |116|40' Wood Lift  |  60| 16|Medium|[3]   4,500.00
      Bridge          |   |and Trestle    |    |   |      |
    Powers Bridge     |252|2-126' Wood    | 520| 18|Medium|[1]  12,000.00
                      |   |Spans          |    |   |      |
    Bridge at Gravel  |125|126' Wood Span | 790| 16|Medium|[3]   8,000.00
      Ford--No. Fork  |   |               |    |   |      |
      of Coquille     |   |               |    |   |      |
      River           |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Douglas:            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Pheasant Creek    |187|8'x8' R. C.    |  10| 24|Heavy |[2]   1,804.69
      Culvert near    |   |Culvert        |    |   |      |
      Curtin          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Pass Creek        |194|20' R. C.      |  20| 20|Heavy |[2]   2,184.00
      Culvert, 1 mi.  |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      North of        |   |               |    |   |      |
      Comstock        |   |               |    |   |      |
    Umpqua River      |195|2-144' Wood    | 330| 18|Heavy |[2]  19,000.00
      Bridge South of |   |Spans          |    |   |      |
      Dillard         |   |               |    |   |      |
    Rock Creek Bridge |196|30' R. C.      |  30| 20|Heavy |[2]   2,169.70
      near Anlauf     |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Umpqua River      |202|3-144' Wood    | 480| 18|Heavy |[2]  26,500.00
      Bridge north of |   |Spans          |    |   |      |
      Dillard         |   |               |    |   |      |
    20' R. C. Bridge  |216|20' R. C.      |  20| 20|Heavy |[1]   1,200.00
                      |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Van Tyne Creek    |234|60' R. C.      |  60| 20|Heavy |[2]   3,575.70
      Bridge between  |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      Myrtle Creek    |   |               |    |   |      |
      and Dillard     |   |               |    |   |      |
    Viaduct 1 mile    |245|58' R. C.      |  58| 20|Heavy |[2]   2,648.54
      North of Myrtle |   |Viaduct        |    |   |      |
      Creek           |   |               |    |   |      |
    Viaduct 1 mile    |246|45' R. C.      |  45| 20|Heavy |[2]   2,415.28
      North of Myrtle |   |Viaduct        |    |   |      |
      Creek           |   |               |    |   |      |
    Pass Creek Culvert|190|Double 6'x7'   |  14| 24|Heavy |[2]   1,380.03
      11/2 miles North  |   |R. C. Culvert  |    |   |      |
      of Comstock     |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
   Grant:             |   |               |    |   |      |
    John Day River    |124|180' Wood Span | 450| 16|Medium|[1]  11,000.00
      Bridge at       |   |               |    |   |      |
      Monument        |   |               |    |   |      |
    Gulch             |239|40' Wood Span  |  40| 18|Medium|[1]     600.00
    Gulch             |240|40' Wood Span  |  52| 18|Medium|[1]     700.00
    Gulch             |241|40' Wood Span  |  52| 18|Medium|[1]     700.00
    Rock Creek        |242|40' Wood Span  |  86| 18|Medium|[1]   1,700.00
    John Day River at |243|108' Wood Span | 150| 18|Medium|[1]   8,800.00
      Goose Rock      |   |               |    |   |      |
    North Fork John   |244|144' Wood Span | 184| 18|Medium|[1]  11,500.00
      Day River       |   |               |    |   |      |
    Holmes Creek      |255|40' Wood Span  |  78| 18|Medium|[1]   1,500.00
    Rattlesnake Creek |256|40' Wood Span  |  52| 18|Medium|[1]   1,000.00
    Dixie Creek Bridge|282|50' Wood Span  |  50| 18|Medium|[2]   6,000,00
      at Prairie City |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Hood River:         |   |               |    |   |      |
    East Fork of Hood |119|140' R. C.     | 140| 16|Heavy |[1]   8,400.00
      River           |   |Viaduct        |    |   |      |
    Neal Creek Bridge |120|25' Bridge,    |  25| 16|Heavy |[3]   1,000.00
                      |   |R. C.          |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Hood  |121|126' Wooden    | 126| 16|Medium|[3]   3,500.00
      River at Dee    |   |Span           |    |   |      |
    Odell Creek Bridge|122|15' R. C.      |  15| 18|Heavy |[3]     600.00
                      |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Herman Creek      |159|100' R. C.     | 100| 20|Heavy |[2]   7,389.06
      Bridge          |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Culvert for Flume |162|R. C. Culvert  | ...| 24|Heavy |[2]     378.44
      Line at Mitchell|   |               |    |   |      |
      Point           |   |               |    |   |      |
    Culvert for Pipe  |171|3'x61/2' R. C.   |   8| 24|Heavy |[2]     642.41
      Line at Cascade |   |Culvert        |    |   |      |
      Locks           |   |               |    |   |      |
    Viento Creek      |172|20' R. C.      |  20| 20|Heavy |[2]   1,650.97
      Bridge at Viento|   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Gorton Creek      |173|50' R. C.      |  50| 20|Heavy |[2]   3,153.90
      Bridge          |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Parham Creek      |182|4'x10' R. C.   |  12| 24|Heavy |[2]     965.85
      Culvert near    |   |Culvert        |    |   |      |
      Viento          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Indian Creek      |197|Culvert        |  10|...|...   |[3]   1,500.00
    Hood River Bridge |200|420' R. C. Arch| 420| 20|Heavy |[2]  48,000.00
      at Hood River   |   |and Viaduct    |    |   |      |
    Half Viaduct on   |273|54' Half       |  74|...|Heavy |[2]   1,563.01
      Ruthton Hill    |   |Viaduct        |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Jackson:            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Big Applegate near|147|126' Wood Span,| 226| 16|Medium|[1]   4,000.00
      Jacksonville    |   |100' approach  |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Josephine:          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Trestle over Dry  |210|120' Wood      | 120| 18|Medium|[3]   1,852.78
      Gulch East of   |   |Trestle        |    |   |      |
      Wolf Creek      |   |               |    |   |      |
    Coyote Creek      |211|58' Wood       |  58| 18|Medium|[3]     811.28
      Bridge East of  |   |Trestle        |    |   |      |
      Wolf Creek      |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Lane:               |   |               |    |   |      |
    Overhead Railway  |163|92' R. C.      |  92| 20|Heavy |[1]   6,500.00
      Crossing at     |   |Viaduct        |    |   |      |
      Divide          |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Lincoln:            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Alsea River, 7    |260|144' Wood Span | 258| 18|Medium|[3]  10,000.00
      miles above     |   |               |    |   |      |
      Waldport        |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Linn:               |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Mill  |274|40' R. C.      |  40| 24|Heavy |[1]   2,000.00
      Race in Lebanon |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Marion:             |   |               |    |   |      |
    Willamette River  |123|Steel Bridge   |2220| 24| (¶)  |[3] 250,000.00
      Bridge at Salem |   |               |    |   |      |
    Slough            |253|6'x7' R. C.    | ...|...|Heavy |[1]   1,200.00
                      |   |Culvert        |    |   |      |
    Slough            |254|Double 21/2'x3'  | ...|...|Heavy |[1]     500.00
                      |   |R. C. Culvert  |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Multnomah:          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Overhead Crossing |169|106' Wooden    | 106| 20|Heavy |[2]     800.00
      --Ore. Elec. Ry.|   |Overcrossing   |    |   |      |
      at Capital Hill |   |               |    |   |      |
    Slough            |258|60' Wooden Span|  60| 16|Medium|[2]   1,000.00
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Polk:               |   |               |    |   |      |
    Mulkey Cut-off    |201|40' Wood       |  40| 18|Medium|[1]     600.00
      near Monmouth   |   |trestle        |    |   |      |
    LaCreole Creek in |231|70' R. C. Arch |  70| 22|Heavy |[3]  10,755.68
      Dallas (not     |   |               |    |   |      |
      designed by     |   |               |    |   |      |
      State)          |   |               |    |   |      |
    R. C. Bridge      |233|36' Wood Bridge|  36| 20|Heavy |[3]   1,898.17
      between Dallas  |   |               |    |   |      |
      and Monmouth    |   |               |    |   |      |
    Little Luckiamute |238|72' Wood Span  | 130| 18|Medium|[3]   3,615.00
    Big Luckiamute,   |283|160' Suspension| 160|  4| ...  |[3]     500.00
      at Montgomery   |   |Foot Bridge    |    |   |      |
      School (See also|   |               |    |   |      |
      Marion County   |   |               |    |   |      |
      for Salem       |   |               |    |   |      |
      Bridge)         |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Sherman:            |   |               |    |   |      |
    John Day River    |108|2-126' Wood    | 372| 18|Heavy |[1]  20,000.00
      Bridge on       |   |Deck Spans     |    |   |      |
      Columbia River  |   |               |    |   |      |
      Highway         |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Tillamook:          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over North |127|40' Lift and   | 750| 16|Medium|[2]  11,000.00
      Fork of Nehalem |   |90' Span       |    |   |      |
      River           |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Beaver|153|172' R. C.     | 172| 20|Heavy |[1]   8,000.00
      Creek, North of |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      Beaver          |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Beaver|154|120' R. C.     | 120| 20|Heavy |[2]   6,000.00
      Creek in Beaver |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Munson Creek      |160|16' R. C.      |  16| 20|Heavy |[2]     500.00
      Bridge          |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Umatilla:           |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Wash- |229|54' Wood Span  |  54| 18|Medium|[1]   1,500.00
      out Gulch near  |   |               |    |   |      |
      Reith           |   |               |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Union:              |   |               |    |   |      |
    Grand Ronde River |174|2-126' Wooden  | 270| 16|Medium|[1]   8,000.00
      Bridge          |   |Spans          |    |   |      |
    Grand Ronde River |175|1-162' Wooden  | 200| 16|Medium|[1]   8,000.00
      Bridge          |   |Spans          |    |   |      |
    Bridge between La |275|12' R. C.      |  12| 24|Heavy |[1]   1,000.00
      Grande and Hot  |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      Lake            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge between La |276|10' R. C.      |  10| 24|Heavy |[1]     900.00
      Grande and Hot  |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      Lake            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge between La |277|26' R. C.      |  26| 20|Heavy |[1]   2,000.00
      Grande and Hot  |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      Lake            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge between La |278|18' R. C.      |  18| 20|Heavy |[1]   1,500.00
      Grande and Hot  |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      Lake            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge between La |279|14' R. C.      |  14| 20|Heavy |[2]   1,400.00
      Grande and Hot  |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
      Lake            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Box Culvert near  |215|7'x8' R. C.    |  10| 24|Heavy |[2]     800.00
      Hot Lake        |   |Box Culvert    |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Wasco:              |   |               |    |   |      |
    Eight Mile Creek  |106|60' R. C. Box  |  60| 20|Heavy |[2]   3,000.00
      Bridge East of  |   |Culvert        |    |   |      |
      the Dalles      |   |               |    |   |      |
    Three Mile Creek  |109|6'x6' R. C.    | ...| 20|Heavy |[2]     700.00
      Bridge--East of |   |Culvert        |    |   |      |
      the Dalles      |   |               |    |   |      |
    Mosier Creek      |118|175' R. C.     | 175| 20|Heavy |[2]   7,000.00
      Bridge at Mosier|   |Viaduct        |    |   |      |
    Butler Creek      |128|36' R. C.      |  36| 20|Heavy |[2]   1,800.00
      Bridge          |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Tygh Creek Bridge |129|78' R. C.      |  78| 20|Heavy |[2]   5,500.00
      near Tygh Valley|   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
    Rock Creek Bridge |203|45' R. C.      |  45| 20|Heavy |[1]   2,700.00
                      |   |Bridge         |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Washington:         |   |               |    |   |      |
    Onion Flat Trestle|199|599' Wood      | 599| 18|Heavy |[3]   8,372.22
      between Rex and |   |Trestle        |    |   |      |
      Tigardville     |   |               |    |   |      |
    Tualatin River    |204|144' Wood Span | 310| 18|Heavy |[3]  12,968.60
      Bridge, 2 mi.   |   |               |    |   |      |
      So. of          |   |               |    |   |      |
      Tigardville     |   |               |    |   |      |
    Fanno Creek Bridge|264|70' Wood       |  70| 18|Heavy |[3]   1,882.81
      at Tigard       |   |Trestle        |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Wheeler:            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Bridge|176|162' Wooden    | 333| 16|Medium|[1]  10,000.00
      Creek, near     |   |Span           |    |   |      |
      Mitchell        |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Bridge|177|90' Wooden Span| 105| 16|Medium|[3]   6,774.15
      Creek, 4 mi.    |   |               |    |   |      |
      West of Mitchell|   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over West  |178|30' Wooden Span|  30| 16|Medium|[1]     500.00
      Branch Creek,   |   |               |    |   |      |
      near Mitchell   |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge at Mitchell|179|162' Wooden    | 200| 16|Medium|[1]   8,000.00
                      |   |Span           |    |   |      |
                      |   |               |    |   |      |
  Yamhill:            |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over       |262|40' Wooden Span|  97| 18|Medium|[1]   1,000.00
      Yamhill River--6|   |               |    |   |      |
      mi. West of     |   |               |    |   |      |
      Grande Ronde    |   |               |    |   |      |
    Bridge over Cedar |263|30' Wooden Span|  68| 18|Medium|[1]     800.00
      Creek--4 mi.    |   |               |    |   |      |
      West of Grande  |   |               |    |   |      |
      Ronde           |   |               |    |   |      |
  --------------------+---+---------------+----+---+------+--------------
  Total                                                   |   $788,788.09
  --------------------------------------------------------+--------------

[1] Designed by Highway Department but not yet constructed.

[2] Designed by Highway Department and construction supervised by
Counties.

[3] Designed and construction supervised by Highway Department.

Where loading is referred to as "Heavy," the structure is designed for a
twenty-ton roller and for 100 lbs. per sq. ft. Where loading is referred
to as "Medium," the structure is designed for a fifteen-ton roller and
for 75 lbs. per sq. ft.


SUMMARY OF BRIDGE AND CULVERT DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION

  Designed and Construction Supervised by Highway Department  $527,788.09
  Designed by Highway Department and Construction supervised
    by Counties                                                 89,600.00
  Designed by Highway Department but not yet constructed       171,400.00
                                                              -----------
  Total                                                       $788,788.09


TABLE C

MILES OF LOCATION SURVEYS MADE BY HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT 1917-1918

       Jobs                                        Miles

  Baker County--
    Baker to Middle Bridge                          17.0
    Canyon Section of Baker-Cornucopia Road          4.5
    Sag Section of Baker-Cornucopia Road             4.9
    Middle Bridge to Black Bridge                   13.0

  Clackamas County--
    Canby to Oregon City                             7.5
    Oregon City to Multnomah County Line             6.5
    Aurora to Canby                                  5.0

  Columbia County--
    Columbia City to Scappoose                      11.2

  Coos County--
    Myrtle Point to Douglas County Line             24.4
    Marshfield to Curry County Line                 39.2
    Coquille to Myrtle Point                         9.0

  Curry County--
    Coast Highway                                   20.0

  Douglas County--
    Johns Ranch to Jacques Ranch                     7.2
    Canyon Creek Pass to Johns Place                 2.3
    Coos County Line to Roseburg                    28.7

  Gilliam County--
    Columbia River Highway                          34.0

  Grant County--
    Big Basin Section of John Day River Highway     23.5
    John Day to Fisk Creek                           7.4
    Fisk Creek to Hall Hill                          3.5
    Hall Hill to Prairie City                        2.2

  Harney County--
    Burns to Crane                                   6.0

  Hood River County--
    Hood River to Mosier                             7.0

  Jackson County--
    Ashland to Klamath Falls                        15.6

  Josephine County--
    Wolf Creek to Grave Creek                        4.0
    Grants Pass to Grave Creek                      17.2
    Wolf Creek to Stage Road Pass                    2.4

  Klamath County--
    Klamath Falls-Chiloquin                          3.3

  Lane County--
    Goshen to Cottage Grove                         18.2
    Eugene to Florence                              37.5
    Divide to Overhead                               1.3

  Linn County--
    Albany to Jefferson                              7.8

  Marion County--
    Salem to Aurora                                 22.2
    Salem to Jefferson                              15.5

  Morrow County--
    Columbia River Highway                          28.6
    Heppner to Willows                              43.0
    Heppner to Umatilla County Line                 28.4

  Polk County--
    Between Monmouth and Dallas                       .7
    Between Salem and Dallas                          .8

  Sherman County--
    Columbia River Highway                          14.0

  Tillamook County--
    Tillamook to Cloverdale                         15.0
    Neskowin to Salmon River                         8.0

  Umatilla County--
    Pendleton to Umatilla                           40.6
    Pendleton to Pilot Rock                         13.9
    Pilot Rock to Morrow County Line                18.3
    Pendleton to Kamela                             26.8
  Union County--
    Elgin to Minam                                   9.4
    Union to Telocaset                               7.2
    La Grande to Elgin                              29.1
    La Grande to Union                               9.4
    La Grande to Kamela                             22.4

  Wasco County--
    Seuffert to Deschutes River                     12.5

  Washington County--
    Multnomah County Line to Newberg                15.7
    Beaverton to Hillsboro                           7.6
    Forest Grove to Gaston                           6.7

  Wheeler County--
    Sarvice Creek to Grant County Line              25.5
    Ochoco Forest to Grant County Line              50.5
    Fossil to Gilliam County Line                    4.5
    Fossil to mouth of Sarvice Creek                21.0

  Yamhill County--
    McMinnville to Dayton                            6.7
    Grande Ronde Section                             6.8
                                                   -----
      Total miles of surveys                       902.1


TABLE D

MILES OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF ROAD IN EACH COUNTY

(These mileages are only roughly approximate as accurate data is
obtainable in very few counties)

  ==========+==========================================================
            | Public Roads
            |        |Concrete Pavements
            |        |    |Asphaltic Concrete
   COUNTIES |        |    |     |Plank Roads
            |        |    |     |     |Broken Stone
            |        |    |     |     |       |Gravel Roads
            |        |    |     |     |       |       |   Earth Roads
            |        |    |     |     |       |       |Improved
            |        |    |     |     |       |       |       |Un-
            |        |    |     |     |       |       |       |improved
  ----------+--------+----+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+--------
  Baker     | 3,500.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    ...|   30.0|  470.0| 3,000.0
  Benton    |   550.0| ...|  ...|  ...|   10.0|  200.0|  200.0|   140.0
  Clackamas | 1,220.0| 2.0| 24.0| 99.0|  177.0|  221.0|  441.0|   256.0
  Clatsop   |   310.0| 4.5| 25.0| 26.0|   94.0|   19.0|  141.0|     ...
  Columbia  |   575.0| ...|  4.5| 19.0|  116.5|   42.0|   17.0|   376.0
  Coos      |   675.0|  .5|  1.5| 51.0|   16.0|   86.0|   86.0|   434.0
  Crook     | 1,450.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    2.0|   50.0|  300.0| 1,098.0
  Curry     |   140.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    2.0|   52.0|   53.0|    33.0
  Deschutes | 1,500.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    ...|   25.0|  300.0| 1,175.0
  Douglas   | 2,000.0| 1.0|  1.0|  8.0|  150.0|  340.0|  500.0| 1,000.0
  Gilliam   |   600.0| ...|  ...|  ...|   10.0|    5.0|   50.0|   535.0
  Grant     |   850.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    ...|   12.0|   15.0|   823.0
  Harney    | 1,000.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    ...|    8.0|  192.0|   800.0
  Hood River|   250.0| ...|  1.0|  ...|    7.0|   32.0|  110.0|   100.0
  Jackson   |   750.0| 8.0| 10.0|  ...|   12.0|   20.0|  300.0|   400.0
  Jefferson | 1,500.0| ...|  ...|  ...|   30.0|   25.0|  500.0|   945.0
  Josephine |   700.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    4.0|   52.0|  400.0|   244.0
  Klamath   | 1,200.0| ...|  2.0|  ...|    4.0|   14.0|  300.0|   880.0
  Lake      | 1,400.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    5.0|   20.0|  200.0| 1,175.0
  Lane      | 1,450.0| ...|  ...| 26.0|  137.0|  425.0|   78.0|   784.0
  Lincoln   |   385.0| ...|  ...|  5.0|   20.0|   10.0|  250.0|   100.0
  Linn      | 1,900.0| ...|  ...|  ...|   70.0|  530.0|  500.0|   800.0
  Malheur   | 1,800.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    ...|   25.0|  200.0|  1575.0
  Marion    | 1,300.0| ...|  8.0|  ...|  123.0|  272.0|  300.0|   597.0
  Morrow    |   900.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    4.0|    ...|   33.0|   863.0
  Multnomah |   500.0|12.0| 77.0|  3.0|  125.0|  136.0|  120.0|    27.0
  Polk      | 1,100.0| ...|  1.0|  ...|   40.0|  300.0|  300.0|   459.0
  Sherman   |   500.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    ...|    4.0|   90.0|   406.0
  Tillamook |   350.0| 6.0|  5.0| 11.0|    ...|  228.0|   50.0|    50.0
  Umatilla  | 3,000.0| ...| 11.0|  ...|   30.0|   30.0|  644.0| 2,285.0
  Union     |   800.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    3.0|   10.0|  187.0|   600.0
  Wallowa   | 1,500.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    ...|    ...|  300.0| 1,200.0
  Wasco     | 1,100.0| ...|  ...|  ...|   25.0|  100.0|  475.0|   500.0
  Washington|   975.0| ...| 16.0| 25.0|  171.0|   33.0|  300.0|   430.0
  Wheeler   |   950.0| ...|  ...|  ...|    5.0|    ...|    5.0|   940.0
  Yamhill   | 1,300.0| 4.0|  ...|  ...|  125.0|  171.0|  500.0|   500.0
            +--------+----+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+--------
      Total |39,980.0|38.0|187.0|273.0|1,518.0|3,527.0|8,907.0|25,530.0
  ----------+--------+----+-----+-----+-------+-------+-------+--------


TABLE E

1918 MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION BY COUNTIES

  ===========+===========+=========
    County   |   Total   |  Number
             | Number of | Persons
             |   Motor   | Per Auto
             | Vehicles  |
  -----------+-----------+---------
  Baker      |  1,409    |  12.8
  Benton     |  1,080    |   9.9
  Clackamas  |  2,299    |  13.0
  Clatsop    |  1,409    |  11.4
  Columbia   |    632    |  16.8
  Coos       |  1,128    |  15.9
  Crook      |    533    |   5.6
  Curry      |    135    |  15.1
  Deschutes  |    829    |   5.6
  Douglas    |  1,428    |  13.8
  Gilliam    |    520    |   7.1
  Grant      |    436    |  12.9
  Harney     |    488    |   8.3
  Hood River |    682    |  11.8
  Jackson    |  2,431    |  10.6
  Jefferson  |    305    |   5.6
  Josephine  |    743    |  12.9
  Klamath    |  1,151    |   7.4
  Lake       |    463    |  10.0
  Lane       |  2,618    |  12.9
  Lincoln    |    170    |  34.6
  Linn       |  2,184    |  10.4
  Malheur    |  1,138    |   7.6
  Marion     |  3,982    |  10.0
  Morrow     |    670    |   6.5
  Multnomah  | 20,456    |  11.1
  Polk       |  1,298    |  10.4
  Sherman    |    737    |   5.8
  Tillamook  |    843    |   7.4
  Umatilla   |  3,231    |   6.3
  Union      |  1,609    |  10.1
  Wallowa    |    811    |  10.3
  Wasco      |  1,324    |  12.3
  Washington |  2,041    |  10.5
  Wheeler    |    243    |  10.2
  Yamhill    |  1,862    |   9.3
  -----------+-----------+--------
  Total      | 63,318    |  10.6
  -----------+-----------+--------


STATE REGISTRATION

  Total number of passenger vehicles                          58,000
  Total number of Ford trucks                        2,266
  Total number of trucks of other makes              3,052
                                                     -----
  Total number of trucks, all makes                            5,318
                                                              ------
  Total number of motor vehicles of all types and all makes   63,318


TABLE F

COUNTY BOND ISSUES

As proof that the people of Oregon are awake to the value of good roads,
the following list is given of Counties which have voted bond issues for
the development of their road systems:

  ===========+=================+===============
   County    | Amount of bonds |  Date voted
  -----------+-----------------+---------------
  Coos       | $  362,000.00   | June     1916
  Columbia   |    360,000.00   | Feb.     1914
  Clatsop    |    400,000.00   | Nov.  4, 1913
  Crook      |     90,000.00   |          1918
  Douglas    |    500,000.00   | Aug.     1917
  Grant      |    140,000.00   | June  4, 1917
  Hood River |     75,000.00   | July 15, 1914
  Jackson    |    500,000.00   | Sept. 9, 1913
  Multnomah  |  1,250,000.00   | Mar.     1915
  Wasco      |    260,000.00   | Nov.     1916
  Wheeler    |     80,000.00   | Nov.     1916
             +-----------------+---------------
   Total     | $4,017,000.00   |
  -----------+-----------------+---------------


TABLE G--TABULATION OF CONTRACT PRICES

GIVING UNIT PRICES OF ALL UNIT PRICE CONTRACTS FOR PAVING AND GRADING
WORK, 1917-1918

  ========+============+====================+======+===================
  Contract|            |                    | N  m |
  No+-----+            |                    | u  i |
    |       Job        |    CONTRACTOR      | m  l |  Kind of Work
    |                  |                    | b  e |
    |                  |                    | e  s |
    |                  |                    | r    |
  --+------------------+--------------------+------+-------------------
   1|Cummins Hill      |Elliot Construction |  3.5 |Grading
    |                  |  Co.               |      |
   2|Wild Horse Paving |Warren Construction | 11.0 |Paving
    |                  |  Co.               |      |
   3|Multnomah County  |Oskar Huber         | 15.7 |Grading and Paving
    |  Line-Newberg    |                    |      |
   5|Astoria-Svenson   |Warren Construction |  9.0 |Grading and Paving
    |                  |  Co.               |      |
   6|Goble Section     |Warren Construction |  2.0 |Grading
    |                  |  Co.               |      |
   7|Rainier Hill      |A. L. Clark         |  2.2 |Grading
   8|Cascade Locks     |A. D. Kern          |  8.2 |Grading
   9|Viento Section    |A. D. Kern          |  3.6 |Grading
  10|Ruthton Hill      |A. D. Kern          |  2.4 |Grading
  11|Delena-Goble      |Clark & Dibble      |  7.6 |Macadam
    |                  |                    |      |
  12|Tillamook Paving  |Oskar Huber         |  5.0 |Grading and Paving
  13|Multnomah County  |Warren Construction |  2.5 |Paving
    |  Line-Scappoose  |  Co.               |      |
  18|Oregon City-Canby |Ore. Hassam Paving  |  7.5 |Paving
    |                  |  Co.               |      |
  19|Yoncalla-Oakland  |Warren Construction | 10.4 |Grading
    |                  |  Co.               |      |
  20|Comstock-Leona    |Hall & Soleim       |  4.6 |Grading & Macadam
    |                  |                    |      |
  21|Divide-Comstock   |S. S. Schell        |  2.4 |Grading
  25|Locust Hill       |A. Anderson         |  1.0 |Grading
  28|Wolf Creek-Grave  |American Express    |  4.9 |Grading
    |  Creek           |  Co.               |      |
  29|Myrtle Creek-     |Calvert & Wolke     | 12.8 |Grading
    |  Dillard         |                    |      |
  32|Bridge Creek      |United Construction |  0.9 |Grading
    |                  |  Co.               |      |
  36|Canemah-new Era   |Clackamas County    |  1.8 |Grading
    |                  |  Court             |      |
  64|Divide-Comstock   |S. S. Schell        |  2.4 |Macadam
    |  Macadam         |                    |      |
  65|Union-Telocaset   |State               |  6.0 |Grading
  66|Elgin-Minam       |State               |  9.3 |Grading
  71|Hall Hill-Prairie |A. D. Kern          |  2.2 |Grading & Macadam
    |  City            |                    |      |
    |                  |                    |      |
  LP|Lowest Unit Price |                    |      |
  HP|Highest Unit Price|                    |      |
  ---------------------+--------------------+------+-------------------

  ==+==========+=====================+======+=================+=========
  Ct|Clearing  |     EXCAVATION      | Over-|   CONCRETE      |Rubble
  No|  and     |     Cubic Yards     | haul,|  Cubic Yards    |Masonry
    |Grubbing  +--------+------+-----+  Cu. +-----+-----+-----+  Cu.
    |Lump Sum  | Common |Inter-|Solid| Yds. |Class|Class|Class|  Yds.
    |          |        | me-  |Rock | Per  |  A  |  B  |  C  |
    |          |        |diate |     | 100' |     |     |     |
  --+----------+--------+------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+---------
   1|   ...    |$ .40   |$ .70 |$1.35| ...  |  ...|  ...|  ...|$ 10.00
   2|          |  ...   |  ... |  ...|$.01  |  ...|  ...|  ...|    ...
   3|$1,250.00 |  .34   |  .62 | 1.15| ...  |  ...|  ...|$8.50|
   5| 5,610.00 |  .49   |  .75 | 1.20| .01  |  ...|  ...| 8.50|
   6| 2,085.00 |  .45   |  .70 | 1.15| .02  |  ...|  ...|15.00|   9.00
    |          |        |      |     |      |     |     |     |
   7|   ...    |  .30   |  .48 | 1.25| .03  |  ...|  ...|12.00|    ...
   8|  Free    |  .42   |  .75 | 1.15| .03  |20.00|  ...|14.00|   7.00
   9|  Free    |  .39   |  .70 | 1.10| .03  |20.00|  ...|14.00|   7.00
  10|  Free    |  .39   |  .70 | 1.05| .03  |  ...|  ...|14.00|   7.00
  11|   ...    |  .40   |  .60 | 1.15| .02  |20.00|  ...|18.00|    ...
    |          |        |      |     |      |     |     |     |
  12|   ...    |  .60   |  .90 |  ...| .02  |  ...|  ...|17.70|    ...
  13|   ...    |  .45   |  .65 |  ...| .02  |  ...|  ...|  ...|    ...
  18|   ...    |  ...   |  ... |  ...| ...  |  ...|  ...|  ...|    ...
  19|$6,350.00 |  .49   |  .77 | 1.30| .02  |24.00|22.00|  ...|   9.00
  20| 2,247.00 |  .371/2  |  .61 | 1.12| .021/2 |18.00|16.05|  ...|  14.80
    |          |        |      |     |      |     |     |     |
  21| 2,400.00 |  .45   |  .60 | 1.15| .03  |24.00|16.00|  ...|   8.00
  25|   125.00 |  .53   |  .63 | 1.20| .03  |  ...|  ...|20.00|    ...
  28| 3,500.00 |  .45   |  .45 | 1.25| .02  |22.50|  ...|18.00|    ...
  29| 3,500.00 |  .35   |  .56 | 1.14| .02  |22.00|  ...|20.50|    ...
  32|   ...    |  .60   |  .75 | 1.40| .03  |34.00|  ...|31.00|  12.50
    |          |        |      |     |      |     |     |     |
  36|   500.00 |  .60   |  .80 | 1.25| .02  |15.00|  ...|12.00|   1.25
  64|   ...    |  ...   |  ... |  ...| ...  |  ...|  ...|  ...|    ...
  65|   ...    |  .40   |  .75 | 1.35| .03  |25.00|  ...|20.00|    ...
  66|   ...    |  .40   |  .70 | 1.25| .03  |22.00|20.00|  ...|  10.00
  71|   ...    |  .72   |  ... | 1.60| .05  |31.00|30.00|28.00|    ...
    |          |        |      |     |      |     |     |     |
  LP|          |  .30   |  .45 | 1.05| .01  |15.00|16.05| 8.50|   1.25
  HP|          |  .72   |  .90 | 1.60| .05  |34.00|30.00|31.00|  14.80
  --+----------+--------+------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+--------

  ==+======+=================+==========================================
  Ct| Metal|      Plain      |         REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE
  No| Rein-|     Concrete    |               Lineal Feet
    |force-|       Pipe      |
    | ment |   Lineal Feet   |
    |Pounds+--------+--------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------
    |      | 12-in. | 18-in. |12-in. |18-in. | 24-in. | 30-in. | 36-in.
  --+------+--------+--------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------
   1|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
   2|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
   3|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |$ 1.25 | $1.75 | $ 2.45 |    ... | $ 4.25
   5|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |  1.40 |  2.00 |   2.75 |    ... |   4.60
   6|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |  1.50 |   ... |   3.30 |    ... |   5.30
    |      |        |        |       |       |        |        |
   7|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
   8|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |  1.75 |  2.25 |   3.00 |    ... |   4.75
   9|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |  1.75 |  2.25 |   3.00 |    ... |    ...
  10|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |  1.75 |  2.25 |   3.00 |    ... |    ...
  11|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
    |      |        |        |       |       |        |        |
  12|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |[4].48 |[4].78 |[4]1.16 |    ... |[4]1.80
  13|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
  18|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
  19|$ .08 |$ 1.10  |$ 2.02  |   ... |   ... |   3.27 |    ... |   5.50
  20|  .12 |   .67  |  1.55  |   ... |   ... |   2.90 |    ... |   5.50
    |      |        |        |       |       |        |        |
  21|  .08 |  1.00  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |   2.50 |    ... |    ...
  25|  ... |  1.00  |  1.50  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
  28|  .15 |[4].55  |[4].80  |   ... |   ... |[4]1.10 |[4]1.50 |[4]2.00
  29|  .10 |[4].35  |   ...  |   ... |[4].60 |[4]1.05 |[4]2.00 |[4]3.00
  32|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
    |      |        |        |       |       |        |        |
  36|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |  1.25 |    ... |    ... |    ...
  64|  ... |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
  65|  .08 |  1.25  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
  66|  .07 |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
  71|  .10 |   ...  |   ...  |   ... |   ... |    ... |    ... |    ...
    |      |        |        |       |       |        |        |
  LP|  .07 |   .67  |  1.50  |  1.35 |  1.75 |   2.45 |[4]1.50 |   4.00
  HP|  .15 |  1.25  |  2.02  |  1.75 |  2.25 |   3.30 |[4]2.00 |   5.50
  --+------+--------+--------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------

  ==+=====================================+======+=====+======+=========
  Ct|   CORRUGATED GALVANIZED IRON PIPE   |6-Inch|Guard|Lumber|Asphaltic
  No|             Lineal Feet             |Porous|Fence|  and |Concrete
    |                                     |Drain | Lin.|Timber|2 inches
    |                                     | Tile | Ft. |1,000 |on Rock
    |-------+------+--------+------+------+ Lin. |     | Ft.  |  Base
    | 12-in.|18-in.| 24-in. |30-in.|36-in.|  Ft. |     |B. M. |Sq. Yd.
  --+-------+------+--------+------+------+------+-----+------+---------
   1|[4]$.40|   ...|[4]$1.00|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...|    ...
   2|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...| $ 1.29
   3|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...| $.15 | $.45| 50.00|   1.28
   5|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...|   1.24
   6|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  .57|   ...|    ...
    |       |      |        |      |      |      |     |      |
   7|   1.00|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... | 1.50|   ...|    ...
   8|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  .50|   ...|    ...
   9|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  .50|   ...|    ...
  10|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  .50|   ...|    ...
  11|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|  1.30|  ... |  .60|   ...|    ...
    |       |      |        |      |      |      |     |      |
  12|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  .14 |  ...|   ...|   1.42
  13|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...|   1.17
  18|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...|   1.26
  19|   2.07|  2.75|    3.44|   ...|   ...|  .20 |  ...| 45.00|    ...
  20|   1.55|  2.00|    3.00|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...| 32.00|    ...
    |       |      |        |      |      |      |     |      |
  21|    ...|   ...|    3.25|   ...|   ...|  .20 |  ...| 20.00|    ...
  25|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  .25 |  ...|   ...|    ...
  28| [4].30|[4].40|  [4].50|[4].60|[4].75|  .40 |  .50| 45.00|    ...
  29| [4].20|[4].30|  [4].40|[4].60|[4].75|  .25 |  .55| 45.00|    ...
  32| [4].73|[4].90|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  .85|   ...|    ...
    |       |      |        |      |      |      |     |      |
  36|   4.00|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  .10 |  .35|   ...|    ...
  64|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...|    ...
  65|    ...|   ...|     ...|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...|    ...
  66|    ...|  1.50|    2.50|  4.00|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...|    ...
  71|    ...|  1.80|    2.70|   ...|   ...|  ... |  ...|   ...|    ...
    |       |      |        |      |      |      |     |      |
  LP|   1.00|  2.00|    3.00|[4].60|[4].75|  .10 |  .35| 20.00|   1.17
  HP|   2.07|  2.75|    4.00|[4].60|[4].75|  .40 | 1.50| 50.00|   1.42
  --+-------+------+--------+------+------+------+-----+------+---------

  ==+=====================+=======+=======+========+=======+========
  Ct|       MACADAM       |Broken | Sand  |Broken |  Clay |  Rip-
  No|     Cubic Yards,    | Stone |Cu. Yd.|Stones |  Fil- |  rap
    |   (Loose Measure)   |Cu. Yd.|(Loose |Shoul- |  ler  |  Cu.
    +------+------+-------+(Loose |Meas.) | ders  |  Cu.  |  Yd.
    |Broken|Gravel|Crushed|Meas.) |       | Li.   |  Yd.  |
    |Stone |      |Gravel |       |       | Ft.   |       |
  --+------+------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+--------
   1|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
   2|  ... |  ... |   ... |$ 1.87 |   ... |  .05  |$ 1.00 |    ...
   3|  ... |  ... |   ... |  2.40 |   ... |  .06  |   .85 |$  2.75
   5|  ... |  ... |   ... |  2.30 |   ... |  .05  |   .88 |    ...
   6|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
    |      |      |       |       |       |       |       |
   7|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
   8|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
   9|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  10|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  11| 2.18 |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |  1.00 |    ...
    |      |      |       |       |       |       |       |
  12|  ... |  ... |   ... |  2.20 |   ... |  .06  |  1.00 |    ...
  13|  ... |  ... |   ... |  1.90 |   ... |  .05  |   .90 |    ...
  18|  ... |  ... |   ... |  2.37 |   ... |  .051/2 |   .90 |    ...
  19|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  20| 4.89 |  ... |   ... |   ... |  1.70 |  ...  |   .62 |    ...
    |      |      |       |       |       |       |       |
  21|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  25|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  28|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  29|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |   5.00
  32|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
    |      |      |       |       |       |       |       |
  36|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  64| 3.35 |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   .75 |    ...
  65|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  66|  ... |  ... |   ... |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   ... |    ...
  71|  ... | 3.30 |  3.70 |   ... |   ... |  ...  |   .75 |    ...
    |      |      |       |       |       |       |       |
  LP| 2.18 | 3.30 |  3.70 |  1.87 |  1.70 |  .05  |   .62 |   2.35
  HP| 4.89 | 3.30 |  3.70 |  2.40 |  1.70 |  .06  |  1.00 |   5.00
  --+------+------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+--------

[4] Indicates that contract price on culvert pipe is for hauling and
placing only, the pipe to be furnished to the contractor.


TABLE H

YEARLY EXPENDITURES OF STATE FUNDS IN COUNTIES

1914, 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918

    ==========+=========+=========+=========+==========+==========+==========
     Counties |  1914   |  1915   |  1916   |   1917   |  1918    |  Total
    ----------+---------+---------+---------+----------+----------+----------
    Baker     |         |         |$  802.74|$ 1,214.01|$ 6,364.67|$ 8,381.42
    Benton    |         |$  181.50|   727.14|     47.56|          |    956.20
    Clackamas |$  587.74|         | 1,013.37| 12,519.70|143,341.40|157,462.21
    Clatsop   |64,587.44|35,110.03|20,823.44| 54,294.83|290,092.40|464,908.14
    Columbia  |13,384.87|92,069.72|11,143.48| 76,424.91|411,877.24|604,900.22
    Coos      |         |         |   375.81| 16,703.28|    264.40| 17,343.49
    Crook     |         |    57.17|12,052.32|          |  3,053.72| 15,163.21
    Curry     |         |         |         |     79.91|  5,549.33|  5,629.24
    Deschutes |         |         |         |  7,244.37| 13,472.00| 20,716.37
    Douglas   |         |15,701.12|25,188.08|  8,803.50|150,966.08|200,658.78
    Gilliam   |         |         |     7.42|  4,443.52| 31,555.96| 36,006.90
    Grant     |         |         |    26.95|  2,980.16|  4,488.62|  7,495.73
    Harney    |         |         |         |          |  1,873.45|  1,873.45
    Hood River| 1,077.24|47,927.84| 4,317.17| 61,326.69|372,601.53|487,250.47
    Jackson   |59,569.82|31,954.91|25,774.49| 54,476.20| 32,143.68|203,919.10
    Jefferson |         |         |         |          |          |
    Josephine |         | 2,230.81| 5,590.03|  5,297.73| 72,700.41| 85,818.98
    Klamath   |         |         |         |     27.75|    791.48|    819.23
    Lake      |         |         |         | 15,215.57|    176.10| 15,391.67
    Lane      |         |    61.11| 4,639.07| 12,247.61|  2,281.91| 19,229.70
    Lincoln   |         |    11.95|    12.88|  2,054.05|    943.42|  3,022.30
    Linn      |         |   208.81|    37.32|    287.67|    503.40|  1,037.20
    Malheur   |         |         |   189.61|     93.02|    773.63|  1,056.26
    Marion    |   414.76|    79.79|   712.55|    479.41|  4,604.18|  6,290.69
    Morrow    |         |         |   105.18|  4,200.72|  6,662.38| 10,968.28
    Multnomah | 1,068.08|   107.03|         |          |          |  1,175.11
    Polk      |   414.15|    74.54| 6,614.53|    137.78|    665.14|  7,906.14
    Sherman   |44,523.20|   993.26|   188.87|     48.87|  3,003.27| 48,757.47
    Tillamook |         |   116.59| 1,735.01|  5,213.34| 63,060.95| 70,125.89
    Umatilla  |         |         |    13.49|100,608.75| 73,333.75|173,955.99
    Union     |         |         |    42.20|  5,975.15| 26,213.02| 32,230.37
    Wallowa   |         |         |         |          |    765.07|    765.07
    Wasco     |         |   134.91|    10.34|    286.02|  4,027.77|  4,449.04
    Washington| 4,998.14|14,321.44| 4,975.48| 70,139.95|176,629.10|271,064.11
    Wheeler   |         |         |     5.64| 13,084.26| 56,130.52| 69,220.42
    Yamhill   |   408.34|   108.37| 2,106.03| 38,714.45| 86,244.39|127,581.58
              +---------+---------+---------+----------+----------+----------
      Totals $191,033.78|         |         |          |          |
                       $241,450.90|         |          |          |
                                 $129,230.64|          |          |
                                            $574,670.74|          |
                                                     $2,047,154.37|
                                                                $3,183,540.43
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------


TABLE I

MILEAGE TABLE

Main Traveled Roads

Showing distances between some of the important towns; for convenience
in obtaining mileage for long trips; to be used in connection with the
official automobile road map on opposite page.

All distances between points west of the Cascade Range and Eastern
Oregon points are via Portland and the Columbia River Highway, unless
otherwise noted.

  =============+======+======+======+======+======+======+===+======+======
               |   P  |   S  |   A  |   E  |   R  |   M  | P |   B  |   B
               |   o  |   a  |   l  |   u  |   o  |   e  | e |   a  |   e
               |   r  |   l  |   b  |   g  |   s  |   d  | n |   k  |   n
               |   t  |   e  |   a  |   e  |   e  |   f  | d |   e  |   d
               |   l  |   m  |   n  |   n  |   b  |   o  | l |   r  |
               |   a  |      |   y  |   e  |   u  |   r  | e |      |
               |   n  |      |      |      |   r  |   d  | t |      |
               |   d  |      |      |      |   g  |      | o |      |
               |      |      |      |      |      |      | n |      |
  -------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+---+------+------
  Portland     |   ...|    53|    78|   126|   203|   318|240|   345|   253
  Salem        |    53|   ...|    25|    73|   150|   265|293|   398|[5]195
  Albany       |    78|    25|   ...|    48|   125|   240|318|   423|[5]170
  Corvallis    |    89|    36|    11|    40|   117|   232|329|   434|[5]162
  Eugene       |   126|    73|    48|   ...|    77|   192|366|[5]356|[5]122
  Roseburg     |   203|   150|   125|    77|   ...|   115|443|[5]433|[5]199
  Grants Pass  |   285|   232|   207|   159|    82|    33|525|[5]515|[6]265
  Medford      |   318|   265|   240|   192|   115|   ...|484|[6]490|[6]232
  Ashland      |   331|   278|   253|   205|   128|    13|471|[6]477|[6]219
  Ore.-Cal.    |      |      |      |      |      |      |   |      |
    State Line |   354|   301|   276|   228|   151|    36|   |      |
  Crater Lake  |   401|   348|   323|   275|   198|    83|372|   378|   120
  Klamath Falls|   395|   342|   317|   269|   192|    77|407|   413|   155
  Astoria      |   107|   160|   185|   233|   310|   425|347|   452|   360
  Tillamook    |   107|    91|   116|   150|   227|   342|347|   452|   360
  Marshfield   |[7]253|[7]200|[7]175|[7]127|    88|   190|493|[5]483|[5]249
  The Dalles   |    91|   144|   169|   217|   294|   409|149|   254|   162
  Pendleton    |   240|   293|   318|   366|   443|   558|...|   105|   252
  Walla Walla  |   285|   338|   363|   411|   488|   603| 45|   150|   297
  La Grande    |   293|   346|   371|   419|   496|[6]542| 53|    52|   305
  Baker        |   345|   398|   423|[5]356|[5]433|[6]490|105|   ...|   258
  Huntington   |   395|   448|   473|[5]406|[5]483|[6]540|155|    50|   298
  Prineville   |   244|[5]208|[5]183|[5]135|[5]212|[6]269|226|   221|    37
  Bend         |   253|[5]195|[5]170|[5]122|[5]199|[6]232|252|   258|   ...
  Burns        |   396|[5]338|[5]313|[5]265|[5]342|[6]340|195|   169|   143
  Lakeview     |   426|[5]368|[5]343|[5]295|[6]292|[6]177|358|   332|   173
  Canyon City  |   317|[5]337|[5]312|[5]264|[5]341|[6]398|122|    96|   166
  -------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+---+------+------

[5] Via Eugene and McKenzie River Highway.

[6] Via Klamath Falls.

[7] Via Scottsburg.

[Illustration: AUTOMOBILE ROAD MAP, SHOWING THE MAIN TRAVELED ROADS OF
OREGON WITH MILEAGES

Prepared by the Oregon State Highway Department]

=This Is Not a Map of the System of State Highways.= This map is
intended as a guide to the main traveled, existing, through highways and
roads connecting important centers of population. The heavier weight
lines are intended to designate the most generally traveled, through
routes, rather than their relative condition or importance.


TABLE J

OFFICIAL DESIGNATION OF STATE HIGHWAYS

  =No. 1. Pacific Highway--=
    From Portland south via Oregon City, Salem, Albany, Eugene, Roseburg,
    Grants Pass, Medford and Ashland to the Oregon-California State Line.

  =No. 2. Columbia River Highway--=
    From Astoria east via Rainier, Portland, Hood River, The Dalles,
    Arlington and Umatilla, to Pendleton.

  =No. 3. Coast Highway--=
    From Astoria south via Tillamook, Toledo, Florence, Marshfield,
    Coquille and Gold Beach to Oregon-California State Line.

  =No. 4. The Dalles-California Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 2, at or near The Dalles, south via
    Shaniko, Redmond, Bend, LaPine and Klamath Falls to the Oregon-
    California State Line.

  =No. 5. The John Day River Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 2, at or near Biggs, southeasterly through
    Wasco, Condon, Fossil, Dayville, Prairie City and Vale to the Oregon-
    Idaho State Line at Ontario.

  =No. 6. The Old Oregon Trail--=
    From a junction with Highway No. 2, at Pendleton, southeasterly
    through La Grande, Baker and Huntington to a junction with Highway
    No. 5 at or near Ontario.

  =No. 7. Central Oregon Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 4, at or near Bend, easterly through
    Millican, Riley, Burns, Crane and Juntura to a junction with Highway
    No. 5, at or near Vale.

  =No. 8. Oregon-Washington Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 2, at or near Willows, through Ione,
    Heppner, Pendleton and Freewater to the Oregon-Washington State Line.

  =No. 9. Pendleton-John Day Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 8, at or near Pilot Rock south to a
    junction with Highway No. 5, at or near John Day.

  =No. 10. La Grande-Enterprise Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 6, at or near La Grande, through Elgin and
    Enterprise to Joseph.

  =No. 11. Enterprise-Flora Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 10, at or near Enterprise, north to Flora.

  =No. 12. Baker-Cornucopia Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 6, at or near Baker, east through Middle
    Bridge and Halfway to Cornucopia.

  =No. 13. Baker-Unity Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 6, at or near Baker, southwest to a
    junction with Highway No. 5, at or near Unity.

  =No. 14. Antelope-Mitchell Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 4, at or near Antelope to a junction with
    Highway No. 15, at or near Mitchell.

  =No. 15. McKenzie River Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1, at or near Eugene, easterly through the
    McKenzie Valley and through Sisters, Redmond, Prineville and Mitchell
    to a junction with Highway No. 5, at or near Dayville.

  =No. 16. Albany-Sisters Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 4, at or near Albany, southeasterly to a
    junction with Highway No. 15 near Sisters.

  =No. 17. Bend-Sisters Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 4, at or near Bend, northwesterly to a
    junction with Highway No. 15, at or near Sisters.

  =No. 18. Lakeview-Burns Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 19, near Lakeview, northeasterly to a
    junction with Highway No. 7, at or near Burns.

  =No. 19. LaPine-Lakeview Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 4, at or near LaPine southeasterly through
    Fort Rock, Silver Lake, Paisley and Lakeview to the Oregon-California
    State Line.

  =No. 20. Klamath Falls-Lakeview Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 4, at or near Klamath Falls, east to a
    junction with Highway No. 19, at or near Lakeview.

  =No. 21. Ashland-Klamath Falls Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1 near Ashland, east to a junction with
    Highway No. 4, at or near Klamath Falls.

  =No. 22. Medford-Crater Lake Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1 at Medford, northeasterly, through Trail
    and the Rogue River Valley to a junction with Highway No. 24 near
    Crater Lake.

  =No. 23. Klamath-Crater Lake Highway--=
    From a junction with Highway No. 22 near Crater Lake, southeasterly
    to a junction with Highway No. 4, at or near Chiloquin.

  =No. 24. The Rim Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 22 near Crater Lake, thence around Crater
    Lake to the point of beginning.

  =No. 25. Grants Pass-Crescent City Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1 at Grants Pass, southwesterly through
    Kerby and Waldo to the Oregon-California State Line.

  =No. 26. Mt. Hood Highway--=
    From Portland through Gresham and Bull Run around the south and east
    sides of Mt. Hood and to a junction with Highway No. 2, at or near
    Hood River.

  =No. 27. Clackamas Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1, at or near Oregon City, northeasterly
    to a junction with Highway No. 26, at or near Pleasant Home.

  =No. 28. The West Side Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1, at or near Portland, thence south on
    the west side of the Willamette River through Newberg, McMinnville,
    Dallas, Independence and Corvallis to a junction with Highway No. 1,
    at or near Eugene.

  =No. 29. Forest Grove-McMinnville Highway--=
    From Portland through Hillsboro, Forest Grove and Carlton to a
    junction with Highway No. 28, at or near McMinnville.

  =No. 30. Salem-Independence Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1, at Salem, southwesterly to a junction
    with Highway No. 28 at Independence.

  =No. 31. Albany-Corvallis Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1, at Albany to a junction with Highway
    No. 28, at or near Corvallis.

  =No. 32. Yamhill-Nestucca Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 28, at or near McMinnville, through
    Sheridan, Willamina, and Dolph to a junction with Highway No. 3, at
    or near Hebo.

  =No. 33. Corvallis-Newport Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 28, at Corvallis westerly to a junction
    with Highway No. 3, at or near Toledo.

  =No. 34. Eugene-Florence Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 1, near Eugene, westerly through Goldson
    and Deadwood to a junction with Highway No. 3, near Florence.

  =No. 35. Coos Bay-Roseburg Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 3, at or near Coquille, easterly up the
    Middle Fork of the Coquille River, through Camas Valley and Brockway
    to a junction with Highway No. 1, near Dillard.

  =No. 36. Pendleton-Cold Springs Highway--=
    From a point on Highway No. 2, at or near Pendleton, northwest to Cold
    Springs.


TABLE K

EMPLOYES OF THE OREGON STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION

November 30, 1918

Herbert Nunn, State Highway Engineer

  R. A. Klein, Assistant Engineer
  C. A. Dunn, Assistant Engineer
  M. O. Bennett, Division Engineer
  C. H. Whitmore, Division Engineer
  J. C. McLeod, Division Engineer
  C. W. Wanzer, District Engineer
  P. M. Hall-Lewis, Asst. Div. Eng'r
  S. H. Probert, Office Engineer
  L. W. Metzger, Designing Engineer
  E. A. Skelley, Chief Draftsman
  L. C. Elwell, Voucher Clerk
  C. L. Turner, Cost Clerk
  M. S. Farwell, Bridge Draftsman
  C. E. Farnsworth, Office Draftsman
  Theo. Rowland, Office Draftsman
  James Moberg, Office Draftsman
  W. C. Crews, Office Draftsman
  R. E. Raley, Office Computer
  J. C. Tibbits, Clerk
  L. N. Myers, Clerk
  H. M. McDaniel, Clerk
  C. F. Smith, Clerk
  Helen Ingrey, Stenographer
  Margaret H. Hodge, Stenographer
  Grace Fugate, Stenographer
  Gertie Witzel, Stenographer
  Delia Ferguson, Stenographer
  R. H. Baldock, Locating Engineer
  R. H. Coppock, Locating Engineer
  C. A. Harrington, Locating Engineer
  B. H. McNamee, Locating Engineer
  J. H. Scott, Locating Engineer
  E. B. Bishop, Resident Engineer
  H. C. Compton, Resident Engineer
  M. E. DeWitt, Resident Engineer
  F. N. Drinkhall, Resident Engineer
  H. B. Fletcher, Resident Engineer
  H. N. Hackett, Resident Engineer
  A. S. Kennedy, Resident Engineer
  J. E. Nelson, Resident Engineer
  J. E. Peck, Resident Engineer
  R. A. Pratt, Resident Engineer
  W. P. Smith, Resident Engineer
  C. E. Carter, Resident Bridge Engineer
  J. M. Baker, Supt. of Construction
  C. L. Grutze, Supt. of Construction
  W. H. Burtis, Foreman of Repair Shop
  W. S. Hodge, Transitman
  Tom Opedal, Transitman
  Wm. T. Nelson, Field Draftsman
  H. R. Wessell, Field Draftsman
  Chas. E. Lytle, Timekeeper
  L. N. Russell, Timekeeper
  F. A. Keith, Levelman
  H. W. Lange, Levelman
  M. M. Brown, Field Computer
  L. D. Coppock, Field Computer
  Jack Slavens, Head Chainman
  Chas. Collier, Rodman
  Clyde Leghorn, Rodman
  Ora L. Nochols, Rodman
  M. S. Parker, Rodman
  Katherine Riddle, Rodman
  Orville Widdows, Rodman
  Fred Busch, Chainman
  Claire Hopper, Chainman
  J. F. Jones, Chainman
  J. A. Matott, Chainman
  Warren Pearson, Chainman
  Boyd Potter, Chainman
  A. H. Rudd, Chainman
  J. J. Sturgill, Chainman
  D. E. Tompkins, Chainman
  E. Wiggins, Chainman
  Frank Galdabini, Rock Checker
  Pete Knudson, Rock Checker
  L. Parker, Rock Checker
  C. S. Peck, Rock Checker


TABLE L

STATE HIGHWAYS

Names, Numbers, Mileages.

               Highways                            Miles

  No.  1 Pacific Highway                             352
  No.  2 Columbia River Highway                      360
  No.  3 Coast Highway                               430
  No.  4 The Dalles-California Highway               342
  No.  5 The John Day River Highway                  285
  No.  6 The Old Oregon Trail                        190
  No.  7 Central Oregon Highway                      270
  No.  8 Oregon-Washington Highway                   148
  No.  9 Pendleton-John Day Highway                  105
  No. 10 La Grande-Enterprise Highway                 68
  No. 11 Enterprise-Flora Highway                     35
  No. 12 Baker-Cornucopia Highway                     76
  No. 13 Baker-Unity Highway                          42
  No. 14 Antelope-Mitchell Highway                    43
  No. 15 McKenzie River Highway                      229
  No. 16 Albany-Sisters Highway                      100
  No. 17 Bend-Sisters Highway                         27
  No. 18 Lakeview-Burns Highway                      159
  No. 19 LaPine-Lakeview Highway                     151
  No. 20 Klamath Falls-Lakeview Highway              100
  No. 21 Ashland-Klamath Falls Highway                51
  No. 22 Medford-Crater Lake Highway                  78
  No. 23 Klamath-Crater Lake Highway                  14
  No. 24 The Rim Highway                              39
  No. 25 Grants Pass-Crescent City Highway            46
  No. 26 Mt. Hood Highway                            105
  No. 27 Clackamas Highway                            18
  No. 28 The West Side Highway                       120
  No. 29 Forest Grove-McMinnville Highway             25
  No. 30 Salem-Independence Highway                   12
  No. 31 Albany-Corvallis Highway                     11
  No. 32 Yamhill-Nestucca Highway                     39
  No. 33 Corvallis-Newport Highway                    60
  No. 34 Eugene-Florence Highway                      76
  No. 35 Coos Bay-Roseburg Highway                    81
  No. 36 Pendleton-Cold Springs Highway               30
                                                   -----
  Total mileage State Highways                     4,317

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE PACIFIC HIGHWAY IN PASS CREEK CANYON, DOUGLAS COUNTY.
GRADED AND MACADAMIZED IN 1917 AND 1918]




                            Description of Work of the
                             State Highway Department
                                     In the
                              Counties of the State
                                   1917-1918


BAKER COUNTY

Although Baker County is generally well supplied with railroads there
are sections still isolated and much in need of improved transportation
facilities. Some of the most fertile and productive areas of the County
are not served by rail transportation and depend upon roads for
communication with railway points. This situation with the character of
the winter season and soil conditions found here render improved
highways of extreme importance.

Since State and Federal aid have been made available the people of Baker
County are fast coming to a realization of the situation and are making
strenuous efforts to co-operate in highway improvement. No bond issues
have been voted in this County but an example of their enthusiasm is
supplied by the fact that private donations for co-operative improvement
of one road amount to $15,000.00.

State and Federal aid were extended in 1918 and the co-operation has
resulted in plans for improving three sections of the Baker-Cornucopia
Highway. Other roads in the County will receive the consideration of the
Highway Commission during the coming season.

Four sections of the Baker-Cornucopia Highway have been surveyed, and
plans for three of these are nearly complete. Together the four sections
make about thirty-eight miles of location survey. Construction work will
begin on this road early in the coming season.


Survey of the Baker-Cornucopia Highway

During 1917 and 1918 the State Highway Department surveyed a greater
part of the Baker-Cornucopia Highway. The policy of giving first
attention to those portions of the road most in need of improvement
resulted in the surveying of four separate sections. These sections are
designated as follows: Baker-Middle Bridge; Love Bridge-Black Bridge;
Canyon and Sag Sections. These surveys were made under the direction of
J. O. Kingsley and W. C. Crews, locating engineers for the State Highway
Department.

The Baker-Middle Bridge section extends from Baker to a point near
Middle Bridge on Lower Powder River. Beginning at Baker the line follows
closely the present main traveled road east for about six miles, thence
along the Palmer road to the present crossing at Ruckles Creek, thence
down Ruckles Creek to a point about two miles south of Keating, thence
easterly, leaving Ruckles Creek, and entering the lower Powder River
Valley near Middle Bridge. This survey is 18.64 miles in length. The
plans for this work are completed.

The Love Bridge-Black Bridge section covers that portion of the route
through the canyon between the Keating and Richland districts. At
present all traffic passes through Sparta and over the mountains to the
north of the Powder River there being no road through the canyon. This
survey is about ten miles long and involves heavy and expensive
construction. This project begins at a point about seven miles east of
Keating and ends about five miles west of Richland. There is a four-mile
section of the Baker-Cornucopia Highway lying between Middle and Love
Bridges that has not been definitely located. No office work has been
done for this survey.

What is known as the Canyon Section extends through the canyon east of
Richland. This survey begins at a point 1.5 miles east of Richland and
parallels the Powder River along the north bank for a distance of 4.64
miles. The project ends at the point where the proposed route leaves the
Powder River and leads over the mountains toward Pine Valley. Plans are
almost completed for this project.

The Sag Section is that part of the road leading north from the divide
between Powder River and Pine Valley. This survey which is 4.69 miles
long begins at the divide and ends at a point in the edge of Pine Valley
two miles south of Halfway. The location follows very near the route of
the present road. The office work in connection with this survey is
nearing completion.


Baker-Cornucopia Post Road Project

The State Highway Commission requested Government aid in the
construction of the Baker-Cornucopia Highway and this request has
resulted in the approval by the Federal Office of Public Roads of three
projects on this highway. These three projects, namely, Baker-Middle
Bridge, Canyon Section and Sag Section have a combined length of 27.97
miles, and the total estimated cost of these constructions is
$94,731.00. Baker County will co-operate with the State and Government
in defraying the cost of this construction. The following tabulation
indicates the amounts and segregations of funds for each project.

  ================================+============+============+============
  Appropriated for expenditure in |   State    |  County    | Government
             1919                 |   Funds    |   Funds    |   Funds
  --------------------------------+------------+------------+------------
  Baker-Middle Bridge Section     | $13,978.00 | $15,000.00 | $13,978.00
  Canyon Section                  |   8,249.00 |   6,000.00 |   8,249.00
  Sag Section                     |  11,639.00 |   6,000.00 |  11,639.00
                                  +------------+------------+------------
            Totals                | $33,866.00 | $27,000.00 | $33,866.00
  --------------------------------+------------+------------+------------

No plans have been made for financing the Love Bridge-Black Bridge
Section which was surveyed in 1917. This is an important section of the
road and will probably receive early attention from the State Highway
Commission.


BENTON COUNTY

During 1917 and 1918, very little work was done by the Highway
Department in Benton County. At the request of the County Court a short
section of the West Side Highway north of Corvallis was staked for
grading to be done by the County, and designs were prepared for three
concrete structures. Two of these were for box culverts for the Pacific
Highway about five miles north of Corvallis. The other was for an 85
foot reinforced concrete bridge over a mill race south of Corvallis. A
short reconnaissance was made of the Corvallis-Newport road between
Blodgett and Eddyville.

For work to be done in Benton County in 1919, the Highway Commission has
set aside $129,500.00. With this amount it is planned to pave the West
Side Highway from Corvallis north to the Polk County Line, approximately
seven miles.


CLACKAMAS COUNTY

The work under the supervision of the Highway Department in Clackamas
County during 1917 and 1918 has consisted of 4.5 miles of grading
between New Era and Oregon City, 7.5 miles of paving between Oregon City
and Canby, and 0.2 miles of grading between Oswego and the Multnomah
County Line. The first of these jobs was done by the State and County in
co-operation; the second was a strictly State job; and the third was a
County job supervised by the State.

The total expenditure on the work done in Clackamas County was
$198,952.24, of which Clackamas County paid $43,091.14 and the State
$155,861.10.

Between New Era and Oregon City, the Pacific Highway has been graded on
an entirely new location, paralleling the Southern Pacific Railway along
the bank of the Willamette River instead of following the location of
the old road farther back from the river, where the grading is not so
heavy, but where a number of heavy grades are required. In addition to
eliminating these heavy grades, a considerable saving in distance is
effected, and the dangerous crossing under the Southern Pacific tracks
at Oregon City is avoided.


Grading--Vicinity of New Era

On August 20, 1917, bids were considered by the State Highway Commission
for the grading of two and one-half miles on the Pacific Highway near
New Era. The most satisfactory proposal received was a cost plus ten per
cent proposal submitted by the Warren Construction Company, and a
contract was entered into with that firm on the cost plus ten per cent
basis.

This work involved the grading of New Era Hill, just south of New Era,
and some heavy rock excavation from New Era north. After the work had
started, it was decided to pave between Oregon City and Canby, and the
contract for this paving let to the Oregon Hassam Paving Company. The
most feasible place to secure the crushed rock necessary for this paving
was from the rock being excavated under the grading contract with the
Warren Construction Company, and the Highway Department entered into an
agreement with the paving company, whereby the state would crush the
rock from a big cut at New Era, and furnish the crushed rock for the
paving upon certain agreed terms, the crushing to be done under the cost
plus contract with the Warren Construction Company.

On this basis the work was carried on by the Warren Construction Company
until March 1, 1918, at which time it was deemed advisable by the
Highway Commission to take the work over and complete it with State
forces.

The total cost of the grading and rock crushing was $66,000.00, and the
amount received for the crushed rock furnished for the paving was
$19,850.00. Clackamas County co-operated with the State on this work,
the total amount paid out of County funds being $15,009.91.

[Illustration: AT THE TOP OF CANEMAH HILL ON THE PACIFIC HIGHWAY IN
CLACKAMAS COUNTY. GRADED AND PAVED IN 1918]


Grading--Canemah Hill Section

To complete the grading of the Pacific Highway between Oregon City and
Canby preparatory to the paving of this section, Clackamas County agreed
to appropriate $25,000.00 toward the grading between Fly Creek and
Oregon City, known as the Canemah Hill Section. On December 10, 1917,
the Highway Commission received bids for this grading and the lowest bid
having been submitted by Clackamas County, the contract was awarded to
the County. This piece of work was about one and one-half miles in
length and involved some very heavy rock excavation.

There has been expended on this work to date the sum of $24,037.20, of
which amount Clackamas County has paid $22,092.53. The work complete
will cost approximately $27,500.00. Mr. M. E. DeWitt was the resident
engineer in charge.


DETAILED STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918

GRADING--CANEMAH HILL (Work in progress)

  Engineering                                                 $  1,944.67

  Construction--
    Clearing and grubbing                         $    500.00
    Common excavation, 10,231 cu. yds. at 60c        6,138.60
    Intermediate excavation, 8,689.4 cu. yds.
      at 80c                                         6,951.52
    Solid rock excavation, 7,722.2 cu. yds.
      at $1.25                                       9,652.75
    12-inch reinforced concrete pipe, 391 lin. ft.
      at $1.25                                         488.75
    36-inch reinforced concrete pipe, 56 lin. ft.
      at $4.00                                         224.00
    6-inch porous drain tile, 585 lin. ft. at 10c       58.50
    Class A concrete, 48 cu. yds. at $15.00            720.00
    Class C concrete, 2 cu. yds. at $12.00              24.00
    Rubble masonry, 2 cu. yds. at $1.25                  2.50
    Overhaul per 100 lin. ft., 54,862 cu. yds.
      at 2c                                          1,097.24
    Crushed rock for drain tile, 30 cu. yds.            46.20
    18-inch concrete pipe in place, 45 lin. ft.         87.15
                                                  -----------
                                                  $ 25,991.21
    Less 15 per cent retained pending completion     3,898.68
                                                  -----------
                                                                22,092.53
                                                              -----------
    Total expended to November 30, 1918                       $ 24,037.20
      Paid by State--engineering                                 1,944.67
      Paid by County--construction                              22,092.53
                                                              -----------
        Total                                                 $ 24,037.20
  This work is estimated to cost complete                     $ 27,500.00

[Illustration: BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT ON THE PACIFIC HIGHWAY SOUTH OF
OREGON CITY IN CLACKAMAS COUNTY. GRADED AND PAVED IN 1918]


Paving--Oregon City to Canby

A contract was awarded on September 4, 1917, to the Oregon Hassam Paving
Company of Portland, for a sixteen-foot bituminous pavement between
Oregon City and Canby, a distance of 7.5 miles.

A considerable part of the crushed rock used in this pavement was
furnished by the Highway Department from a rock point which it was
necessary to remove in connection with the grading just north of New
Era.

The paving of this section is practically complete at this date and the
contracting company is to be complimented upon the excellence of its
work. The cost of the work completed will be about $135,000.00 of which
amount $102,114.85 has been paid.

Mr. M. E. DeWitt acted as resident engineer for the Highway Department
on this work.


DETAILED STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918

PAVING OREGON CITY TO CANBY

  Engineering                                                  $ 2,444.57

  Construction--
    Standard Bitulithic pavement, 70,170 sq.
      yds. at $1.26                               $ 88,414.20
    Stone Shoulders, 68,208 lin. ft. at .051/2         3,751.44
    Hauling and placing broken stone furnished by
      State, 6,1681/4 cu. yds., at $1.18               7,278.54
    Broken stone, loose measure, 12,8721/4 cu.
      yds., at $2.37                                30,507.23
    Installing wooden headers at railroad crossing      24.06
    Filling low places after rolling, clearing
      debris after forest fire                          59.53
    Excavating spongy place in subgrade and
      refilling                                         67.10
    Loading and hauling to bring outside 2 ft. of
      roadbed to grade; no material nearby             154.14
    Grading 800 feet north from New Era, and
      dismantling and loading crusher                1,726.40
                                                  -----------
    Total due contractor for work done to
      November 30, 1918                           $131,982.64
    Less 15 per cent retained pending completion    19,797.40
                                                  -----------
                                                  $112,185.24
    Less plant rock and miscellaneous items
      furnished by State                            12,514.96
                                                  -----------
                                                               $99,670.28
                                                               ----------
      Total expended to November 30, 1918                     $102,114.85
  This work is estimated to cost complete                     $135,000.00


Oswego to the Multnomah County Line

On April 19, 1918, a contract was awarded by Clackamas County to the
Glemorrie Quarry Company of Oswego for the regrading of a 0.2 mile
section of the West Side Pacific Highway between Oswego and the
Multnomah County Line. At the request of the Clackamas County Court the
engineering supervision of this work was handled by the Highway
Department, Mr. M. E. DeWitt, resident engineer, on work between Oregon
City and Canby, being in charge.

This piece of work eliminated some very bad curves on the old road and
greatly improved the grade. The work was completed on September 4, 1918,
at a total cost of $5,746.68. Of this amount $507.98 was expended by the
State for the engineering. The construction cost of $5,238.70 was paid
by the County.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT

Grading--Multnomah County Line to Oswego

  Engineering                                                    $ 507.98

  Construction--
    Clearing and grubbing                            $ 200.00
    Common excavation, 1,167.3 cu. yds. at 75c         875.47
    Intermediate excavation, 2,127.6 cu. yds.
      at $1.00                                       2,127.60
    Solid rock excavation, 829.5 cu. yds. at
      $1.85                                          1,534.58
    12-inch plain concrete pipe, 26 lin. ft.
      at $1.50                                          39.00
    15-inch plain concrete pipe, 76 lin. ft. at
      $1.80                                            136.80
    18-inch reinforced concrete pipe, 84 lin. ft.
      at $2.00                                         168.00
    Class C concrete, 5 cu. yds. at $15.00              75.00
    Drainage structures under roadbed to protect
      embankment and private water supply               82.25
                                                    ---------
                                                                 5,238.70
                                                                ---------
        Total cost                                              $5,746.68
  Paid by State                                                 $  507.98
  Paid by County                                                 5,238.70
                                                                ---------
        Total                                                   $5,746.68


Oregon City Bridge

The State Highway Department has been requested by the County Court of
Clackamas County to prepare plans and estimates for a bridge over the
Willamette River at Oregon City. This will replace the old suspension
bridge at that place which is too light for the modern traffic
conditions in that vicinity.

Surveys and studies of the site are being conducted at this time. In
this case, as is customary, the State Highway Department will furnish
plans free of cost to the County.


CLATSOP COUNTY

During the period from December 1, 1916, to November 30, 1918, the State
Highway Department expended in Clatsop County the sum of $344,387.23.
The work accomplished consists of 3.5 miles of bituminous paving, 22.7
miles of broken stone macadam, 1.7 miles of gravel macadam, 1.2 miles of
new grading, one covered wood draw bridge, two reinforced concrete
bridges, and 1-6x12 ft. reinforced concrete box culvert, all of these
improvements being on the Columbia River Highway between Astoria and the
Columbia County Line.


Astoria-Svensen Paving

On July 20, 1917, the State Highway Department contracted with the
Warren Construction Company for nine miles of paving between Astoria and
Svensen. This contract called for a 16-foot bituminous pavement on a
crushed rock base and with two-foot macadam shoulders. The contract also
included the grading of a section 1.2 miles in length about midway
between Astoria and Svensen, this section being known as the John Day
Cut-off.

Work was started on the grading of the cut-off on August 6, 1917, and on
the erection of the paving plant on August 15. On September 20, the
first batch of hot stuff was placed on the road at the Svensen end. The
work was just nicely started, however, when the rainy season which came
on unusually early, started in and the work had to be discontinued. At
this time the work on the grading of the cut-off was but fifty or sixty
per cent complete, and only one mile of paving had been laid.

The following season, the roadbed did not become sufficiently dry to
permit of resumption of work until about the 15th of June, but even at
that late date the contractors were not able to start work on account
of the shortage in materials and labor resulting from the participation
of the United States in the war, and it was not until July 23 the work
was resumed. Continued shortage of labor and material made progress very
slow particularly on the placing of rock base, and when the 1918 rainy
season came on a total of only 3.5 miles of paving had been completed.
The grading of the John Day Cut-off had been finished, however, and
considerable progress made on the removal of slides and regrading of
roadbed.

[Illustration: BITUMINOUS PAVING NEAR SVENSON IN CLATSOP COUNTY ON THE
COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY. PAVED IN 1917]

The paving was discontinued on October 2 but in order to provide a
passable roadbed at as early a date as possible, it was decided to
continue the placing of rock base during the winter months. This work is
now in progress, and it is expected that a rocked surface over the
remaining unpaved distance of 5.5 miles will be secured by about January
1, 1919.

The paving work will be continued again next season, and will
undoubtedly be completed early in the season.

It is estimated that the grading and paving of this section will cost
completed $236,000.00. The total expenditures to November 30, 1918,
amounted to $96,955.97 and there remained unpaid to the contractor for
work done to that date the sum of $15,225.64.

The engineering work was in charge of Mr. J. E. Nelson, during the 1917
season, and in charge of Mr. H. N. Hackett during the 1918 season.


Svensen-Westport Macadam

From Westport to Svensen in Clatsop County, 13.55 miles of 16-foot
waterbound macadam, 3.6 miles of 9-foot waterbound macadam and 1.76
miles of gravel was laid. This work was handled by the Warren
Construction Company prior to December 26, 1917, at which time the State
Highway Department took the work over and proceeded with State forces.

On this section the unit costs show a slight advantage in favor of doing
the work with State forces. Conditions were practically the same as on
the Clatskanie-Westport Section in Columbia County--the State paying
higher wages than the contractor, but the contractor having the
disadvantage of more unfavorable weather conditions. The main advantage
in the State doing this work was gained by having better control of the
organization and more direct supervision of the work.

The original intention was to complete all macadam 16-feet wide but the
increased cost of labor, supplies, etc., made it necessary to reduce the
width of the macadam to nine feet so as to complete the full distance
with the money available.


COST STATEMENT--SVENSEN-WESTPORT MACADAM

  ===========================+==========+=========+============+=======
           Item              |   Unit   |  Quan-  |   Cost     | Unit
                             |          |  tity   |            | Cost
  ---------------------------+----------+---------+------------+-------
  By Warren Construction Co.,|          |         |            |
    on cost plus contract--  |          |         |            |
  Clearing and grubbing      | Acres    |      1  |$    112.18 |$112.18
  Excavation                 | Cu. Yd.  |  9,069  |   6,468.95 |    .71
  6-inch by 12-inch pipe     | Foot     |  1,519  |   4,472.69 |   2.90
  Waterbound macadam         |[8]Cu. Yd.| 13,409  |  53,010.60 |   3.95
  Engineering                |  ...     |    ...  |     971.84 |    ...
  By State Forces--          |          |         |            |
  Excavation                 | Cu. Yd.  |  11,512 |   7,540.71 |    .64
  6-inch by 12-inch pipe,    | Foot     |   1,760 |     328.80 |    .19
    laying only              |          |         |            |
  Waterbound macadam         | Cu. Yd.  |  34,722 | 134,022.23 |   3.86
  Engineering                |          |         |   1,651.69 |    ...
                             |          |         +------------+
    Total                    |  ...     |    ...  |$208,579.69 |    ...
  ---------------------------+----------+---------+------------+-------

[8] Including 1,839 cubic yards of gravel purchased at a cost of
$1,839.00 and 5,278 cubic yards crushed rock purchased at a cost of
$6,333.60. All other rock was crushed and cost of crushing is included
in the cost of the macadam.

[Illustration: COVERED WOOD DRAWBRIDGE ON THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY IN
CLATSOP COUNTY, OVER THE JOHN DAY RIVER EAST OF ASTORIA. BUILT IN 1918.
LIFT SPAN--40 FEET]


John Day River Bridge

As a part of the improvement of the Columbia River Highway between
Astoria and Svensen, a bridge was constructed over the John Day River
about four miles east of Astoria.

The John Day River is a stream navigable to small boats, so it was
necessary to provide a movable span of 40-foot clear opening. Owing to
the unusually high price of steel it was decided to construct this
bridge of wood. The movable span is of the single leaf bascule type
operated by a windlass. Counter weights are employed to assist the
movement of the span and in order to compensate for the variable pull
required to lift the span at different phases of its movement, the
counter weight cables operate over spiral drums in such manner that
their pull is a maximum when the span is down, and is least when the
span is raised, gradually changing between the two extremes. In order to
guard against failure of the operator to close the gate on the side of
the stream opposite the machinery, an automatic gate was constructed. It
closes when the bridge starts to open and when the bridge closes it
swings back out of the way automatically.

The bridge rests on concrete piers carried on piling, and besides the
lift span there are two 90-foot covered wooden spans. The operating
machinery is completely housed in by means of a tower.

The crossing was designed to carry 20-ton trucks and the covered spans
have laminated wood floors with asphaltic wearing surface.

One of the most serious objections raised against covered wooden bridges
is the lack of light. This was overcome in this case, as in other wooden
bridges on primary roads designed by this Department, by whitewashing
the interior and the addition of open windows at panel points. These are
provided with returns, and with the asphaltic wearing surface on the
floors of such bridges prevent moisture coming in contact with the
structural timbers of the bridge.

This bridge was built by the Portland Bridge Company and the total cost
will be about $25,000.00. The payments on the bridge to November 30,
1918, amounted to $21,051.52. Mr. Leigh M. Huggins was resident engineer
in charge of construction.


Big Creek Bridge

This bridge is located on the Columbia River Highway near Knappa. It
consists of two forty-five-foot reinforced concrete spans, and was built
by the State Highway Department with State forces at a cost of
$8,446.70.


Plympton Creek Bridge

The Plympton Creek Bridge is located on the Columbia River Highway in
the town of Westport. It is a two thirty-foot span structure and was
built by the State Highway Department with State forces at a cost of
$6,413.19.


Little Creek Culvert

This is a 6 by 12 reinforced concrete structure and is located on the
Columbia River Highway near Knappa. It was built by the Highway
Department with State forces at a cost of $929.69.


COLUMBIA COUNTY

The State Highway Department expended in Columbia County during 1917 and
1918, the sum of $488,302.15, which is the largest amount expended in
any one county in the state. With this amount the following work was
completed:

   2.5 miles of bituminous paving.
  27.2 miles of broken stone macadam.
   8.2 miles of grading.
  11   reinforced concrete bridges.
   2   reinforced concrete box culverts.

All of this work is on the Columbia River, and all but the 2.5 miles of
paving is between the Clatsop County Line and a point about two miles
east of Goble.


Multnomah County Line-Scappoose Paving

A contract was awarded to the Warren Construction Company, August 22,
1917, for 2.5 miles of bitulithic pavement sixteen feet wide on crushed
rock base, with two foot macadam shoulders. The old road bed on this
section was in excellent condition for base for pavement being old
macadam about sixteen feet in width. The grade was followed closely,
scarified, and clean crushed rock spread over the entire surface and
rolled. Material was borrowed along each side to obtain the required
twenty-four foot of roadbed.

A sixteen foot span wooden bridge was replaced by an 8x10 feet
reinforced concrete culvert built by Lindstrom Bros. on the basis of
cost plus ten per cent.


CONSTRUCTION COST OF CULVERT

  Class A concrete, 64 cu. yds. at $22.43       $1,435.64
  Reinforcing steel, 2,900 lbs. at 8c              232.00
                                                ---------
                                                $1,667.64
    Contractors percentage                         166.96
                                                ---------
    Total Cost                                  $1,834.60

Paving work was started November 5, 1917, and completed December 20,
with the exception of about 200 feet of new fill made at the culvert
which was completed in June, 1918.

Engineering work was done by P. W. Marx, under the supervision of Chas.
H. Whitmore, assistant engineer.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--PAVING--MULTNOMAH COUNTY LINE TO
SCAPPOOSE

  Engineering                                                  $ 1,364.28
  Right-of-way attorney fees                                        35.00
  Contract Construction Work as follows:
    Common excavation, 800 cu. yds. at 45c          $  360.00
    Standard Bith. pavement, 24,248.2 sq. yds.
      at $1.17                                      28,370.39
    Broken stone, loose measure, 3,115.5 cu. yds.
      at $1.90                                       5,919.45
    Broken stone shoulders, 26,974 lin. ft. at 5c    1,348.70
    Force account:
      34 feet of 12-inch corrugated iron pipe and
        120 feet of 6-inch porous drain tile           254.77
    Total paid to contractor                                   $ 36,253.31
                                                               -----------
      Total cost                                               $ 37,652.59


Westport-Clatskanie Macadam

On the Clatskanie-Westport Section, which extended from Clatskanie to
the Clatsop County Line, the work was handled originally by the Warren
Construction Company, on a cost plus ten per cent. basis. The State
Highway Department took this work over December 26, 1917, and from that
time on the work was handled by this Department. This work consisted of
8.62 miles of sixteen-foot waterbound macadam.

On this section the costs show that the Warren Construction Company laid
crushed rock slightly cheaper than the State. However, the State did all
the finishing on this section, which is more expensive than laying the
base rock and it was necessary to raise the wages twenty-five per cent.
after the work was taken over by the Department. C. L. Grutze was
resident engineer on this work.


COST STATEMENT--WESTPORT-CLATSKANIE MACADAM

  ===========================+==========+========+==============+========
            Item             |   Unit   | Quan-  | Total cost   | Unit
                             |          | tity   |              | cost
  ---------------------------+----------+--------+--------------+--------
  By Warren Construction Co. |          |        |              |
    on cost plus contract--  |          |        |              |
  Clearing and grubbing      | Acres    |    1/2   | $      49.87 | $ 99.74
  Excavation                 | Cu. yd.  |  6,200 |     6,820.70 |    1.10
  6-ft. by 12-in. drain pipe | Foot     |  1,085 |     2,752.38 |    2.80
  Water-bound macadam        |[9]Cu. yd.|  7,742 |    27,698.87 |    3.59
  Engineering                |          |        |       497.03 |
  By State Forces--          |          |        |              |
  Excavation                 | Cu. yd.  |  8,299 |     5,594.75 |     .67
  6-ft. by 12-in. drain pipe | Foot     |    298 |        21.05 |     .07
    (laying)                 |          |        |              |
  Water-bound macadam        | Cu. yd.  | 17,977 |    68,168.50 |    3.79
  Engineering                |          |        |        25.09 |
                             |          |        +--------------+
    Total cost               |          |        | $ 111,628.24 |
  ---------------------------+----------+--------+--------------+--------

[9] 4,972 cu. yds. purchased at cost of $5,966.40, all other rock
crushed on this job.


Clatskanie-Delena Macadam

The section extending from a point three miles east of Clatskanie to a
point two and one-half miles east of Delena, known as the
Clatskanie-Delena Section, was completed by L. O. Herrold on a basis of
cost plus ten per cent. This work consisted of eleven miles of sixteen
foot waterbound macadam, one and one-tenth miles of nine foot waterbound
macadam and all necessary grading, drainage, etc. The foundation on part
of this section was very poor and 10,233 cubic yards of rubble base was
used in order to make satisfactory foundation for macadam. While this
increased the cost of the macadam, it was the only way in which a
permanent foundation could be secured on this section. P. M. Hall-Lewis
was resident engineer on this work.


COST STATEMENT--CLATSKANIE-DELENA MACADAM (COST PLUS 10 PER CENT)

  Item                                        Cost

  Engineering                              $ 5,998.96
  General construction                      11,759.14
  Clearing and grubbing                        892.37
  Excavation and embankment                 22,529.95
  Drainage structures                        3,596.27
  Miscellaneous structures                   1,454.76
  Quarrying and crushing                    43,714.47
  Placing, rolling, sprinkling, etc.        46,502.97
  Camp construction and operation              111.51
                                          -----------
  Total                                   $136,560.40

This work includes 25,405 cubic yards of excavation, 22,170 cubic yards
of crushed rock macadam and 10,298 cubic yards of rubble base, besides
numerous small structures, drains, etc.


Delena-Goble Macadam

Clark & Dibble of Rainier contracted with the Highway Department to
construct five and seven-tenths miles of broken stone macadam between
Delena and Goble. The prices at which this work was taken by the
contractors was very low, and the result was that almost from the first
the work was handicapped by lack of proper finances. It became evident
to the Department that the contractor would be unable to complete all of
this work before the winter rains set in, so to facilitate matters and
to provide a passable road for the winter, the Department took over the
part of the work between Rainier and Goble after about $10,000.00 worth
of work had been done on this part by Clark & Dibble. The work of the
Highway Department on this section is described in the article on the
Rainier-Goble macadam.

Clark & Dibble successfully carried to completion the two and one-tenths
miles of macadam west of Rainier. A complete statement of the costs of
the work handled by the contractors is given below.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--MACADAM--DELENA TO GOBLE

  Engineering                                                  $ 2,519.50
  Construction--
    Common excavation, 938 cu. yds. at 40c       $    375.20
    Intermediate excavation, 75 cu. yds. at 60c        45.00
    Solid rock excavation, 25 cu. yds. at $1.15        28.75
    Broken stone macadam, 12,911.5 cu. yds. at
      $2.18                                        28,147.07
    12-inch corrugated iron pipe, 420 lin. ft.
      at $1.30                                        546.00
    Clay filler, 1,403 cu. yds. at $1.00            1,403.00
    Force Account--
      Lowering 18-inch corrugated iron culverts        55.78
      Lengthening existing culverts and opening
        ditches                                        15.62
      18-inch corrugated iron pipe, 80 lin. ft.       235.43
      Clearing slides and ditching near Prescott    2,201.47
      Removal of slides                             1,377.22
      Side ditches for macadam work                   336.97
      Preparation of subgrade for macadam             330.65
      Spreading, sprinkling, and rolling macadam       27.07
                                                   ---------
                                                   35,125.23
    Less credit for 24 days use of State roller
      at $5.00                                        120.00
                                                   ---------
    Total amount paid to contractor                             35,005.23
                                                              -----------
      Total cost                                              $ 37,524.73


Rainier-Goble Macadam

In Columbia County the State Highway Department laid twenty-four and
one-tenth miles of sixteen foot waterbound macadam and four and
two-tenths miles of nine foot waterbound macadam between Goble and the
Clatsop County Line. Of this the Rainier-Goble Section was taken over
from the contractors, Clark & Dibble, after being partly completed. This
was done in order to facilitate the work and get the road open for
traffic before the rainy season.

While the work done by the State on this section cost more per cubic
yard than the contractor was originally receiving, the actual difference
in cost for the job was not sufficient to justify the Department in
allowing the contractor to proceed with the work which would have
entailed leaving the road closed to traffic for another winter.


COST STATEMENT--RAINIER-GOBLE MACADAM (STATE FORCES)

  ===============================+========+========+============+=====
             Item                |  Unit  | Amount |   Cost     | Unit
                                 |        |        |            | Cost
  -------------------------------+--------+--------+------------+-----
  Engineering                    |        |        | $   382.85 |
  Intermediate Excavation        |Cu. yds.|        |   1,078.97 |  .72
  Quarrying and crushing         |Cu. yds.|  2,555 |   3,828.71 | 1.29
  Hauling stone                  |Cu. yds.|  2,555 |   3,243.99 | 1.27
  Placing and rolling            |Cu. yds.|  2,555 |   2,979.22 | 1.17
  Camp construction and operation|        |        |     719.27 |
  General construction           |        |        |     197.34 |
                                 |        |        | ---------- |
  Total                          |        |        | $12,430.35 |
  -------------------------------+--------+--------+------------+-----


Goble Macadam Work

A contract was awarded to Warren Construction Company September 4, 1917,
for macadamizing the Goble Cut-off on a basis of cost plus ten per cent.

Columbia County has a quarry on the old road about three-fourths of a
mile west of Goble, which was equipped with complete crushing outfit and
arrangements were made by the contractor for the use of this equipment
and all the rock for this job was crushed and hauled from this quarry.

Work was started March 1, 1918, and completed June 25, 1918.

Engineering work was done by H. C. Compton as resident engineer under
the supervision of Chas. H. Whitmore.


COST STATEMENT

  Construction engineering                          $548.12
  Excavation and embankment                          137.24
  Drainage                                            21.11
  Quarrying and crushing (6,504 cu. yds. crushed)  9,627.92
  Spreading and rolling (6,504 cu. yds.)           5,913.53
  Hauling (6,504 cu. yds)                          4,371.62
  Camp construction and operation                    545.61
  Corral construction and operation                  313.82
                                                 ----------
  Total cost                                     $21,478.97


Goble Grading Section

A new location of the Columbia River Highway was made from a point two
miles east of Goble to Goble Creek and a new concrete bridge built over
Goble Creek, making a saving in distance of about one-half mile and
doing away with several excessive grades, sharp curves and narrow
roadbed, also a dangerous bridge and trestle across Goble Creek.

A rock cut between Goble and Goble Creek was taken out by the S. P. & S.
Ry. Co. with steam shovels and the material used by them for riprap,
thus making a considerable saving to the State Highway Commission. The
material for the west approach to the new bridge was obtained by
blasting and barring down rock from a dangerous perpendicular cliff
about 1,000 feet west of the bridge, from which large rocks had fallen
onto the highway. To make the highway safe it was necessary to remove
this material and by using it in the bridge approach, did away with
other borrow which would have been necessary. The cliff is about 200
feet high with the highway and S. P. & S. Ry. side by side at the foot,
necessitating very light shots and careful work and was completed
without accident to men or interruption of traffic on the railroad.

[Illustration: ON THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY NEAR GOBLE IN COLUMBIA
COUNTY. GRADED AND MACADAMIZED IN 1917 AND 1918]

The material for the east approach was obtained by trimming up the cut
left by the railroad company.

A contract for grading the cutoff was awarded to the Warren Construction
Company, August 7, 1917, and work started in July, 1917. From the east
end of the section to Ruben, about one mile in length, the material was
handled by teams. Rock work at Ruben and at Goble was sub-let to station
men. The fill across the flat between Ruben and Goble was made from side
borrow, by using a steam hoisting engine, with boom and clam shell
bucket. This work was done in the fall and winter and the material was
light loam and sand and very wet, and did not pack very solid in the
fill, therefore a strip of rock sixteen feet wide and one foot in
thickness, taken from the rock cuts at either end, was placed on the
fill and rolled thus making a solid base for the crushed rock macadam.

The engineering work was done by A. F. Pratt, resident engineer and W.
E. Eddy, assistant state highway engineer, until October 1, 1917, when
it was taken over by H. C. Compton, resident engineer, under the
supervision of Chas. H. Whitmore, assistant engineer.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING GOBLE SECTION

  Engineering                                                  $ 2,925.64
  Guarding S. P. & S. Ry. tracks                                   527.02
  Right-of-way damages                                              73.56
  Rental on State Industrial Ry. track furnished
    contractor                                                     138.00
  Payments to contractor for work as follows:
    Clearing and grubbing                          $ 2,085.00
    Common excavation, 20,106.5 cu. yds. at 45c      9,047.92
    Intermediate excavation, 3,534.9 cu. yds.
      at 70c                                         2,474.43
    Solid rock excavation, 11,947.2 cu. yds.
      at $1.15                                      13,739.28
    12-inch reinforced concrete pipe, 560 lin.
      ft. at $1.50                                     840.00
    24-inch reinforced concrete pipe, 92 lin. ft.
      at $3.30                                         303.60
    36-inch reinforced concrete pipe, 80 lin. ft.
      at $5.30                                         424.00
    Overhaul per 100 lin. ft., 18,032 cu. yds. at
      2c                                               360.64
    Force account--
      Replacing trestle for Warren Packing Co.'s
        plant, Goble                                   256.00
      Borrowing approximately 400 cu. yds. rock to
        cover dirt fill                                506.08
      Removal of overhanging rock near Goble Creek
        bridge                                       6,454.32
      Widening grade and building fill from Goble
        postoffice to Goble Creek bridge             5,853.31
      Cutting off rock point to give safe sight
        distance around curve                           47.12
      Removal of slide west of Goble Creek              18.66
      Placing 400 feet drain tile in quicksand         137.01
      Placing timber foundation for culvert             51.05
                                                     --------
    Total paid to contractor                                  $ 42,598.42
                                                              -----------
  Grand total cost                                            $ 46,262.64


Rainier Hill Grading

On July 30, 1917, a contract was entered into with A. L. Clark of
Rainier for the widening of the Rainier Hill Section, a section two and
two-tenths miles in length, located just west of Rainier. This work was
let under a unit price contract, but the nature of the work was such
that a considerable part of it could not be fairly measured and paid for
on a unit, and on this part the contractor was allowed cost plus ten per
cent. The total cost of this improvement was $6,350.61. A detailed cost
statement follows:


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING--RAINIER HILL SECTION

  Engineering                                                   $ 468.38
  Construction--
    Common excavation, 1,925 cu. yds. at 30c         $ 577.50
    Intermediate excavation, 1,071.9 cu. yds. at
      48c                                              514.51
    Solid rock excavation, 1,039.7 cu. yds. at
      $1.25                                          1,299.62
    Overhaul per 100 lin. ft., 905 cu. yds. at 3c       27.15
    12-inch corrugated iron pipe, 228 lin. ft. at
      $1.00                                            228.00
    Force account--
      Excavation for cribbing and placing rip-rap       61.93
      8-foot extension to 36-inch culvert               54.63
      Widening old roadbed, removal of slides and
        general improvement work not subject to
        measurement                                  3,082.56
      Culvert pipe furnished by State                   36.33
                                                    ---------
                                                                5,882.23
                                                              ----------
  Total cost                                                   $6,350.61


Beaver Valley Grading

Before the Columbia River Highway through Beaver Creek Canyon between
Delena and Inglis was opened for traffic in July, 1918, in order to
reach Clatskanie from Delena, it was necessary to travel over a narrow,
dangerous, earth and corduroy road, either by way of Maygar and Quincy
or through the hills about eight miles into Clatskanie. Both of these
roads were passable for autos only about three months during the dry
season.

The grading of this section was partly completed by the County under
supervision of Mr. Bowlby, State Highway Engineer in 1914. This section
being a very important link in the Columbia River Highway and no funds
being available from County or State funds during 1915 or 1916, S.
Benson decided to advance the necessary funds to make this section
passable. About four miles of grading was completed between Inglis and
Delena, leaving only the building of bridges to open this section. This
work was later macadamized by the State.

The engineering work was done by A. K. Grondahl.

A bill was passed by the 1917 Legislature refunding to Mr. Benson
$20,978.22 which is a large portion of the amount expended by him.


COST STATEMENT

  Clearing and grubbing               $ 1,265.80
  Grading--labor and teams             17,124.07
  Explosives                            2,275.31
  Pipe culverts                           313.04
                                      ----------
  Total                               $20,978.22


Prescott Hill Section

This section of the highway was built along the steep hillside, several
slides having occurred narrowing the roadbed in some places to about
eight feet and making it very dangerous, it was necessary to build
several retaining walls, half viaducts and guard fences.

This was done by Oscar Lindstrom on a basis of cost plus ten per cent.

A half-viaduct seventy-five feet in length was built containing
fifty-three cubic yards of concrete and 4,100 pounds reinforcing steel,
with standard bridge railing for guard fence.

Two hundred and fourteen linear feet of rubble masonry walls were built
on a slope of three-fourths to one, and standard bridge railing placed
on top for guard fence. These walls contain 438 cubic yards of rock.

A reinforced concrete crib forty-one feet long, fifteen feet high and
seven feet wide was built and filled with large rock. The members were
cast on the dock in Rainier and hauled to the location. A reinforced
concrete slab on solid earth foundation was used for footing, on the
required angle to give the crib a batter of one-fourth to one.

The total cost of the Prescott Hill improvement was $9,039.86.


Goble Creek Bridge

A ninety-foot reinforced concrete bridge was built over Goble Creek on
the Columbia River Highway about one-half mile east of Goble. This
bridge has a pile foundation which was put in by the Warren Construction
Company on a cost plus basis for $1,583.32. The superstructure was built
by Lindstrom and Fiegeson on a unit price basis. The cost of the
structure complete was $5,907.14.

The engineering work in connection with this work was handled by H. C.
Compton, resident engineer, on the Goble Section, and the inspection of
the placement of steel and pouring of concrete was in charge of L. M.
Huggins.


COST STATEMENT--GOBLE CREEK BRIDGE

  Engineering                                                    $ 77.47
  Construction--
    Class A concrete, 135 cu. yds. at $18.40        $2,447.20
    Reinforcing steel, 17,925 lbs. at 71/2c            1,344.38
    Concrete hand rail, 186 lin. ft. at $1.75          325.50
    Construction of cement shed and unloading cement   129.27
    Pile foundation (force account)                  1,583.32
                                                    ---------
  Total construction cost                                       5,829.67
                                                               ---------
  Grand total cost of bridge                                   $5,907.14


Beaver Creek Bridges

For a considerable distance between Rainier and Clatskanie the Columbia
River Highway follows Beaver Creek, crossing the creek in many places.
To replace a number of temporary wooden structures and to provide
bridges at every crossing, the highway department in 1917 and 1918
constructed nine reinforced concrete bridges across this stream. The
spans of these structures vary from thirty to 105 feet, there being one
thirty-foot, one fifty-foot, two sixty-foot, four seventy-foot and one
105-foot spans in all.

The thirty-foot span structure was built by L. O. Herrold of Salem, on a
cost plus ten per cent basis and cost $3,600.00.

The other eight structures were built by L. O. Herrold of Salem, on a
unit price basis, the cost of the eight being $32,000.00.


Graham Creek Culvert

A double 6x6 foot reinforced concrete box culvert was built on the
Columbia River Highway to provide passage for Graham Creek near
Marshland. This culvert was built with State forces. It contains fifty
cubic yards of concrete and cost $804.49.


Survey--Columbia City to Scappoose

A survey was made between Scappoose and McBride a distance of eleven and
two-tenths miles. This survey follows the S. P. & S. Ry. on the south
side the entire distance and is shorter than the present traveled road
by about one mile, and also does away with six grade crossings. While
most of the roadbed will be entirely new work, it will not be of heavy
construction, the country being comparatively flat. Between Scappoose
and St. Helens the material is mostly earth. Between St. Helens and
McBride the material is mostly rock.

[Illustration: ONE OF NINE REINFORCED CONCRETE BRIDGES IN THE BEAVER
CREEK VALLEY, COLUMBIA COUNTY, ON THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY BETWEEN
RAINIER AND CLATSKANIE. ALL BUILT IN 1917 AND 1918]

Two bridges of thirty foot spans or more are needed, also several box
culverts and pipe culverts.

The survey from Scappoose to St. Helens was made by P. W. Marx; from St.
Helens to McBride by H. C. Compton.


COOS COUNTY

The work of the Highway Department in Coos County consisted entirely in
assistance given the County in the making of surveys and the engineering
of construction work done under the County's bond issue of $362,000.00.
For this purpose $16,967.68 of State funds were expended, and the total
amount of County expenditures audited and vouchered through the Highway
department was $170,781.83. These expenditures were made on work on the
Coast Highway between Marshfield and the Curry County Line, and on the
Coos Bay-Roseburg Highway between Coquille and Myrtle Point. The
engineering work was in charge of R. B. Murdock.


CROOK COUNTY

Crook County is one of the districts of Eastern Oregon where the road
program is an expensive one. Prineville now has rail communication with
outside points, and in sections of the County there is found some good
natural roads, but much is wanting in the line of transportation
facilities. Owing to a large portion of the County being mountainous in
character, much of the roads are little else than trails.

Formerly the boundaries of Crook County encircled an area now comprising
several counties. The paring process, caused by the forming of new
counties left Crook County in a peculiar position. The local road map
indicates that the County is divided into two communities with the
dividing line following the rugged country a few miles east of
Prineville. A single road that is a succession of heavy grades and poor
alignment, is the sole medium of traffic communication between the two
ends of the County.

The people of Crook County are fully aware of the importance of
highways. Although local funds will not go far, a remarkable beginning
has been made. A County bond issue of $95,000.00 has been voted for road
construction. The general progressiveness and co-operative spirit
existing throughout the County is shown by the fact that $85,000.00 of
the bond issue is to be expended on one road. Reference is made to the
proposed road up Crooked River from Prineville, connecting the east and
west end of the County.

The State Highway Commission has ordered a location survey made of the
Crooked River Highway between Prineville and the Shorty Davis Ranch. The
length of this line will be about thirty miles, and practically a water
grade can be secured. This work will start easily in 1918.

The immediate purpose of the survey is to gather definite data for the
consideration of the State Highway Commission. The County authorities
have made application for State aid and request early consideration of
the matter.

The State Highway Commission is cooperating in the construction of the
Ochoco Forest Road in Crook County.


Ochoco-Canyon Forest Road

The State Highway Commission extended aid to Crook County by helping to
secure Federal aid and by appropriating State funds for the construction
of a nine and seven-tenths mile section of the McKenzie River Highway
between Prineville and Mitchell. This section is adjacent to the Wheeler
County Line and connects up with proposed grading work in Wheeler
County.

Construction work is in progress under the direction of the United
States Office of Public Roads. The cost of this work will be defrayed by
co-operative funds from the State, County and Government. The total
estimated cost is $52,500.00. The following statement shows the
appropriations made for this work:

  Total estimated cost of work          $52,500.00
  Appropriated by State                  17,500.00
  Appropriated by Government             17,500.00
  Appropriated by County                 17,500.00


CURRY COUNTY

The most important highway in this County is, of course, the Coast
Highway, which affords an outlet to California on the south and Coos Bay
on the north. Between the Coos County Line and Port Orford the route of
the Coast Highway lies along the foot of the mountains and on a
comparatively level plain and, except in a few cases at river crossings,
the grades of the present road are not excessive. The alignment could be
improved but is satisfactory for the present. A gravel surfacing on this
section makes it passable the whole year round.

South of Port Orford the topography of the County changes. The slopes
are steep; in many cases reaching forty degrees, and are badly broken
up. This section is also subject to slides of which there is abundant
evidence of recent activity. The drainage being at right angles to the
coast must be crossed by the highway requiring considerable rise and
fall in the grade line.

A survey from Port Orford south was commenced in December of 1917. A
line was located and staked ready for construction between Port Orford
and Hubbard Creek, eliminating steep grades and sharp curves on the
present road. A close preliminary line was run between Hubbard Creek and
Mussel Creek (Arizona Inn), a thorough study made of the conditions and
the following route recommended, which eliminates the excessive grades
and high summit of 1,100 feet of the present road. The location lies
between elevation 100 and 400, dropping into and crossing drainage as it
is met, following close to the beach until Brush Creek is reached, then
following up Brush Creek on the east side of Humbug Mountain until an
intersection with the present road is reached, straightening out present
road for about one mile, then following the coast between elevation 200
and 400, dropping into Mussel Creek.

The controlling points on this route are the slides which must be headed
to secure a stable roadbed. A twelve-foot roadbed has been proposed for
this project, with maximum six per cent grades and the construction even
for this narrow width is heavy as it will be necessary to bench out the
entire width of the roadbed on solid ground, the slopes being too steep
for fill to catch. Considerable bridging is required and a gravel
surface provided throughout the entire length to insure an all year
road, so the cost of even this narrow roadbed will be high.

A beach route located about ten feet above high tide has been proposed,
and, while this has the advantage of shorter distance and no rise and
fall, this route is not believed to be feasible because the underlying
rock is soft and disintegrates readily and is eroded by tidal action to
a considerable extent. The numerous slides at this elevation would also
make construction on this location inadvisable for a permanent road.

A reconnaissance was made between Mussel Creek and Gold Beach. After
leaving Mussel Creek, considerable development work is required to
attain standard grade, and but a small portion of the present road could
be used. Passing Euchre Creek, there will be utilized along Cedar Creek
a new section of road about eight miles in length which has been
recently graded by the County. If widened and the alignment corrected in
a few locations, this would afford a direct route to the Rogue River
where a ferry runs regularly. Between the river crossing and Gold Beach
there is a fair road requiring only straightening out and widening.

A large portion of the total area of Curry County is in the forest
reserve making the taxable area relatively small. For this reason and in
view of the heavy cost of construction, aid is asked by the County from
State and Federal sources. The most needed improvement is the section
between Port Orford and Brush Creek. In view of the increasing
probability of the Coast Military Highway by the Federal Government,
which would be a great benefit to this County as well as to the State in
general, it is desired to construct such sections as are undertaken on
the correct location and standard grades, so that future widening and
surfacing only will be necessary to bring it to the high standards which
will undoubtedly be maintained on this military highway.

It has been proposed by the Commission to co-operate with the Forest
Service in a joint Forest Aid Project in Coos and Curry Counties, each
contributing $50,000.00, the Forest money to be spent in northern Coos
County and the State money, between Port Orford and Brush Creek. Curry
County has offered to co-operate with County tax funds. It is hoped that
this project can be carried out during the 1919 season.


DESCHUTES COUNTY


Bend-Lapine Cinder Macadam

During the year 1917, an appropriation was made by the Highway
Commission for the construction of cinder macadam between Bend and
Lapine. This work was advertised and, proposals were received on August
7, 1917. As the bids submitted at that time were not considered
favorable, all were rejected, and the work was undertaken under the
supervision of the County Court.

This section, which had been graded under a previous administration,
passes through a flat, pine district, with a surface formation of
volcanic ash, which is a very poor road material, roads without
surfacing becoming practically impassable during the summer season.

As no rock or gravel was available for macadamizing, scoria or volcanic
cinder was used, of which material there is an inexhaustible supply
along the right-of-way. This scoria is very light, weighing about 1,700
pounds per cubic yard. It, however, has made an excellent macadam, and
because of its lightness can be handled and placed cheaper than either
rock or gravel. The results are as favorable as if the best pit-run
gravel could have been had.

A total of 18,300 cubic yards of cinder macadam was placed on this
section and twelve and five-tenths miles of completed surface was
secured. The total cost was $20,183.60, giving a unit cost of
approximately $1,600.00 per mile, which is proof of the economy of this
type of construction where volcanic cinder is obtainable.


Survey--Rolyat to One Hundred Mile Road

In September and October, 1918, the State Highway Commission made a
location survey on the section of the Bend-Burns Highway between Rolyat,
in Deschutes County and the One Hundred Mile Road, in Harney County. The
object of the survey at this time is to secure a more direct route and
to avoid the bad section of the present road through the Glass Buttes
district. The length of this survey is seventeen and one-tenth miles and
it materially shortens the distance, as compared with the present road
between the terminal points mentioned.

Fifteen and six-tenths miles of this line are in Deschutes County and
one and five-tenths miles in Harney County. The northeast corner of Lake
County is touched by the survey but only for a short distance. The
definite limits are not shown as the County Lines could not be found and
it was deemed not advisable to go to the cost of reestablishing the
lines for the purpose of the survey. The new location leads in an
easterly direction from Rolyat and continues to the north of the present
road.

The plans for this survey will be made up in the near future. H. B.
Wright was the locating engineer in charge.


DOUGLAS COUNTY

As a result of the liberal co-operation of Douglas County, a very large
amount of work has been done during 1917 and 1918 on the Pacific Highway
across that County. From a $500,000.00 bond issue the County set aside
$200,000.00 for the improvement of the Pacific Highway north of
Roseburg, with the understanding that the Highway Department would
expend an equal amount on the same highway south of Roseburg. In
accordance with this arrangement, it was agreed that the County would
grade 10.4 miles between Yoncalla and Oakland, grade and macadamize 4.6
miles between Comstock and Leona, and grade 2.4 miles between Comstock
and the Lane County Line; and that the State would grade 12.8 miles
between Myrtle Creek and Dillard and macadamize 2.4 miles between
Comstock and the Lane County Line. It was further agreed that if the
County would cooperate with the State and Federal Government to the
amount of $23,000.00 on the Canyonville-Galesville Forest Road Project,
this amount would be considered a part of the $200,000.00 to be provided
by the County in connection with the general scheme of improvement
outlined.

All of the work contemplated in this co-operative agreement has been
carried to completion, and when final payments have been made the total
expenditure by the State will be approximately $205,000.00 and by the
County $175,000.00.

The Canyonville-Galesville Forest Road Project referred to above
involves the grading of a 9.7 mile section over Canyon Creek Pass, and
it will eliminate one of the very worst stretches on the Pacific Highway
between Portland and the California Line. This is estimated to cost
$211,000.00, of which the County will pay $23,000.00, the State
$94,000.00 and the Federal Government $94,000.00.

In summary, the improvement work on the Pacific Highway in Douglas
County during 1917 and 1918, including the work now under way, consisted
of 39.9 miles of grading and 7.0 miles of macadamizing.

The expenditures on the individual sections by the County, State and
Federal Government when final payments are completed, will be
approximately as follows:

  ======================+===========+===========+==========+===========
       Sections         |     By    |    By     |    By    |   Total
                        |   State   |  County   |  Federal |
                        |           |           |   Govt.  |
  ----------------------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------
  Lane County Line-     |           |           |          |
    Comstock Grading    |$  2,027.30|$ 17,119.44|    ...   | $19,146.74
  Lane County Line-     |           |           |          |
    Comstock Macadam    |  15,185.09|     ...   |    ...   |  15,185.09
  Comstock-Leona        |           |           |          |
    Grading and         |   5,650.28|  74,349.72|    ...   |  80,000.00
    Macadam             |           |           |          |
  Oakland-Yoncalla      |  17,565.28|  83,530.84|    ...   | 101,096.12
    Grading             |           |           |          |
  Myrtle Creek-Dillard  | 120,000.00|     ...   |    ...   | 120,000.00
    Grading             |           |           |          |
  Canyonville-Galesville|  94,000.00|  23,000.00| 94,000.00| 211,000.00
    Grading             |           |           |          |
  Umpqua River Bridges  |  45,500.00|     ...   |    ...   |  45,500.00
                        +-----------+-----------+----------+-----------
  Total                 |$299,927.95|$198,000.00|$94,000.00|$591,927.95
  ----------------------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------

[Illustration: BRIDGE ON PASS CREEK--20 FT. SPAN. ON PACIFIC HIGHWAY
NEAR COMSTOCK IN DOUGLAS COUNTY]


Grading--Comstock to the Lane County Line

This section runs through the northern portion of the Pass Creek Canyon,
and has been the dread of tourists heretofore. It has always been a hard
road to travel under summer conditions and absolutely impassable in
winter, even for horse-drawn conveyances.

The contract for this improvement involved 2.4 miles of grading and was
awarded to S. S. Schell of Oakland, Oregon on September 5, 1917. The
bulk of the grading was done that fall and the job was completed in the
spring of 1918. The road bed was graded to a width of 24 feet with 5 per
cent maximum grades and easy curves. In addition to the grading, the
contract included two drainage structures over Pass Creek, one a double
6x6 reinforced concrete box culvert and the other a 20-foot reinforced
concrete bridge. All construction charges were paid by Douglas County.
Engineering charges were paid by the State.

Mr. E. B. Bishop was the Resident Engineer in charge on this section.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING COMSTOCK TO LANE COUNTY LINE

  Engineering                                                  $ 2,029.80
  Construction--
    Clearing and Grubbing                           $2,400.00
    Common Excavation, 11,688 cu. yds. at 45c.       5,259.60
    Intermediate Excavation, 6,085 cu. yds. at 60c.  3,651.00
    Solid Rock Excavation, 1,016 cu. yds. at $1.15   1,168.40
    Overhaul per 100 ft., 7,220 cu. yds. at 3c.        216.60
    12-inch Plain Concrete Pipe, 134 lin. ft. at
      $1.00                                            134.00
    24-inch Reinforced Concrete pipe, 160 lin. ft.
      at $2.50                                         400.00
    6-inch Porous Drain Tile, 591 lin. ft. at 20c.     118.20
    Class A Concrete, 120.46 c. y. at $24.00         2,891.04
    Class B Concrete, 11.62 c. y. at $16.00            185.92
    Metal Reinforcement, 7,625 lbs. at 8c.             609.84
    Repairing Timber Bridge                             26.34
    Laying 315.5 lin. ft. of Drain Tile and
      Backfilling                                       56.00
      Total paid to Contractor                                   17,116.94
                                                                ----------
      Total Cost                                                $19,146.74
        Paid by County                              17,119.44
        Paid by State                               $2,027.30
                                                   ----------
  Total                                            $19,146.74


Macadam--Comstock to Lane County Line

On August 6, 1918, a contract was awarded to S. S. Schell for
macadamizing the above newly graded section in Pass Creek Canyon, by the
State Highway Commission, same to be a standard three course broken
stone, water bound surface. This work was carried through in a very able
manner on the part of the Contractor and completed November 16, 1918.
This surfacing makes an all year road, of one of the worst pieces of
road in the State. The entire cost of this work was paid by the State.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--MACADAMIZING--COMSTOCK TO LANE COUNTY
LINE

  Engineering                                                     $ 302.09
  Advertisements for bids                                            66.90
  Construction--
    Broken Stone Macadam, 4,354 cu. yds. at
      $3.35                                        $14,585.90
    Earth Filler, 150 cu. yds. at 75c.                 112.50
    Removing Slides                                    117.70
                                                   ----------
  Total Paid to Contractor                                       14,816.10
                                                                ----------
  Total Cost                                                    $15,185.09


Grading and Macadam--Comstock to Leona

This section is through the south end of Pass Creek Canyon, beginning
approximately a mile and a half south of Comstock and extending to a
point a half mile north of Leona, being 4.6 miles in length. The
contract was a joint contract signed by the County Court and State
Highway Commission and was awarded to Hall & Soleim of Eugene on
September 5, 1917. Work covered by the contract was for grading and
macadamizing, culverts and bridges.

Due to shortage of labor, poor shipments on macadam rock, and financial
difficulties, the contractors were obliged to ask the State Highway
Commission to take over the work. On August 20, 1918, after a conference
with the County Court and the Contractor's Surety Company, this was
done. The work was completed November 30, 1918. The construction details
under the State supervision were handled by a State construction
engineer, representing the Contractors and Surety Company, and the
engineering details by the resident engineer on the work--the latter
rendering regular monthly estimates of work done on the unit contract
prices, of the original contract.

This work complete will cost approximately $80,000.00 of which the
County will pay $74,349.72 and the State $5,650.28.

The construction of this section was in charge of E. B. Bishop, resident
engineer, and F. E. LaPointe, construction superintendent.


Grading--Oakland to Yoncalla

This work extends from the Calapooya River Bridge at Oakland to a point
two miles south of Yoncalla, a total distance of 10.4 miles. A contract
for clearing, grading and culverts was awarded the Warren Construction
Company, September 5, 1917, being the last of three contracts signed
jointly by the County Court and State Highway Commission.

This work was completed July 25, 1918, and is an excellent piece of
standard construction 24 feet in width. It eliminates the old excessive
grade over Rice Hill, and some bad sections just north of Oakland--there
being now no grades over 5 per cent.

On the completion of the grading the State Highway Commission requested
permission Of the Capital Issues Committee to sell bonds, part of which
were to cover the rocking of this unit to make it passable for winter.
This request was refused on the ground that it was not a necessary war
measure. The road will therefore not be passable this winter, but it is
expected that the section will be macadamized during the 1919 season.

Mr. Robert A. Pratt was resident engineer in charge of the construction.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING--OAKLAND TO YONCALLA

    Engineering                                                   $ 5,864.31
    Construction--
      Clearing and Grubbing                          $ 6,350.00
      Common Excavation, 45,563 cu. yds. at 49c       22,325.87
      Intermediate Excavation, 37,544 cu. yds.
      at 77c                                          28,908.88
      Solid Rock Excavation, 17,976 cu. yds. at
        $1.30                                         23,368.80
      Overhaul per 100 lin. ft., 61,580 cu. yds.
        at 2c                                          1,231.60
      12-inch Plain Concrete Pipe, 2,463 lin. ft.
        at $1.10                                       2,709.30
      18-inch Corrugated Galvanized Iron Pipe, 742
        lin. ft. at $2.75                              2,040.50
      24-inch Corrugated Galvanized Iron Pipe, 108
        lin. ft. at $3.44                                371.52
      6-inch Porous Drain Tile, 1,055 lin. ft. at 20c    211.00
      Class A Concrete, 146.5 cu. yds. at $24.00       3,516.00
      Class B Concrete, 102.2 cu. yds. at $22.00       2,248.40
      Metal Reinforcement, 9,057 lbs. at 8c              724.56
      Lumber, 3,545 F. B. M. at $45.00                   159.52
      Extra work on culverts, drain ditches, rock back
        filling                                          174.48
      Hauling and Placing rip-rap for embankments,
        approximately 350 cu. yds.                       203.97
      Lowering water pipe crossing                        13.64
      Rebuilding right of way fence                      170.50
      Grubbing for borrow pit                             21.12
      Extra clearing and grubbing account of line
        change                                            74.82
      Gasoline furnished State                             9.19
      32-ft. by 36-in. Corrugated Iron Pipe (Hauling and
        Placing)                                          28.09
      68-ft. by 36-in. Corrugated Iron Pipe in place     370.04
        Total paid to contractor                                  $ 95,231.80
                                                                  -----------
        Total cost                                                $101,096.11

          Paid by State                                           $ 19,015.09
          Paid by County                                            82,081.02
                                                                  -----------
            Total                                                 $101,096.11

[Illustration: ALONG THE UMPQUA RIVER NORTH OF MYRTLE CREEK IN DOUGLAS
COUNTY. GRADED IN 1917 AND 1918]


Grading--Myrtle Creek to Dillard

On November 27, 1917, a contract was awarded to Calvert & Wolke of
Grants Pass (now known as the Grants Pass Construction Company, James
Logan, President), for the clearing, grading, culverts and concrete
bridges on a section of 12.8 miles between Myrtle Creek and the junction
of the Pacific Highway with the Roseburg-Coos Bay Highway, one mile and
a half north of Dillard. This construction eliminates the well but
unfavorably known Roberts Mountain grade just south of Roseburg, on
which several lives have been lost and also, seven grade crossings of
the Southern Pacific Railway. It will be a water grade highway along the
beautiful Umpqua River.

The road will not be open to the public until the completion of two
bridges over the Umpqua, which are now under construction and which are
expected to be completed about January 1, 1919. It is expected that this
entire section will be macadamized during the 1919 season.

Mr. F. N. Drinkhall is resident engineer in charge of the grading on
this section.


DETAILED STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918--GRADING--MYRTLE
CREEK TO DILLARD

  Engineering                                                    $ 7,499.22
  Culvert Pipe furnished by State                                  4,109.70
  Construction--
    Clearing and Grubbing, 97% completed           $  3,395.00
    Common Excavation, 49,146 cu. yds. at 35c        17,201.10
    Intermediate Excavation, 42,951 cu. yds. at
      56c                                            24,052.56
    Solid Rock Excavation, 23,859 cu. yds. at
      $1.14                                          27,199.26
    Overhaul, per 100 lin. ft., 6,614 cu. yds. at
      2c                                                132.28
    12-inch Plain Concrete Pipe, 1,798 lin. ft. at
      35c                                               629.30
    18-inch Corrugated Galvanized Iron Pipe, 556
      lin. ft. at 30c                                   166.80
    24-inch Corrugated Galvanized Iron Pipe, 284
      lin. ft. at 40c                                   113.60
    36-inch Corrugated Galvanized Iron Pipe, 246
      lin. ft. at 75c                                   184.50
    6-inch Porous Drain Tile, 5,054 lin. ft. at 25c   1,263.50
    Class A Concrete, 471.92 cu. yds. at $22.00      10,382.24
    Class C Concrete, 25 cu. yds. at $20.50             512.50
    Metal Reinforcement, 37,747 lbs. at 10c           3,774.70
    Lumber and Timber, 17,058 F. B. M. at $45.00        767.61
    Rough Dry Walls (approx.) (Force Account) 122
      cu. yds.                                          106.41
    Clearing outside R. O. W. (Force Account)           112.96
    Back-filling over drain tile with gravel            321.06
                                                     ---------
    Total Amount Earned by Contractor to Nov. 30,
      1918                                           90,315.38
    15 per cent retained until completion of
      contract                                       13,547.31
                                                     ---------
    Total paid contractor to Nov. 30, 1918                        76,768.07
                                                                 ----------
  Total Amount expended to November 30, 1918                     $88,376.99


Umpqua River Bridge One Mile North of Dillard

This bridge consists of 3-144 foot covered wooden Howe Truss spans on
concrete piers. The spans are continuous, thus forming a roof over 430
feet long. Open windows are constructed at panel points to light the
spans and make a more artistic appearance, lack of light and unsightly
appearance having been the chief objections to covered wooden bridges.
This bridge being on the Pacific Highway, was designed for heavy traffic
loading. A laminated wood floor system is used and provision is made for
an asphaltic wearing surface although a three inch wooden decking is
used temporarily.

This type of bridge is regarded as being very durable, and under
conditions of the past year or two, very economical. The structure
complete will cost approximately $26,500.00. Mr. A. S. Kennedy was
resident engineer for this bridge as well as the one two and one-half
miles south of Dillard. The construction is being handled by the
Portland Bridge Company.

[Illustration: VAN TYNE CREEK VIADUCT NORTH OF MYRTLE CREEK IN DOUGLAS
COUNTY. BUILT IN 1918]


Bridge Two and One-half Miles South of Dillard

This bridge is similar to the one described above, except that there are
two 144-foot spans instead of three. The cost of construction will be
approximately $19,000.00. It is being built under a contract with the
Portland Bridge Company.


Van Tyne Creek Bridge

This is a 60-foot reinforced concrete viaduct on the Pacific Highway
near Dole, north of Myrtle Creek. It was constructed by the Grants Pass
Construction Company, under their grading contract for the section
between Myrtle Creek and Dillard. The total cost of the structure was
$3,575.70.


Half Viaducts North of Myrtle Creek

These structures, two in number, were constructed within a few hundred
feet of each other on the Pacific Highway between Myrtle Creek and
Dillard and span crevices in the face of a rock bluff. They are of
reinforced concrete construction of the through girder type and of spans
of 45 feet and 58 feet respectively. The 45 foot structure cost complete
$2,415.28, and the 58 foot structure cost $2,648.54. Both were built by
the Grants Pass Construction Company under their contract for grading
between Myrtle Creek and Dillard.


Myrtle Creek Bridge

The bridge over the Umpqua River at Myrtle Creek being inadequate for
modern traffic a survey has been made for a new structure. As
contemplated, the new bridge will eliminate a grade crossing that now
exists at one end of the present bridge.


Canyonville-Galesville Forest Road Project

Under a co-operative agreement between Douglas County, the State and the
Federal Government, a 9.7 mile section of the Pacific Highway between
Canyonville and Galesville is being constructed. This project will
eliminate the heavy grades and dangerous curves through what has been
erroneously called Cow Creek Canyon. This section has heretofore been
one of the very worst on the entire highway, and its improvement is of
great importance.

The work is under contract to John Hampshire & Co. of Grants Pass. The
supervision of the work is in the hands of the Federal Office of Public
Roads. It is estimated that the project complete will cost $211,000.00,
of which the County will pay $23,000.00, the State $94,000.00 and the
Federal Government $94,000.00.


Surrey--Coos County Line to Roseburg

During April and May 1917, a preliminary survey was made from the
Coos-Douglas County Line eastward to a connection with the new Pacific
Highway location between Roseburg and Dillard. Some construction on this
line was contemplated in the spring of 1918, but was postponed until the
close of the war. Location surveys were in charge of Mr. C. C. Kelley,
locating engineer. The length of the survey is 28.7 miles.


Survey--Johns Ranch to Jacques Ranch

This survey was made in July 1917, and is on the Pacific Highway between
Glendale and Canyonville. The survey was 7.2 miles in length and was
made by Mr. C. C. Kelley, locating engineer.


Survey--Canyon Creek Pass to Johns Ranch

This survey consisted of the location of a 2.3 mile section of the
Pacific Highway from Canyon Creek Pass to Johns Ranch in Cow Creek
Valley. It was made by C. C. Kelley, locating engineer, in August, 1917,
and the section is now being constructed as a part of the
Canyonville-Galesville Forest Road Project.


GILLIAM COUNTY

Gilliam County presents an interesting situation from the viewpoint of
highways. Besides the Columbia River Highway the County is traversed by
the John Day Highway, one of the important routes of Eastern Oregon.
This large mileage of State highways along with the fact that there are
many large agricultural communities to be served, renders important and
necessary an extensive road building program.

[Illustration: THE JOHN DAY RIVER HIGHWAY SOUTH OF CONDON IN GILLIAM
COUNTY MACADAMIZED IN 1917]

The people of Gilliam County have long realized the value of good roads.
Although continuous effort has been put forth, expensive construction
and limited funds have resulted in only a beginning. County authorities
have always shown a keen interest in the plans for state co-operation,
regardless of whether Gilliam County was to be benefitted directly or
whether improvements were to be made in the neighboring counties.

The State Highway Commission has always recognized the urgency of
building the Columbia River Highway, and in addition has from the
beginning realized the necessity of an improved road leading inland from
Condon.

During 1918 the State Highway Commission made a location survey of the
Columbia River Highway between John Day River and Arlington, and a
reconnaissance survey has been made from Arlington east to the Morrow
County Line.

Since August 1917 the State Highway Commission has expended $28,673.43
for macadamizing the John Day Highway between Condon and Thirty Mile
Creek. In addition $9,000.00 of State funds has been set aside for
maintaining and resurfacing this section during the coming winter.

Gilliam County Court and the road district in the north end of the
County through heroic efforts have raised $60,000.00 for grading the
Columbia River Highway between Arlington and Blalock, a distance of
eight and sixty-eight one-hundredths miles. This work is to be started
at once and rushed during the winter season. The State Highway
Department will supply engineering supervision.


Condon-Thirty Mile Creek--Macadam

In August 1917 a contract was let by the State Highway Department to
Warren Construction Company of Portland for macadamizing a five and
seven-tenths mile section of the John Day Highway between Condon and
Thirty Mile Creek. The contractor was paid on the basis of cost plus ten
per cent for labor and plus five per cent for materials.

Rock was quarried and crushed at two different points on the job and
trucks and teams were used for hauling. The old road was scarified and
re-dressed prior to laying the macadam. A dry macadam six inches thick
was laid over the five and seven-tenths miles. The average width of the
surface is about fourteen feet.

The State paid the entire cost of this work amounting to $28,673.43 and
it is thought that about $1,500.00 per mile will be required for
maintenance and re-dressing during the next few months.

C. A. Harrington was resident engineer and inspector for the Department
on this work.


Mayville-Wheeler County Line--Grading and Macadam

At the completion of the state work on the Cummins Hill macadam, Gilliam
County deemed it advisable to avail themselves of the opportunity to
utilize the installed equipment and organization for macadamizing the
John Day Highway between Mayville and Wheeler County Line, one mile
south. Accordingly they graded and laid macadam for this distance
thereby connecting Mayville up with the Wheeler County macadam. Gilliam
County paid the full cost of this work amounting to about $6,500.00 for
both grading and macadam.

The engineering and inspection was done by the State Department with
George Hibbet in charge.


Columbia River Highway--Survey

A location survey of the Columbia River Highway was made by the State
Highway Department during 1918. Beginning at the John Day River near its
mouth the line follows up the Columbia River paralleling the O.-W. R. &
N. Railway and ends at Arlington. The total length of the survey is
twenty-three and ninety-six one-hundredths miles. The plans for the
eight and sixty-eight one-hundredths miles section from Arlington to
Blalock have been completed but there are revisions to be made in the
remainder of the line owing to right-of-way encroachments upon the
railroad property.

This survey was made under the direction of C. A. Harrington and B. H.
McNamee, locating engineers for the State Department.


GRANT COUNTY

Grant County lies in the mountainous section of the State and its limits
on three sides, north, east and south follow water sheds. The general
slope of the lands and direction of the drainage is toward the west but
even here the country is of such rugged character that no natural
passageways are found to relieve the isolated condition. The roads in
all directions are very rough and of little economic value to the
County. The narrow gauge railway leading from Baker to Prairie City
serves the whole County for both passenger and freight traffic.

It is readily seen that the call for improved roads for these
settlements is an urgent one. To meet the demands for transportation
facilities the County has made a very creditable showing towards
financing highway improvements. In November 1916 a bond issue was voted
providing $140,000.00. The mileage is so great however, and the
construction so heavy and expensive, that County funds available for
permanent work are altogether inadequate.

Grant County was among the first to apply for State and Federal aid and
its call did not go unheeded. The State Highway Commission drew heavily
upon its first apportionments of Post Road Funds in order to provide a
connecting road between Spray and Dayville through the Big Basin and
Picture Gorge. The co-operative plans provide also for the improvement
of the John Day-Prairie City sections.

Two sections of the John Day Highway in this County aggregating
thirty-one and thirty-one hundredths miles in length have been
definitely established by location surveys, an additional location is to
be made in the near future. In November the State Highway Commission
received bids for the grading and macadamizing of that section of the
John Day Highway between Hall Hill and Prairie City. The cost of this
work is to be defrayed by State and Government funds in equal amounts.

Funds have been set aside by the Commission for the matching of Federal
and County funds in the construction of the John Day Highway between the
Grant-Wheeler County Line and Dayville. This is a portion of Post Road
Project No. 6 extending from the mouth of Sarvice Creek, Wheeler County
to Valades Ranch, Grant County. The project covers a total of
forty-eight and ninety-five hundredths miles, twenty-three and
forty-five hundredths miles of which are in Grant County. The
appropriations for the improvement are apportioned as follows: Grant
County, $50,000.00; State, $93,871.20; Government, $93,871.19. Total
estimated cost, $237,742.39.

The Department has also appropriated funds for the grading and
macadamizing of that section between the town of John Day and Fisk
Creek, seven and four-tenths miles east of the town. The total estimated
cost of the work is $145,051.50, which amount is to be supplied in equal
amounts by the State and Government. The improvement from John Day to
Prairie City is listed for early completion owing to an urgent request
from the War Department to keep the road in condition for hauling chrome
ore.

The following summary shows State and Federal aid to be extended Grant
County during the next season.

  =======================+==========+==========+==========+===========
     Appropriated for    |   State  |  County  |Government|   Total
   expenditures in 1919  |   Funds  |   Funds  |  Funds   |
  -----------------------+----------+----------+----------+-----------
  Hall Hill to Prairie   |$19,493.95|    ...   |$19,493.95|$ 38,987.90
    City                 |          |          |          |
  Wheeler County Line to | 93,871.20|$50,000.00| 93,871.19| 237,742.39
    Valades Ranch        |          |          |          |
  John Day to Fisk Creek | 72,525.75|    ...   | 72,525.75| 145,051.50
  -----------------------+----------+----------+----------+-----------


Hall Hill Section--Grading and Macadamizing

In July of this season the Grant County Court turned over to the State
Departments funds for the improvement of certain sections between John
Day and Prairie City. The Hall Hill Section, three and five-tenths miles
in length, received first attention as it was much in need of repair.
The grading is almost completed and gravel macadam is laid on two and
twenty-four hundredths miles. There has been expended on this work up to
November 30, $39,000.00, and approximately $11,000.00 will be required
for completion of the same. County funds will be supplied to finish this
section. State forces and local labor are being employed on this work
under the direct supervision of C. A. Harrington, resident engineer for
the Department. In addition to the grading and macadamizing this work
involves the construction of a 100-foot span bridge over the John Day
River.


SUMMARY OF CONSTRUCTION QUANTITIES

  Excavation--5,300 cu. yds. solid rock; 4,100 cu. yds. intermediate;
  10,300 cu. yds. common.

  Pipe--70 lin. ft. 18-inch; 150 lin. ft. 24-inch; 120 lin. ft.
  9-inch.


Survey of Big Basin Section of John Day Highway

In 1917 a location survey was made from the Grant-Wheeler County Lines
east of Spray to Valades Ranch, five miles west of Dayville. The line
crosses the North Fork of the John Day River at Kimberly's Ranch and
follows up the Big Basin Valley along the east bank of the John Day
River. A crossing is made near the upper end of Big Basin and the line
follows the west bank of the river through Picture Gorge Canyon. On
leaving Picture Gorge the line enters the John Day Valley, and continues
on the west side of the river to Valades Ranch where the project ends.
Valades Ranch is five miles west of Dayville. This is a portion of the
Sarvice Creek-Valades Ranch Post Road Project and the Grant County
section is twenty-three and forty-five hundredths miles in length. This
survey was made under the direction of R. H. Coppock, locating engineer.


Survey of John Day Highway From John Day to Prairie City

In 1918 a location survey was made from the town of John Day to Prairie
City. The line follows the south limit of the valley east from John Day
for eight and five-tenths miles and crosses the river to the north side
of the valley at the bridge site on the present road. It continues
thence along the north side of the valley to Prairie City. The length of
this survey is twelve and seventy-four hundredths miles.

C. A. Harrington and R. H. Coppock were the locating engineers on this
section. The office work for this survey is finished and plans are
complete.


Sarvice Creek-Valades Ranch Port Road Project

(Same as for Wheeler county)


John Day-Fisk Creek Post Road Project

The State Highway Department has submitted to the Government for the
purpose of securing Post Road aid, that section of the John Day Highway
between John Day and Fisk Creek. This project is five and seventy-two
hundredth miles in length and the total estimated cost is $145,051.50.
The co-operation is to be on the basis of fifty per cent of the cost
from each the State and Government.

Assurance has been received that the project will receive the support of
the Government and it is expected that construction work will begin in
the near future.


Hall Hill-Prairie City Post Road Project

The Office of Public Roads has approved the application for Post Road
aid on the John Day Highway between Hall Hill and Prairie City. The
length of this project is two and fourteen hundredths miles. The total
estimated cost is approximately $39,000.00. The road is to be graded and
surfaced with gravel macadam. This improvement involves also the
construction of a fifty foot span bridge near Prairie City. The
apportionment of the costs provide for the payment of $19,500.00 by each
the State and Government.

Bids were received for this work on November 27 and a contract for the
construction was later awarded Kern & Co. of Portland, Oregon. Work will
begin in a short time and the bid price for this improvement was
$38,987.90.


HARNEY COUNTY

Roads in Harney County are few in number, but the combined mileage of
these few is enormous. Fortunately a large portion of the County roads
are good most of the year, but during the winter season communication by
the valley roads is usually extremely difficult.

Highways are of extreme importance in this County owing to the scarcity
of railroads. The value of improved highways is fully appreciated by the
people and a very creditable beginning has been made on the roads in the
vicinity of Burns. However, County funds are entirely inadequate for the
carrying out of a road building scheme of any magnitude.

The State Highway Commission extended aid in 1918 to the amount of
$20,000 which appropriation calls for a like amount from the Federal
Government. The County joins in the co-operative work to the amount of
$8,000.00. This makes a total of $48,000.00 for a beginning. Present
plans provide that work shall start early in 1919.

Additional support was secured from the State in the forms of surveys.
Approximately nineteen miles of the Central Oregon Highway within Harney
County was surveyed in 1918.


Survey of Central Oregon Highway--Burns-Experimental Farm Section

During 1918 the State Highway Commission surveyed a six mile section of
the Central Oregon Highway leading east from Burns and past the
Government experimental farm. This project begins one and one-half miles
east of Burns and ends two miles east of the experimental farm. The
plans for this survey are practically completed. This survey was made
under the direction of H. B. Wright, locating engineer.


Sage Hen to Burns Section Survey

This is also a section of the Central Oregon Highway and is ten and
thirty-nine hundredths miles in length. The line begins near Sage Hen
Creek and parallels the present road into Burns, with a considerable
saving in distance. This survey was made at the request of the County
authorities in order that some improvements they have planned may be
placed upon a permanent location. H. B. Wright was locating engineer on
this survey.


Glass Butte Section Survey

This is a portion of the survey between Rolyat in Deschutes County and
One Hundred Mile Road in Harney County. Fifteen and six-tenths miles are
in Deschutes County and fifteen in Harney County. This survey was made
at the request of the Counties in order that local funds may be expended
on a permanent location. The present road through Glass Butte section
between Rolyat and One Hundred Mile Road is in poor material and much
longer than necessary. Local plans provide for the opening of the new
road as soon as practicable. H. B. Wright, locating engineer for the
State Department directed the surveying of this line.


Reconnaissance Survey Burns to Vale

In April, 1918, the State Highway Department made a reconnaissance
survey over the route from Burns to Vale. All possible routes were
covered in the survey and reported upon fully to the State Highway
Engineer and the Commission. The investigation resulted in the
establishing of the route from Burns direct to Crane and down the
Malheur River through River Side, Juntura, Harper and Vale. This survey
was made by M. O. Bennett, division engineer for the State Highway
Department.


HOOD RIVER COUNTY


Grading--Cascade Locks to Hood River

That section of the Columbia River Highway from the Multnomah County
Line to Hood River passes through the narrowest part of the Columbia
River Gorge through the Cascade Range. The steep river banks rise
directly up from the water's edge for a large part of the distance, so
the space for both railroad and highway is necessarily restricted. At
many points, the right of way of the railroad and highway is contiguous
and construction under these conditions involved extremely heavy work
which added materially to the cost.

[Illustration: THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY WEST OF LINDSAY IN HOOD RIVER
COUNTY]

Previous to 1915, there was no road through the County, but from the
proceeds of a bond issue of $75,000, the County built on State standards
a roadway to connect the uncompleted portions. In 1915, the State built
about one mile, including the Mitchell Point Tunnel, one of the many
scenic features of the Columbia River Highway. One mile of pavement
adjoining the Multnomah County pavement was built in 1916 by Mr. S.
Benson.

There remained about fourteen miles which require improvement, and on
August 7, 1917, contracts were awarded to A. D. Kern for grading of
these remaining sections to bring to standard grade and alignment. This
improvement eliminated Ruthton Hill, with its narrow, steep grades,
three railroad crossings, a narrow, steep grade near Wyeth and the
improvement through the village of Cascade Locks to the end of the
pavement. The work was divided as follows: Cascade Locks Section, 8.2
miles; Viento Section, 3.6 miles; Ruthton Hill Section, 4.2 miles. These
contracts were completed in September, 1918. Due to the close proximity
to the railroad tracks, the work required extreme care and watchfulness
but was accomplished without accident and without delays to railroad
traffic. The costs of construction for each of the three sections
follows:


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING--CASCADE LOCKS SECTION

  Engineering                                                   $  8,744.41
  Construction--General--
    Common Excavation, 60,660 cu. yds. at 42c       $25,477.20
    Intermediate Excavation, 50,645 cu. yds. at
      75c                                            37,983.75
    Solid Rock Excavation, 44,500 cu. yds. at $1.15  51,175.00
    Overhaul, per 100 lin. ft., 133,229 cu. yds. at
      3c                                              3,996.87
    12-inch Reinforced Concrete Pipe, 1,102 lin.
      ft. at $1.75                                    1,928.50
    18-inch Reinforced Concrete Pipe, 140 lin. ft.
      at $2.25                                          315.00
    24-inch Reinforced Concrete Pipe, 284 lin. ft.
      at $3.00                                          852.00
    30-inch Reinforced Concrete Pipe. 72 lin. ft.
      at $4.25                                          306.00
    Class A Concrete, 80.86 cu. yds. at $20.00        1,617.20
    Class C Concrete, 32.43 cu. yds. at $14.00          454.02
    Placing Reinforcing Steel, 3,197 lbs. at
      .001/2                                               15.99
    Catch Basins, 9 at $25.00                           225.00
    Extra Clearing and Grubbing, 5.79 acres at
      $200.00                                         1,158.00
    Extra Clearing, 4.13 acres at $100.00               413.00
    Herman Creek Bridge--
      Class A Concrete, 137.61 cu. yds.
        at $20.00                          $2,752.20
      Class C Concrete, 3.57 cu. yds.
        at $14.00                              49.98
      Reinforcing Steel (Placing) 23,000
        lbs at .001/2                           115.00
      Reinforcing Steel furnished by State  1,394.32
      Removing old bridge and constructing
        temporary bridge                      426.00
      Wet excavation for piers                664.86
      Concrete toe wall to protect fill     1,547.98
      Railing                                 438.72
                                            --------
        Total cost of Herman Creek Bridge             7,389.06
      Gorton Creek Bridge--
        Excavation for piers                $ 483.44
        Class A Concrete, 90.85 cu. yds.
          at $20.00                         1,817.00
        Placing Reinforcing Steel, 7,378
          lbs. at .001/2                         36.89
        Reinforcing Steel furnished by State  447.27
        Railing                               224.29
        Rip-rap                               145.01
                                            --------
          Total cost of Gorton Creek Bridge           3,153.90
  Force Account Work as Follows--
    Construction and Removal of temporary bridge
      over Dry Creek                                     15.78
    Removing Slide from O.-W. R. R. & N. Tracks          95.59
    Gravel Surfacing--End of Pavement to Cascade
      Locks                                           2,418.55
    Railing for Viento Creek Bridge                     106.11
    Excavating in water and placing Corrugated Iron
      Pipe                                               57.92
    Excavation and placing drain tile in wet cuts       150.63
    Excavation and placing box drain for form
      crossing                                           10.44
    Riprap on slope to keep fill off O.-W. R. R. &
      N. Right of Way                                   177.29
    Water pipe and private road crossing                 40.16
    Sinking test holes in gravel pit at Cascade Locks    24.93
    Road crossing for Herman Creek Ranger Station       167.38
    Hauling dirt to cover boulders                      264.40
    Placing concrete pipe                                59.03
    Flagmen guarding track (Contractor's force)       1,234.83
  Miscellaneous Construction Items Paid Direct by State--
    Replacing Fence                                      18.75
    Reinforcing Steel for Concrete Culverts             193.77
    Concrete Pipe furnished by State                     71.50
    Moving Building in Cascade Locks                  1,400.00
    Guarding O.-W. R. R. & N. Tracks (Ry. Co. Force)  1,343.69
    Guarding Western Union Telegraph Line               498.01
                                                   -----------
        Total Construction Cost                                 $144,809.25
        Grand Total Cost of Job                                  153,553.66
        Deduction for Rental of State Cars and Track                 648.81
                                                                -----------
          Total Cash Expenditure                                $152,904.85

[Illustration: THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY NEAR VIENTO IN HOOD RIVER
COUNTY. GRADED AND GRAVELED IN 1917 AND 1918]


DETAILED STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918--GRADING AND
BRIDGES--VIENTO SECTION

  Engineering                                                    $ 4,513.24
  Guarding O.-W. R. R. & N. Tracks                                   976.47
  Guarding Western Union Telegraph Lines                             184.64
  Diverting Flume Lines                                              936.37
  Reinforcing Steel Furnished by State                               257.79
  Contract Work as follows:
    Common Excavation, 9,480.4 cu. yds. at 39c      $ 3,697.35
    Intermediate Excavation, 32,654.9 cu. yds.
      at 70c                                         22,858.43
    Solid Rock Excavation, 54,031.9 cu. yds. at
      $1.10                                          59,435.09
    Overhaul, per 100 lin. ft., 82,711 cu. yds. at
      3c                                              2,481.33
    12-inch Reinforced Concrete Pipe, 622 lin. ft.
      at $1.75                                         1088.50
    18-inch Reinforced Concrete Pipe, 304 lin. ft.
      at $2.25                                          684.00
    Class A Concrete, 62 cu. yds. at $20.00           1,240.00
    Class C Concrete, 20.8 cu. yds. at $14.00           291.20
    Placing Reinforcing Steel, 3,928 lbs. at .001/2        19.64
    Rubble Masonry, 12 cu. yds. at $7.00                 84.00
    Catch Basins, one at $25.00                          25.00
    Gravel Backfill in Rock cut (Force Account)         181.77
    Repairing Lindsay Creek Bridge (Force Account)      149.92
    Private Road Approach (Force Account)               168.30
    Clearing Rock from Mitchell Point Tunnel (Force
      Acc't)                                             93.94
  Viento Creek Bridge--
    Class A Concrete, 62.7 cu. yds. at
      $20.00                               $1,254.00
    Placing Reinforcing Steel, 3,800 lbs.
      at .001/2                                  19.00
    Excavation for Footings (Force Account)   128.27
    Material furnished by State               249.70
                                           ---------
        Total Cost of Viento Creek Bridge             1,650.97
                                                      --------
  Total Cost to November 30, 1918                               $101,017.95
  15 per cent Retained of Total Amt. ($93,899.74) Earned
    by Contractors                                                14,084.96
                                                                -----------
  Total Paid Amount to November 30, 1918                        $ 86,932.99


DETAILED STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918--GRADING RUTHTON
HILL SECTION

  Engineering                                                    $ 4,074.19
  Material furnished by State for Concrete Half Viaduct              200.50
  Guarding O.-W. R. R. & N. Tracks                                   804.57
  Contract Construction Work as follows:
    Common Excavation, 2,669.5 cu. yds. at 39c      $ 1,041.10
    Intermediate Excavation, 17,109.4 cu. yds.
      at 70c                                         11,976.58
    Solid Rock Excavation, 79,213.3 cu. yds. at
      $1.05                                          83,173.96
    Overhaul per 100 lin. ft., 19,500 cu. yds. at 3c    585.00
    12-inch Reinforced Concrete Pipe, 536 lin. ft.
      at $1.75                                          938.00
    18-inch Reinforced Concrete Pipe, 140 lin. ft. at
      $2.25                                             315.00
    Class C Concrete, 15.4 cu. yds. at $14.00           215.60
    Rubble Masonry, 30 cu. yds. at $7.00                210.00
    Force Account--
      Connecting road with Morton                       285.50
      Covering sharp rocks with clay                    106.48
      Reinforced Concrete Viaduct at Ruthton Hill     1,362.51
                                                   -----------
                                                   $100,209.73
    Less 15 per cent retained pending completion of
      contract                                       15,031.46
                                                   -----------
      Total payments to contractor to Nov. 30, 1918             $ 85,178.27
                                                                -----------
  Total expended to November 30, 1918                           $ 90,257.53

[Illustration: ON THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY IN HOOD RIVER COUNTY TWO
MILES EAST OF CASCADE LOCKS. GRADED AND GRAVELED IN 1917 AND 1918]


Macadamizing--Cascade Locks to Hood River

On July 4, 1918, a contract was awarded to A. D. Kern of eighteen miles
of gravel surfacing between Hood River and the Multnomah County Line on
the basis of cost plus fifteen per cent on labor and supplies and twelve
and one-half per cent on equipment; provided, that no percentage should
be paid on any cost over $50,000. This work also includes the building
of shoulders on the one mile of pavement built by S. Benson in 1916
adjacent to the Multnomah County Line. The gravel for this work was
taken from pits at Cascade Locks, Herman, Sonny and Hood River, was
loaded by steam shovels, screened at two of the pits and hauled by auto
trucks. As a result there is now a gravel surface between Hood River and
Cascade Locks. A total of 23,396 cubic yards was placed upon the road at
an average cost of $2.88 per cubic yard which represents total cost of
excavating, screening, hauling, spreading and rolling.


Hood River Bridge

The largest concrete bridge so far designed and constructed by the State
Highway Department is that spanning Hood River near the city of Hood
River. It consists of three arch spans 95 feet, center to center of
piers, 110 feet of reinforced concrete approach on the Hood River side
and a short approach on the opposite side.

As in other arch work of similar magnitude studied by the Department, it
was found economical to support the arch superstructures on ribs instead
of using rings extending clear across the roadway, and the open spandrel
idea was carried out.

The concrete viaduct approach on the west side crosses three railroad
tracks which govern the height of the bridge. In order to minimize this
height through concrete girders were used, the girders projecting above
rather than below the roadway slab.

The total cost of the structure complete will be about $48,000.00, of
which Hood River County will contribute $8,000.00. The bridge was built
under contract by Parker & Banfield. Mr. C. E. Carter was resident
engineer on the work.


Herman Creek Bridge

This is a ninety-foot reinforced concrete viaduct on the Columbia River
Highway near Cascade Locks. This structure was built by A. D. Kern in
connection with the grading contract on the Cascade Locks section. The
cost complete was $7,389.06.


Gorton Creek Bridge

This is a 50-foot reinforced concrete bridge at Wyeth on the Columbia
River Highway. It was built by A. D. Kern under the grading contract for
the Cascade Locks Section. The total cost was $3,153.90.


Hood River-Mosier Surveys

Contemplating construction of the Columbia River Highway between Hood
River and Mosier to eliminate the high summit, narrow road bed, and
excessive grades between these points the Department made very thorough
surveys for this important project.

A survey had previously been made developing distance up the Hood River
Valley and reaching a summit of 1,107 feet with a corresponding
additional length required on the Mosier end, making a total distance of
10.7 miles.

Because of its length and high summit a lower route was considered and a
survey was made adjacent to the railroad, using a portion of the old
abandoned railroad grade, but involving extremely heavy construction at
certain points where the line skirts the high bluffs. The summit on
this route was only 160 feet and its length 5.8 miles. However, the
railroad company was contemplating a revision in the alignment of their
tracks on this section, as well as the construction of a second track,
which would still further lessen the space available for a highway. Also
taking into consideration the difficult nature of the work and the
uncertain cost due to track protection in blasting operations and the
limited conditions under which the work must lie done to avoid
interference with the railroad traffic, this route was revised in favor
of a route further away from the tracks up on the side-hill. The summit
reached is 522 feet and the length of this line is 6.3 miles, which
includes a development of 5 per cent grade at each end and provides for
a 24 foot roadbed.

This adopted route is very scenic and affords a splendid view of the
Washington shore, as well as a view up and down the river. The
construction is very heavy, being located on steep side-hill slopes and
at one point involves a tunnel 200 feet long. This project is divided by
the County line, making 4.0 miles in Hood River County and 2.2 miles in
Wasco County. This project will be placed upon the 1919 program.


JACKSON COUNTY

[Illustration: HEAVY GRADING ON RUTHTON HILL IN HOOD RIVER COUNTY.
CONSTRUCTED IN 1917 AND 1918]

The Highway Department expended in Jackson County during 1917 and 1918
the sum of $86,619.88. The work accomplished with this amount consists
of six and five-tenths miles of 16-foot crushed rock macadam in the
Siskiyou Mountains, an undergrade crossing with the Southern Pacific
Railway just north of Ashland, and 4,200 lineal feet of grading and
paving north of Ashland. A survey has also been started on the
Ashland-Klamath Falls Road about fifteen miles of which was completed
before weather conditions made it necessary to discontinue field work
until spring.


Ashland Hill Grading and Undercrossing

On account of a contemplated undergrade crossing with the Southern
Pacific Railway, a stretch of 4,200 feet on the Pacific Highway just
north of Ashland was left unpaved between Ashland and Medford when the
balance of the distance between those points was paved in 1914. In 1917
arrangement was made between the County and Railway Company for the
construction of this undercrossing and the State Highway Commission set
aside funds to cover the cost of the 4,200 feet of grading in connection
therewith.

The Installation of the undercrossing structure was handled by the
Southern Pacific Railway Company. The grading was handled by the County
grading forces under the supervision of the Highway Department. Mr. F.
H. Walker acted as resident engineer. The grading was commenced on
January 7, 1918, and completed August 1, 1918. The total cost of the
grading was $9,768.88, and was paid entirely from State funds.


COST STATEMENT ASHLAND HILL GRADING

  Industrial insurance                     $   156.27
  Grading, labor, teams, material, etc.      8,928.19
  Explosives                                   102.08
  Concrete drainage structures                  14.70
  Pipe culverts                                287.03
  Irrigation flume diversions                    5.40
                                            ---------
  Total                                    $ 9,493.67
  Engineering                                  275.21
                                            ---------
  Total cost                               $ 9,768.88


Ashland Hill Paving

Bids were called for on August 6, 1918, for the paving of the Ashland
Hill Section, but as no satisfactory bids were received the work was
undertaken by the Highway Department with State forces. This section of
paving is 4,200 feet in length, and the type of pavement laid is a
16-foot concrete, 51/2 inches thick at the sides and 61/2 inches thick at
the center. The mixture was a 1:2:31/2, and a ratio of 5.6 gallons of
water per sack of cement was used.

The average haul on material was 1.2 miles and hauling was done by means
of trucks. The cement was shipped to the job prior to the beginning of
construction and stored at convenient locations near the work.

A sixteen cubic foot Koehring mixer equipped with boom and bucket was
used for mixing the aggregate. The pavement, after being struck off, was
finished by the roller and belt method. The pavement first being rolled
from two to four times depending on the condition of the concrete and
later belted with eight and ten inch belts. The eight inch belt being
used first. A very satisfactory surface was obtained in this manner.

[Illustration: CONCRETE PAVEMENT ON ASHLAND HILL IN JACKSON COUNTY, ON
THE PACIFIC HIGHWAY NORTH OF ASHLAND. GRADED AND PAVED IN 1918]

Continuous forms were used on this work and 1/4x4 inch elastite joints
were placed at 30 foot intervals, leaving approximately two inches of
concrete above the elastite and giving the pavement the appearance of
monolithic construction. It was found that a better riding pavement
could be produced in this way as the inequalities at joints were
eliminated and we believe that the use of this pavement will justify the
adoption of this type on future work.

Gravel and crushed rock shoulders two feet wide were built on this
section and the pavement was not covered while curing as the weather was
cool and damp. However, the pavement was kept wet by sprinkling when
necessary.

The crusher and roller on this work were furnished by Jackson County
free of charge.

Mr. J. M. Baker was superintendent of construction on this work.


COST STATEMENT ASHLAND HILL PAVEMENT

4,200 feet 16' Concrete Pavement Built in 1918

                                                                   Unit
      Quantity            Item                       Total Cost    Cost
  7682 sq. yds.--1:2:31/2 Concrete Pavement
    Average Thickness 6"                             $14,117.56   $1.84
  400 cu. yds.--Crushed Gravel in Shoulders            1,000.00    2.50
  1000 pounds--Reinf. Steel                               70.00     .07
  2240 lin. ft.--Expansion Joints                         89.60     .04
                                                     ----------
  Total Cost of Construction                         $15,277.16
  Engineering                                            630.87
                                                     ----------
  Grand Total Cost                                   $15,908.03


Siskiyou Mountain Macadam

During the 1917 season, 61/2 miles of broken stone macadam was constructed
on the Pacific Highway in the Siskiyou Mountains. This macadam is
sixteen feet in width, and extends from the California State Line to
Siskiyou. It was constructed with State forces under the supervision of
L. L. Clarke, construction superintendent. A total of 17,780 cubic yards
of rock were crushed and placed on the road. The cost of the work
complete was $56,252.98.


Survey--Ashland to Klamath Falls

On August 25, 1918, a location survey was started between Ashland and
Klamath Falls. After a careful reconnaissance of the low passes, the
route via Green Springs Mountain was chosen, as against the Dead Indian
Summit, 500 feet higher.

Surveys were continued until November 30, when they were discontinued
for the winter months. The present road is in such poor condition, that
maintaining a locating party at work during the winter would be very
expensive.

During the short time the party was in the field, 15.6 miles of location
were staked, a six per cent grade from the summit of Green Springs
Mountain toward Ashland being obtained, whereas the present road has
many stretches over 20 per cent. Also, over a section between the Green
Springs Summit and Jenny Creek, 9 miles to the south, a location has
been obtained that will give for the greater distance, very cheap
construction and the lightest of grades. This will be appreciated by all
who have traveled the present rocky road with its series of bad grades.

[Illustration: ON THE PACIFIC HIGHWAY SOUTH OF WOLF CREEK IN JOSEPHINE
COUNTY. CONSTRUCTED IN 1917 AND 1918]

This road is a very vital one to the Rogue River and Klamath Valleys. At
present it is only passable during summer months for auto traffic, while
a road built on standard line and grades would soon make it an all year
highway.

There will be an enormous exchange of commodities between the two
valleys when the road is constructed. It will make a three hour auto
trip between Ashland and Klamath Falls, which now takes 81/2 hours by
train via Weed, California.

The location will be resumed in the spring, and continued to Klamath
Falls. Surveys have been in charge of Mr. J. H. Scott, locating
engineer.


JEFFERSON COUNTY

Jefferson is the only county in Eastern Oregon that has not applied for
State aid in some form. This County has been included in the State's
general Post Road scheme and doubtless will receive early attention from
the State Highway Commission.

The State Highway Commission has ordered a reconnaissance survey made
from Kingsley and Tygh Valley in Wasco County south through the Warm
Springs Indian Reservation into Jefferson County along the west side of
the Deschutes River. This investigation will be made during the coming
spring.

The County is traversed by The Dalles-California Highway which will be a
very important road. The Antelope-Mitchell Highway also passes through
the northeast corner of the County.


JOSEPHINE COUNTY

During the two year period covered by this report, a very marked
improvement has been made in the Pacific Highway across Josephine
County. During this time 8.2 miles, or more than one-quarter of the
total mileage of this highway in the County, were completed on standard
grades and alignment, eliminating some of the heaviest and most
dangerous grades between Portland and the California Line. The work done
by the State consisted of the grading of a 4.9 mile section between Wolf
Creek and Grave Creek in the northern part of the County, and the
grading of a one mile section, known as the Locust Hill Section, about
three miles south of Grants Pass. The work done by the County consisted
of 2.3 miles of grading between Locust Hill and the Jackson County Line.
This County work was contracted under State Highway Department
specifications and was engineered by the Department engineers.

In addition to this construction work, location surveys were made over
23.6 miles of the Pacific Highway, completing the location across the
County. These surveys were made in three sections: One from Wolf Creek
to Grave Creek; one from Grants Pass to Grave Creek; and one from Wolf
Creek to Stage Road Pass.

The total amount of money expended by the State in Josephine County
during the fiscal years 1917 and 1918 was $77,998.14, and the amount
expended by Josephine County under State supervision was approximately
$8,500.00. Some considerable amount of work was also done by the County
in grading just south of Grants Pass. While this work was not under
State supervision, it was on the State survey and is standard as regards
grade, alignment, cross-section, etc.

[Illustration: ON THE WOLF CREEK-GRAVE CREEK SECTION OF THE PACIFIC
HIGHWAY IN JOSEPHINE COUNTY. GRADED IN 1918]


Grading--Wolf Creek to Grave Creek

To eliminate four very heavy grades on the Pacific Highway between Wolf
Creek and Grave Creek in Northern Josephine County, the Highway
Commission appropriated funds for the grading of a 4.9 mile section
between those points. The contract for the work was awarded to the
American Exploration and Construction Company of Grants Pass on November
6, 1917. This construction was practically all on steep side-hills, and
as only a small part of the material to be moved was hard rock, the job
was an ideal one for steam shovel operation and over fifty per cent of
the total yardage was moved by this method. The work was handled by the
contractors in a very creditable manner, and an excellent roadbed was
secured.

The grading was completed on October 20, 1918. The width of roadbed is
20 feet and the maximum grade is 5 per cent. Mr. J. E. Nelson was in
charge of the work as resident engineer.

It is expected that this section will be macadamized during the 1919
season.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING--WOLF CREEK TO GRAVE CREEK

  Engineering                                                    $ 4,872.94
  Culvert Pipe furnished by State                                  3,846.45
  Payments to Contractor for Work as follows:
    Clearing and Grubbing                           $ 3,500.00
    Common Excavation, 29,426 cu. yds. at .45        13,241.70
    Intermediate Excavation, 21,258 cu. yds. at
      .45                                             9,566.10
    Solid Rock Excavation, 21,558 cu. yds. at
      $1.25                                          26,947.50
    Overhaul, per 100 lin. ft., 6,767 cu. yds.
      at .02                                            135.34
    12" Concrete Pipe, 1,077 lin. ft. at .55            592.35
    18" Corr. Galv. Iron Pipe, 581.5 lin. ft. at .40    232.60
    24" Corr. Galv. Iron Pipe, 162.5 lin. ft. at .50     81.25
    30" Corr. Galv. Iron Pipe, 127.5 lin. ft. at .60     76.50
    36" Corr. Galv. Iron Pipe, 166.5 lin. ft. at .75    124.87
    Class "A" Concrete, 44.67 cu. yds. at $22.50      1,005.07
    Class "C" Concrete, 66.72 cu. yds. at $18.00      1,200.96
    6" Porous Drain Tile, 400 lin. ft. at .40           160.00
    Trestle Timber, 45,968 f. b. m., at $45.00        2,068.56
    Metal Reinforcement, 2,506 lbs. at .15              375.90
    Extra Clearing, 1.75 acres at $100.00               175.00
    Painting Railings on Coyote Creek and Dry Gulch
      Bridges (Force Account)                            74.94
    Gravel Backfilling for Drain Tile (Force Account)    23.50
    Culvert Pipe furnished by State                   3,846.45
                                                     ---------
      Total Paid to Contractors                                   59,582.14
                                                                 ----------
      Total Cost of Work                                         $68,301.53


Grading--Locust Hill Section

To complete the grading of the Pacific Highway between Grants Pass and
Rogue River, the Highway Commission set aside funds for the construction
of the Locust Hill Section, a section one mile in length located about
three miles south of Grants Pass. The contract for this work was awarded
to Albert Anderson & Co. of Grants Pass, and the construction was
completed about June 1, 1918.

The necessary engineering supervision of this work was given by Mr. J.
E. Nelson, resident engineer of the Wolf Creek-Grave Creek Section.


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING LOCUST HILL SECTION

  Engineering                                                      $ 162.88
  Construction:
    Clearing and Grubbing                             $ 125.00
    Common Excavation, 692 cu. yds. at .53              366.76
    Intermediate Excavation, 2,552 cu. yds. at .63    1,607.76
    Solid Rock Excavation, 1,954 cu. yds. at $1.20    2,344.80
    Overhaul per 100 lin. ft., 3,159 cu. yds. at .03     94.77
    12" Plain Conc. Pipe, 168 lin. ft. at $1.00         168.00
                                                      --------
                                                                   4,707.09
                                                                   --------
      Total Cost                                                 $ 4,869.97


County Construction--Locust Hill to Jackson County Line

In the Spring of 1917, the County Court of Josephine County requested
the Highway Department to engineer for them the construction of 2.3
miles of grading on the Pacific Highway between Locust Hill and the
Jackson County Line. Plans and specifications were prepared for this
work by the Highway Department and it was let by the County Court in two
units: one to Albert Anderson & Co., of Grants Pass; the other to S. S.
Schell of Oakland, Oregon.

The construction engineering was handled by the State Highway Department
under resident engineer H. C. Compton. The work was completed in
September, 1917, the total cost to the County being approximately
$8,500.00.

The final estimate to Albert Anderson & Co., was as follows:


FINAL ESTIMATE TO ALBERT ANDERSON--GRADING BETWEEN LOCUST HILL AND
JACKSON COUNTY LINE

  Clearing, lump sum bid                              $ 800.00
  Common Excavation, 3,887.1 cu. yds. at .43          1,671.45
  Intermediate Excavation, 3,931.3 cu. yds. at .63    2,476.72
  Solid Rock Excavation, 650.0 cu. yds. at $1.15        747.50
  12" Plain Concrete Pipe, 320 lin. ft. at .90          288.00
  18" Plain Concrete Pipe, 78 lin. ft. at $1.45         113.10
  24" Plain Concrete Pipe, 56 lin. ft. at $2.10         117.60
  Class "C" Concrete, 14.94 cu. yds. at $14.50          216.63
  6" Drain Tile, 100 lin. ft. at .22                     22.00
  Run-of-bank Gravel, 6 cu. yds. at $1.35                 8.10
  Overhaul, per 100 lin. ft., 730 cu. yds. at .02        14.60
                                                    ----------
      Total                                         $ 6,475.70


Survey--Wolf Creek to Grave Creek

The old county road between Wolf Creek and Grave Creek on the Pacific
Highway in Northern Josephine County, passed over two summits about 250
feet above the valley levels of Grave and Wolf Creeks, giving four long,
heavy grades, in some places the grade being as high as 25 per cent.
These two summits were about one mile apart, and the nature of the
ground was such that support could be had for a practically level grade
between the two.

With a view to locating this level grade between the summits and
developing five per cent grades down the sides, a preliminary survey was
made in October and November, 1916, under the direction of Mr. S. H.
Probert. This survey was worked up in the office during January and
February, 1917, and in July, 1917, the projected location was staked on
the ground by Mr. C. C. Kelley, locating engineer.

The length of the survey was 4.9 miles, the terminal points being about
three-quarters of a mile east of Wolf Creek Post Office and about
three-quarters of a mile west of the Grave Creek Bridge.

The construction of this section, which was undertaken in the fall of
1917, is described in another article in this report.


Survey--Wolf Creek to Stage Road Pass

[Illustration: ON THE WOLF CREEK-GRAVE CREEK SECTION OF THE PACIFIC
HIGHWAY IN JOSEPHINE COUNTY. GRADED IN 1918]

This survey begins about three-quarters of a mile south of the Wolf
Creek Post Office and follows, in a general way, the present county
roads into the town of Wolf Creek and from Wolf Creek to a point about
two miles south of Stage Road Pass. At this point it connects with a
survey made by the Highway Department in 1915, and which is the location
survey for a five per cent grade down from State Road Pass, which pass
is on the line between Douglas and Josephine Counties.

The length of the survey from east of Wolf Creek to the connection with
the previous survey is 2.5 miles. It was made in July, 1917, under the
direction of Mr. C. C. Kelley, locating engineer.


Survey--Grants Pass to Grave Creek

To complete the location of the Pacific Highway across Josephine County,
a survey was made in 1917 between Grants Pass and Grave Creek. This
survey follows, in a general way, the present road between those points,
deviating from it only where improvements in alignment or grade can be
secured. The most important feature of this location is that it is on a
five per cent grade over the Sexton Mountain Summit. The total length of
the survey is 17.2 miles. Mr. C. C. Kelley was in charge of the work as
locating engineer.


KLAMATH COUNTY

In Klamath County the work of the Highway Commission to date has been
limited to surveys.

A careful reconnaissance has been made from Klamath Falls to Bend,
Klamath Falls to Olene, and Klamath Falls to Ashland. Funds were limited
for more extensive surveys during 1918, but the location from Ashland to
Klamath Falls (see Jackson County report) was started and will be
continued to Klamath Falls in 1919.

A short section between the Klamath Falls City Limits, through Pelican
City to a connection with the existing road to Bend was located by the
Highway Department in August, 1918, and stakes set for 7,500 feet of
grading. This section has since been graded and covered with a cinder
surface by the County.

State surveys in this section were in charge of J. H. Scott, locating
engineer.


LAKE COUNTY


Grading and Macadamizing Between Lakeview and Paisley

In 1917 the State Highway Commission appropriated funds to assist the
County with the grading and macadamizing of a section of the
Lakeview-Paisley Road through Crooked Creek Canyon. This work was
handled by the County, and the total amount of State funds expended was
$15,391.67. The work done consisted of 6.4 miles of grading and 4.0
miles of rock surfacing.


LANE COUNTY


Macadam--Latham to Divide

In 1917 State aid was given to Lane County in the amount of $6,099.86.
This money was used in macadamizing the Pacific Highway between Latham
and Divide. The work was handled by County forces under the supervision
of H. W. Libby, county roadmaster.


Divide Overcrossing

For the elimination of the dangerous grade crossing of the Pacific
Highway with the Southern Pacific Railway at Divide, the Highway
Department made surveys and prepared plans for an overhead crossing at
that point. The Public Service Commission of Oregon ordered that this
overhead crossing be built, forty per cent of the cost to be paid by the
Railway Company, thirty per cent by the State and thirty per cent by the
County.

Bids were received for the construction of the structure and approach
fills on September 10, 1918, but before work was begun, the United
States Highways Council ordered that construction be delayed until after
the war on account of the shortage in steel and cement. Work will,
therefore, not be undertaken until the 1919 season.

The structure designed for this overcrossing is a three span reinforced
concrete viaduct, providing clearance for the double tracking of the
railway. The cost of the structure and the approach fills is estimated
to be $19,500.00. In connection with this, about 1.3 miles of new grade
must be built to connect with the present road, no part of the cost of
which will be shared by the Railway Company. This grading is estimated
to cost $9,000.00. As soon as the grading is completed, it will be
macadamized by the Highway Commission.


Survey--Goshen to Cottage Grove

In June, 1917, a survey was made from Goshen to a connection with the
Pacific Highway south of Cottage Grove. This survey is on the east side
of the Southern Pacific Railway from Goshen to Creswell, crosses the
railway at grade at that point, and continues on the west side all the
way to Cottage Grove, closely following the Southern Pacific alignment
the entire distance. The total length of the survey was 18.2 miles. Mr.
C. C. Kelley was the locating engineer in charge.


LINCOLN COUNTY


Pioneer Mountain Grading

In 1917, the State Highway Commission extended State aid to Lincoln
County in the grading of a one mile section of the Corvallis-Newport
Road. This section is in the vicinity of Pioneer Mountain, and is known
as the Pioneer Mountain section. The grading was handled by County
forces and the total amount of State funds expended was $2,054.05.


Bridge Surveys

In May, 1918, surveys were made by the Department for two large bridges
in Lincoln County. One of these was for a bridge over Alsea River near
Waldport and the other was for a bridge across the Yaquina River at
Toledo. At the present time the only means of crossing the streams at
these points is by ferry.

For the Alsea River Crossing a 264 foot bridge has been designed and is
now under construction by Curtis Gardner, Bridge Contractor. This bridge
consists of one 144 foot medium traffic wood span and 120 feet of wood
trestle. The total cost of the structure will be approximately
$10,000.00. The construction is under the supervision of the Highway
Department, but is being paid for by Lincoln County.

The design has not yet been prepared for the bridge at Toledo, but the
total length of the bridge will be about 3,000 feet.


Neskowin-Salmon River Survey

In June, 1918, a survey was made between Neskowin in Tillamook County
and Salmon River in Lincoln County. This survey was of a preliminary
nature and was made to determine the feasibility of a road between these
points. It was found that a five per cent grade could be obtained, but
that owing to the extremely rugged nature of the country, a road of
standard width and on a standard alignment would be so expensive as to
be impracticable at this time.

The total length of the survey was eight miles. Mr. J. H. Scott was in
charge of the work as locating engineer.


LINN COUNTY


Albany-Jefferson Survey

A survey of the Pacific Highway between the Marion County Line (Santiam
River) and Albany, was made in December, 1917, and a definite route
between these two points adopted. In a general way the located route
follows the present road. Near the Jefferson end, however, the new
location cuts across the property of E. M. Miller, paralleling the
Southern Pacific tracks with a net saving of 1,600 feet in distance over
that of the present road. Near Miller Station the line again leaves the
old road, eliminating four dangerous right angle turns by cutting
diagonally across. The new location also provides for the elimination of
the present grade crossing on the W. E. Fisher property by means of an
overhead crossing just north of the grade crossing.

For the first one-half mile south of the Santiam River Bridge it will be
necessary to materially raise the grade of the present road as it is
considerably below high water, and therefore subject to overflow. It
will also be necessary to construct a few low bridges on this section to
provide waterways for flood waters.

It is expected that the Albany-Jefferson Section will be graded and
paved during the 1919 season.


MALHEUR COUNTY

Malheur County is an important highway center. It is most favorably
situated with respects to highways in Eastern Oregon, in that it serves
as a common junction point for the Old Oregon Trail, John Day Highway
and Central Oregon Highway. A fourth highway will enter the County from
Nevada leading from Winnemucca north through Jordan Valley.

Malheur County is fairly well equipped for road work and has already
made a most creditable showing. All the people are good roads boosters,
having learned the value and necessity of improved roads. This was
proven by their voting a $20,000.00 bond issue at the recent election.
The purpose of this fund is to meet the State and Federal appropriation
of $80,000.00.

In area, Malheur County is an empire in itself. The natural result is an
extra large mileage of roads, and many of them run through mountainous
districts. To improve only the main highways in Malheur County is a huge
undertaking.

The State Highway Commission fully realizes the inability of most of the
counties in Eastern Oregon to cope with the situation and has determined
to extend aid in every manner possible. That State aid may be
substantial and a benefit to all the counties, the Commission is making
an urgent call for more State funds.

In Malheur County near Brogan a 9.85 mile section of the John Day
Highway has been surveyed by the State Highway Department. The
Commission has set aside $20,000.00 for the construction of this road
and an equal amount is requested from the Government. The County has
appropriated $13,958.00 for the purpose of co-operating in this
construction.

State funds to the amount of $20,000.00 have been set aside for the
improvement of a 6.76 mile section of the Central Oregon Highway. This
section extends from Vale 6.76 miles west to Burrell's Ranch. The
Government is requested to share in the cost in amount equal to the sum
given by the State. The County's share in this project will be
$14,420.00.

The following statement shows the amounts appropriated for expenditure
in 1919:

                           State        County    Government
  Section                  Funds        Funds        Funds       Totals
  Cow Valley-Brogan     $20,000.00   $13,958.00   $20,000.00   $53,958.00
    Section
  Burrell-Vale Section   20,000.00    14,420.00    20,000.00    54,420.00

Both of the above mentioned sections are Post Road Projects.
Negotiations with the U. S. Public Roads Office are under way for the
grading of the Cow Valley-Brogan Road, and the Burrell-Vale Project
will be submitted within a short time. It is hoped construction will
begin early in 1919.


Survey of John Day Highway--Cow Valley-Brogan Section

During October and November, 1918, the State Highway Commission made a
location survey of a 9.85 mile section of the John Day Highway between
Cow Valley and Brogan. The line follows in the direction of the present
road, but marked departures from the location were made in several
places. Plans for this work are about fifty per cent complete. R. H.
Coppock, locating engineer for the State Department, was in charge of
this work.


Survey of the Central Oregon Highway--Burrell Ranch-Vale Section

A survey is in progress on the section of the Central Oregon Highway
between Burrell's Ranch and Vale. This line will follow along near what
is called the Post Hill road, and will be about seven miles in length.
Immediately upon completion of the field work, the plans will be rushed
in order that early action may be taken by the U. S. Office of Public
Roads. The State Commission's 1919 construction program includes this
section.

The survey is in charge of R. H. Coppock, locating engineer.


Reconnaissance Survey of Central Oregon Highway and Jordan Valley Road

During April, 1918, a reconnaissance survey was made by M. O. Bennett,
division engineer, for the Department, over the routes between Burns and
Vale for the purpose of establishing a definite route for the Central
Oregon Highway. This investigation resulted in the choice of the river
route by the State Highway Commission. The route as selected goes direct
from Burns to Crane, thence down the Malheur River through Riverside,
Juntura and Harper to Vale.

In November, 1918, a reconnaissance survey was made by the State
Department for the purpose of establishing the most feasible route
between Jordan Valley and Vale and Ontario. This report has not yet been
submitted to the Commission, but the findings seem to favor the Sucker
Creek Route. This survey was made by Manche O. Bennett, division
engineer.


MARION COUNTY


Salem-Aurora Paving

One of the first paving projects to come up for consideration by the
State Highway Commission was that of the Pacific Highway between Salem
and Aurora in Marion County. Upon investigating this project, it was
found that rural mail was carried over practically the entire distance
between Salem and Aurora. This fact made the improvement of this road
subject to Federal Aid, and as very few sections of State Roads west of
the Cascade Mountains will qualify for Federal Aid, it was considered
advisable to use some of the Federal money available to the State in the
improvement of this section.

With a view to securing the approval of this project by the Federal
Office of Public Roads, and to undertaking the construction during the
1918 season, the necessary surveys were made in January and February,
1918, and the plans submitted to the Office of Public Roads in March,
1918. The final approvement by the Government was received June 15,
1918, and on June 25 proposals for the construction were received and
opened. The lowest bid received was from Warren Construction Company,
Portland, Oregon, but as it was in excess of the State Highway
Engineer's estimate, and in excess of the available funds, all bids were
rejected.

[Illustration: INTERCOUNTY BRIDGE OVER THE WILLAMETTE AT SALEM. BUILT BY
MARION AND POLK COUNTIES IN 1917 AND 1918. COST $250,000.00. TOTAL
LENGTH 2,220 FEET.]

The work would have then been started by the Highway Department with
State forces, but it was just at this time that the shortage of labor,
materials, transportation facilities, etc., became serious, and the
Federal Government called for curtailment of road construction, and the
Highway Commission was forced to order the discontinuance of preparation
for this paving, as well as for all other proposed work in the State.

Now, that Peace is in sight, there is every reason to believe that the
Highway Commission will order that construction begin on the
Salem-Aurora Paving at the very earliest date, and its completion may be
looked for during the 1919 season.

This paving is to be sixteen feet wide with a two-foot rock shoulder on
each side. The type will depend upon the bids received. The paving will
start about four miles north of the city limits of Salem and extend to
the Marion-Clackamas County Line, just north of Aurora, the total length
being eighteen miles. It is estimated that this work will cost
$360,000.00.


The Salem Bridge

The new bridge over the Willamette River at Salem, designed and built
under the supervision of the State Highway Department, is one of the
largest strictly highway bridges erected in the United States in 1918.
This structure has a total length of 2,220 feet, and consists of 352
feet of reinforced concrete approach on the Marion County end, six steel
spans over the river aggregating 885 lineal feet, and 780 feet of high
class pile trestle approach on the Polk County end.

To provide for the river navigation, the U. S. Engineers required a
minimum horizontal clearance normal to the channel of 120 feet and a
vertical clearance of at least sixty-six feet above low water, in case a
high level type of bridge were adopted. After careful study it was
decided to construct a high level bridge of the deck type, and to carry
the pony channel span on cantilevers projecting from the adjoining
spans, giving an arch effect over the channel. By this type of
construction, a clear distance of about 145 feet between channel piers
was obtained.

To minimize the cost of fabrication and erection of steel, four spans
were made practically the same. The east span was necessarily shorter
than the typical ones, since otherwise it would place the channel
opening too far across the river. This span is not so deep as the
adjoining one, and the difference in height is made up by means of a
rocker under the small span, which, of course, also serves the purpose
of movable shoes. The channel span rests on cast steel rockers on one
end, which are carried by a shelf on the cantilever panel. The opposite
end of the span was pin connected.

Previous to the design of the bridge, wash borings were made, which
indicated in a general way that the bed of the stream was composed of a
few feet of gravel, underlaid with sand for a considerable depth. It was
accordingly decided to carry the foundations down below the probable
point of future scour, and carry the loads entirely upon piling. The two
channel piers were sunk about thirty-five feet below low water.

The west approach is carried on fir piling treated in an open vat with
carbolineum to a temperature of about 220 degrees F.

Lumber being comparatively cheap, the entire roadway deck of the bridge
and wooden approach is composed of fir, three by seven inches and
twenty-six feet long on edge, spiked together, thus projecting a foot
outside the curb on either side, the roadway being twenty-four feet
between curbs. An asphaltic wearing surface three and one-half inches
thick effectively waterproofs the wood, and the small interstices
between the pieces will allow sufficient circulation of air to preclude
any possibility of attack of dry rot. The ends of the floor members were
painted with hot carbolineum, as were also the wooden members contiguous
to openings in the floor occasioned by expansion joints between spans.

The two five-foot concrete sidewalks are carried on brackets beyond the
trusses. The curbs serve as reinforced concrete beams to carry half the
sidewalk load to the trusses, there being small concrete struts
extending up from the top of the top chords at panel and midpanel
points. Between the bottom of the curb and the top of the wooden floor
is a three-quarter-inch cushion of "Sarco." Since the bridge is on a
grade, it was necessary to precast this in sheets the width of the curb.
When the material hardened, it was rolled up in convenient lengths and
placed. It will thus be possible in the future to renew the wooden floor
with comparatively little difficulty, although it is believed that the
wood floor base, protected as it is now, should last at least fifty
years.

On account of the rather extreme length for pony trusses of the channel
span, 123 feet between end pins, it was decided to tie the trusses
together, and this was accomplished by means of two arched lattice
struts placed each twenty feet and six inches from the center of the
span.

A final coat of battleship gray paint was applied to the steel work, and
has evoked considerable favorable comment, being an innovation from the
black paint commonly used in this part of the country.

The bridge was built by the Coast Bridge Company and Robert Wakefield of
Portland. The cost of the structure complete was $250,000.00, of which
Marion County paid approximately $200,000.00 and Polk County $50,000.00.

The engineering cost for the work is remarkably low. It includes
surveys, borings, inspection of cement and steel fabrications, resident
engineer's salary, cost of design, blue prints and supplies and
stenographic work, and amounts to $4,600.00, or about one and
eight-tenths per cent of the total cost.


Surrey--Salem to Jefferson

A reconnaissance between the city limits of Salem and the Linn County
Line (Santiam River) just south of Jefferson, was made in the spring of
1918, and the following facts developed, as regards the comparison of
three possible routes between these points:

  Via Turner and Marion:
    Length, 22.5 miles.
    Railroad grade crossings, 5 with main line of Southern Pacific.
    Bridges, 9.
    Overflow, long stretches.
    Light grades--very little rise and fall.

  Via Liberty and Ankeny Hill:
    Length, 18.6 miles.
    No railroad crossings.
    Bridges, small.
    Undulating steep grades--heavy work to cut to 5 per cent or
      extensive alignment changes involving added distance.
    New right of way required through valuable orchard property.
    Present road macadamized or graveled entire length.

  Jackson Hill Route:
    Length, 17 miles.
    No railroad crossings.
    Bridges, small.
    Five per cent grades.
    Good alignment. Low summit obtained by alignment change going
      to the east of Jackson Hill, involving two miles of new
      construction.
    Right of way required--unimproved except in one instance.
    Direct route.
    Present road macadamized or graveled except for five miles.

A detailed survey was made over this so-called Jackson Hill route, and
its advantages caused the Highway Commission to adopt it as the route of
the Pacific Highway between these points. It is estimated the cost will
be $109,000.00 to complete the subgrade, and it is expected this project
will be commenced in 1919.


MORROW COUNTY

In Morrow County there are found all classes of conditions affecting
roads and highway improvement. In some parts of the County there are
good natural roads, while in other sections they are extremely poor. As
in most other Eastern Oregon Counties, Morrow County has to wrestle with
the problem of maintaining a large road mileage with a constant shortage
of road funds. Highways are of extreme importance, as there are large
agricultural communities that have no railway connections.

During the past two years the highway movement in Morrow County has
experienced a wonderful growth. County authorities have broken the bonds
of established custom, and have made a most creditable beginning in
highway improvement. Although they have been supported by special road
taxes, in most of the districts the available funds are far from
adequate.

The State Highway Commission early realized the importance of good roads
in this County, and took steps to extend the State aid through the Post
Road Fund. The plans failed when the U. S. Office of Public Roads found
it impossible to co-operate on the projects in question. This failure
was due to nonfulfillment of post road requirements. Additional State
aid was extended through the provisions of the $6,000,000.00 fund, but
the execution of these plans were delayed by war conditions. This fund
is still available, and the State Highway Commission will begin work as
soon as conditions will permit.

Morrow County has received favorable consideration from the Highway
Commission in the matter of surveys, it being the only county in Eastern
Oregon in which the total mileage of State roads has been surveyed.
Those surveys cover the Columbia River Highway in the north end of the
County, and the Oregon-Washington Highway via Heppner, Ione and
Lexington.

The Columbia River Highway was first surveyed under the direction of M.
O. Bennett, and later additional work was done by Oscar Cutler. This
survey was 13.85 miles in length. R. H. Baldock was locating engineer on
the Oregon-Washington Highway survey, which has a total length of 66.1
miles.


Heppner Grading--Oregon-Washington Highway

During 1918 Morrow County graded 2.26 miles of standard road adjacent to
the town of Heppner. A 1.82-mile section begins at the west city limits
of Heppner and extends down Willow Creek on the State survey. Another
section extends from the east city limits up Hinton Creek for a distance
of .44 miles.

The County paid the total cost of this improvement which required
$5,689.19. The State Department supplied the engineering supervision for
this work through R. H. Baldock, resident engineer.

Following is a statement of construction quantities:

  HEPPNER EAST

  Common Excavation, 1,190 cu. yds. at. 43            $502.53
  Culverts                                             216.35
                                                      -------
      Total                                          $ 718.88

  HEPPNER WEST

  Common Excavation, 850 cu. yds. at .48             $ 407.01
  Intermediate Excavation, 2,150 cu. yds. at $1.11   2,385.30
  Culverts                                           2,178.00
                                                    ---------
      Total                                        $ 4,970.31


Jones Hill Grading

The 3.22-mile section of the Oregon-Washington Highway known as the
Jones Hill Grade, lies about ten miles east of Heppner, and extends over
the divide between Hinton and Butler Creeks. The State location involved
the construction of an entirely new road. This improvement was paid for
in full by the County, the total cost being $25,050.26.

R. H. Baldock, resident engineer for the State Highway Department, was
the engineer in charge.

Construction quantities are shown in the following statement:

  Rock Excavation, 6,200 cu. yds. at $3.98   $ 18,504.26
  Common Excavation, 7,300 cu. yds. at .59      4,350.00
  Culverts                                      2,200.00
                                              ----------
      Total cost                             $ 25,054.26


Heppner Macadam

After grading the 1.82-mile section of the Oregon-Washington Highway
west of Heppner, and .44 miles east, Morrow County proceeded to surface
with a standard waterbound macadam. This work was done on a force
account basis by the United Contracting Co. and Warren Construction Co.
The work was completed and opened to traffic in July, 1918.

The 2.26 miles of macadam cost the County a total of $19,280.35. A total
of 4,208 cubic yards of rock was placed, making the unit cost $4.56 per
cubic yard. Crushed trap rock was secured from a quarry near the city
limits, and suitable binder material was found near at hand. The
engineer in charge was R. H. Baldock of the State Department.


MULTNOMAH COUNTY

Although the assessed valuation of Multnomah County is more than
thirty-five per cent of the total assessed valuation of the entire
State, this County has renounced all claim to any share of the State
Funds available for road purposes, and will construct and maintain in a
high state of improvement, at its own expense, all State Roads within
its boundaries. This liberal attitude of the people of Multnomah County
is to be commended, and it makes available for expenditure in counties
outside of Multnomah County, a much greater amount of money than would
otherwise be the case.

The roads of Multnomah County represent some of the heaviest grading
construction, some of the best improved and some of the most scenic
highways to be found anywhere in the world. The Upper Columbia River
Highway is by many considered the most scenic highway in the United
States, and attracts a multitude of tourists annually.

An interesting tabulation of the amounts expended by Multnomah County in
the construction of the Columbia River Highway, both above and below
Portland, is appended:


COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY, EAST 82D STREET VIA SANDY ROAD TO HOOD RIVER
COUNTY LINE

  ==============+=====+===========+===========+===========+=============
     Section    |Miles| Pavement  |  Grading  |  Bridges  |    Total
  --------------+-----+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------
  Sandy Road to |10.29|$183,001.41|$  5,000.00|$ 14,845.33|$  202,846.74
    Troutdale   |     |           |           |           |
  Sandy Cut-off | 2.47|  47,506.74|  94,389.04|     ...   |   141,895.78
    to Auto Club|     |           |           |           |
    Bridge      |     |           |           |           |
  Columbia River|26.68| 495,507.75| 601,012.13| 169,586.71| 1,266,106.59
    Highway to  |     |           |           |           |
    County Line |     |           |           |           |
                +-----+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------
  Totals        |39.44|$726,015.90|$700,401.17|$184,432.04|$1,610,849.11
  --------------+-----+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------
  Total Construction Cost                                  $1,610,849.11
  Engineering                                                  72,004.95
                                                           -------------
      Grand Total                                          $1,682,854.06


VISTA HOUSE AT CROWN POINT

  Building                                                    $68,314.36
  Retaining Walls and Pavement                                 30,833.69
                                                              ----------
      Total                                                   $99,148.05


ST. HELENS ROAD, PORTLAND TO COLUMBIA COUNTY LINE LENGTH, 16 MILES

  ===============+==========+==========+===========+==========+===========
                 |   1915   |   1916   |   1917    |   1918   |  Totals
  ---------------+----------+----------+-----------+----------+-----------
  Regrade and    |    ...   |$35,330.82| $16,444.10|    ...   | $51,774.92
    Macadam      |          |          |           |          |
  Hard Surface   |$80,944.11|  4,111.79| 200,047.81| 41,393.37| 326,497.08
  Shoulders      |    ...   |  5,081.80|     ...   |    ...   |   5,031.80
  Drainage       |    ...   |    ...   |   5,022.19|    ...   |   5,022.19
  Bridges        |    ...   | 28,591.39|  14,203.21|    ...   |  42,794.60
  Right of Way   |    ...   |    ...   |   2,538.06|    ...   |   2,538.06
    and Miscel-  |          |          |           |          |
    laneous      |          |          |           |          |
  Engineering,   |  3,500.00|  3,400.00|  16,667.87|  2,000.00|  25,567.87
    Superinten-  |          |          |           |          |
    dence and    |          |          |           |          |
    Overhead     |          |          |           |          |
                 +----------+----------+-----------+----------+-----------
    Total        |$84,444.11|$76,465.80|$254,933.24|$43,393.37|$459,226.52
  ---------------+----------+----------+-----------+----------+-----------


SUMMARY

  Pavement                  $326,497.08
  Bridges                     42,794.60
  Grading                     64,366.97
  Engineering and Overhead    25,567.87
                            -----------
  Grand Total               $459,226.52


POLK COUNTY

The work of the State Highway Department in Polk County during 1917 and
1918 has been confined chiefly to the design and the supervision of
construction of bridges. In addition to the design and supervision of
the Salem Bridge which is partly within Polk County, and which is
described in detail in an article in the chapter devoted to Marion
County, the Department has handled, at the request of the Polk County
Court, the following bridge work, all of which has been paid for by the
County.

Between Monmouth and Dallas a 37 foot reinforced concrete bridge was
built over a slough on the Mulkey Cut-off. This bridge complete cost
$1,898.17.

The Hollingshead Bridge over the Little Luckiamute River south of Dallas
is a 72 foot covered wooden span on concrete piers. This bridge was
built at a cost of $3,615.00.

A 160 foot suspension foot-bridge was built over the Big Luckiamute
River at a cost of $500.00, to accommodate school children attending the
Montgomery School.

The LaCreole Creek Bridge in Dallas is a reinforced concrete arch
structure seventy feet long. This bridge was not designed by the Highway
Department, but the Department supervised its construction. It is a very
pretty structure with sidewalks and lighting fixtures. It was built at a
cost of $10,755.68.


SHERMAN COUNTY

Sherman County is so situated with respect to the State Highway System,
that its boundaries include a comparatively small mileage of State
roads. This however, is no indication of the value improved roads will
be in the County. The situation is of both state wide and local
importance.

This County is found with many miles of good natural road. In addition
they have graded a large mileage and in some localities unusual
attention is given to road maintenance. The County is fairly well
equipped for road work and have plans for quite an extensive program.

State aid in Sherman County thus far has been confined to highway
surveying, but the State Highway Commission has definite plans for
extending aid in the construction of the Deschutes and John Day River
Bridges and the grading of the Columbia River Highway. It is expected
this work will start early the coming season.


The Deschutes River Bridge.

Various attempts have been made by Sherman, Wasco County and the State
to raise funds for the construction of the Deschutes River Bridge on the
Columbia River Highway. Success crowned these efforts recently when a
final agreement was reached between the three.

The total estimated cost of this bridge is between $70,000.00 and
$75,000.00. The State Department plans call for a reinforced concrete
structure about 600 feet in length.

Sherman County has pledged $25,000 towards defraying the cost of the
bridge providing funds are raised for completing same. This condition
has been met by the State Highway Commission and negotiations are
already underway for securing right-of-way. In this connection it is
pertinent to state that Wasco County also has appropriated $25,000.00
for co-operation in this work. The State's share of the cost will be
approximately $25,000.00, according to the present estimate.


Columbia River Highway Survey

During 1918 the State Department made a location survey of the Columbia
River Highway between the Deschutes and John Day Rivers. The line
follows the river canyon through Sherman, Biggs and Rufus. The length of
this survey is 14.66 miles. The field work only has been completed on
this survey and construction plans will be made up soon. C. S. Noble was
the locating engineer for the Department.


John Day Bridge

This inter-county bridge will be located on the Columbia River Highway
across the John Day River, below McDonald, and will obviate the
necessity for the toll ferry at McDonald.

As designed, the crossing calls for 2-123 foot wooden deck spans on
concrete piers and about 120 feet of high class wooden approach and 100
feet of fill. The cost, which is estimated to be $20,000.00, will be
borne by Sherman and Gilliam Counties, and the State, and it is probable
that construction work will start next spring.


TILLAMOOK COUNTY


Paving--Tillamook South

A contract was awarded on August 7, 1917, to Oskar Huber of Portland for
the grading and paving of a five mile section extending south from the
end of the paving then in place about three miles south of Tillamook
City.

The old road which this paving was to follow in a general way contained
many sharp curves and had a roadbed not eighteen feet wide on the
average. On this was a light surfacing of gravel and rock macadam about
twelve feet in width. The roadbed was widened to a twenty-four foot
width, all excessively sharp curves were eliminated, and all wooden
culverts, trestles, and bridges were replaced with modern concrete
structures, and the decking on two steel bridges renewed and paved.

As there is available in this vicinity no ledge rock, it was found
necessary to haul and crush large boulders from the creek bed to provide
the necessary rock for the base and mixture. Some sand was obtained
locally, but most of it had to be shipped in from Portland and hauled to
the work from Tillamook.

The job was completed by December 15th of this year, and on account of
the unusually bad conditions faced by the contractor as regards labor
and materials, Mr. Huber is to be commended for the prompt completion of
the work as well as for the excellence of construction.

By an arrangement between the County and the Highway Commission the
County pays for all grading in connection with this improvement and also
for twenty-five per cent of the cost of the paving. The total cost of
the grading and paving complete is $109,250.00 of which the County will
pay $34,325.00 and the State $74,925.00.

Mr. C. W. Wanzer was in charge of this work as resident engineer.


DETAILED STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918--GRADING AND
PAVING--TILLAMOOK SECTION

  Engineering                                                     $6,391.47
  Contract Construction Work as follows--
    Common Excavation, 10,835.3 Cu. Yds. at 60c      $6,501.18
    Intermediate Excavation, 1,959.5 Cu. Yds. at
      90c                                             1,763.55
    Overhaul, per 100 Lin. ft., 6,314.8 Cu. Yds.
      at 2c                                             126.30
    12-inch Reinf. Conc. Pipe (Placing only) 84
      Lin. ft. at 48c                                    40.32
    18-inch Reinf. Conc. Pipe (Placing only) 607
      Lin. ft. at 78c                                   473.46
    24-inch Reinf. Conc. Pipe (Placing only) 384
      Lin. ft. at $1.16                                 445.44
    36-inch Reinf. Conc. Pipe (Placing only) 64
      Lin. ft. at $1.80                                 115.20
    Clearing and Grubbing (Force Account)               543.75
    Moving Fences (Force Account)                         4.00
    Standard Bitulithic Pavement, 47,555.5 Sq. Yds.
      at $1.42                                       67,528.81
    Broken Stone Loose measure, 8,840 Cu. Yds. at
      $2.20                                          19,448.00
    Crushed Stone Shoulders, 7,466 Lin. ft. at 6c       447.96
                                                    ----------
      Total Amount Earned by Contractors to Nov. 30,
        1918                                         97,437.97
      Less 15% retained pending completion           14,615.69
                                                    ----------
  Total Payments to Contractor to November 30, 1918               82,822.28
                                                                 ----------
  Total Expenditure to November 30, 1918                          89,213.75

    Paid by State                                    63,203.90
    Paid by County                                   26,009.85
                                                    ----------
      Total                                         $89,213.75


Three Rivers Forest Project

A Federal Aid Forest Road Project is now under construction between Hebo
and Dolph in Tillamook County. This project is 10.3 miles in length,
includes grading and nine foot rock surfacing, and is estimated to cost
$122,000.00 of which $21,500.00 will be paid by the County, $50,250.00
by the State, and $50,250.00 by the Federal Government.

This work is handled under the supervision of Federal Office of Public
Roads. The contract was awarded to the Tillamook County Court, but the
State's Attorney General ruled that the Court had no authority which
would allow them to contract to do work of this nature. To facilitate
matters the Highway Commission took the contract over from the County,
and the work is now in progress, the Highway Department acting as
contractors and being paid for the work at the unit prices originally
bid by Tillamook County.

It was so late in the year when this work was taken over by the State
that little work can be done until the 1919 season. Work is in progress,
however, on camp construction, clearing, and such other portions of the
work as can be done during the winter months.

Mr. J. M. Baker is superintendent of construction on this work.


Tillamook-Cloverdale Survey

On the Tillamook-Cloverdale road a preliminary survey has been completed
from Tillamook to Hebo, a distance of 18 miles, and of this about nine
miles have been located. This is a very important section as it is the
most direct route from the Willamette Valley to the beaches of Tillamook
County, and is not served with a railroad. The engineer in charge of
this work was Mr. C. A. Dunn.


UMATILLA COUNTY

The highway problem of Umatilla County is of greater magnitude than it
would seem to be at first consideration. The fact that the County is
well supplied with rail transportation only renders the demand for
highways more urgent. Soil conditions are generally unfavorable for good
natural roads although gravel deposits suitable for highway construction
are found in most localities.

The County has made constant efforts towards an improved system of
roads, but with 3,000 miles of county roads to care for and with
considerable bridge work in the program, the available funds are found
to be entirely inadequate. The main roads or trunk highways through the
County have had the benefit of a large percentage of local funds but
owing to a large mileage and character of improvement necessary, there
remains a great deal yet to be done.

When the State of Oregon voted to expend $6,000,000.00 in surfacing
roads constructed by the counties, Umatilla County was among the first
to take advantage of the State aid. The State Highway Commission
extended additional aid through the Post Road Fund, but these plans were
later cancelled owing to requirements of the U. S. Office of Public
Roads.

The State Highway Department has surveyed the Old Oregon Trail for the
entire distance across the County and 42.2 miles of the
Oregon-Washington Highway have been surveyed. In addition a considerable
mileage of reconnaissance surveys have been made preliminary to definite
location.

In 1917 and 1918 the State Highway Department expended $162,625.56 in
constructing eleven miles of pavement near Pendleton. The cost of
maintenance on this road has been divided equally between the State and
County.

Funds were set aside by the State Highway Commission in 1917 to
macadamize the 40 mile section of Old Oregon Trail from Pendleton west
to the Morrow County line. War conditions caused a postponement of this
improvement. The funds are still intact and work will proceed as soon as
conditions will permit. Following are statements showing amounts of
State funds expended in Umatilla County and funds appropriated to be
expended in 1919.

  Expended in 1917 and 1918 for paving on Wild Horse Road and
    Pendleton-Reith Section                                    $162,626.56
  Appropriated to be expended in 1919 on macadamizing Old
    Oregon Trail from Pendleton to Morrow County line near
    Umatilla                                                    180,000.00


Wild Horse Paving

The State Highway Commission on June 29, 1917, let a contract to the
Warren Construction Company for paving a ten mile section of the Wild
Horse Road northeast of Pendleton and one mile of the Old Oregon Trail
leading west from Pendleton. The pavement laid was bitulithic and the
subgrade was an old macadam road built by the County. The macadam road
was of insufficient width for supporting a 16 foot pavement, which
condition required widening of the grade, re-ditching and the placing of
extra crushed rock for base.

The widening of the road bed was done with County funds expended under
the direction of the State Highway Department. The work of widening the
grade cost the County, $9,975.00 for the 11 miles.

[Illustration: ON THE PAVED ROAD BETWEEN PENDLETON AND ADAMS IN UMATILLA
COUNTY. PAVED IN 1917]

Paving work begun in July, 1917, and an excellent pavement of the
standard two-inch bitulithic type was secured, with a six inch crushed
rock base. The total cost of this work was $162,626.56 or $14,784.22 per
mile. M. O. Bennett was the engineer in charge and Chas. Noble was the
inspector on this work. Following is a detailed cost statement:

DETAILED COST STATEMENT--WILD HORSE PAVING

  Standard Bitulithic Pavement, 103,543.79 sq. yds. at $1.29   $133,571.49
  Broken Stone loose measure. 10,994.8 cu. yds. at $1.87         20,560.28
  Crushed stone. 115,600 lin. ft. at 5c                           5,780.00
  Extra work on road approaches                                     104.91
                                                              ------------
                                                               $160,016.68
  Engineering and Inspection                                      2,609.88
                                                              ------------
      Total                                                    $162,626.56


Wild Horse Grading

When plans were made in 1917 for the Wild Horse paving. 16 feet was the
width decided upon. Upon investigation it was found this would require
widening of the old road bed from one foot to five feet, re-ditching for
a large part of the 10 miles and the replacing of several culverts.

This work was done under the direction of the State Highway Department
and the entire cost was defrayed from County funds. The total cost to
the County was $9,975.00. Oscar Cutler of the State Highway Department
was resident engineer in charge.


Pendleton-Pilot Rock Section--Grading and Macadamizing

Upon the completion of the survey by the State Highway Department of the
section of the Oregon-Washington Highway between Pendleton and Pilot
Rock, the Umatilla County Court started grading. Where the construction
is light the road grader was used to great advantage. Through the aid of
the Division Office of the State Department new right-of-way was secured
in some places and the alignment of the road naturally improved.

During September and October, 1918, the section between Pendleton and
the County Poor Farm was graded and macadamized on a six per cent
development over Grave Yard Hill. This work, both grading and
macadamizing is of excellent character and will soon be opened to
traffic. W. C. Crews, engineer for the State Department made the
relocation on this section and was resident engineer during
construction. The following is a statement showing quantities and total
and unit costs:

  Item and quantity          Total cost   Unit cost
  Excavation, 4,795 cu. yds   $3,164.70       $ .66
  Gravel, 2,000 cu. yds        2,600.00        1.30
  Concrete Bridge              1,600.00
                             ----------
      Total cost              $7,364.70

An additional four miles from the County Poor Farm south was graveled by
the County with an expenditure of $2,000.00.


Survey of Columbia River Highway and Old Oregon Trail

During 1917 and 1918 the State Highway Department made a location survey
over the entire east and west route across Umatilla County, excepting
the six mile section between Pendleton and the Indian Agency. On this
six miles a base line survey only was made.

The section of this road between the Morrow County Line and Pendleton is
a part of the Columbia River Highway and has a total length of 40.5
miles. It passes through Umatilla, Hermiston, Stanfield, Echo and Reith.
From Pendleton east the road is known as the Old Oregon Trail.

The survey in the east end of the County begins at the Umatilla Indian
Agency, follows the general direction of the present road up Cabbage
Hill, passes through Meacham and ends at the Union County Line near
Kamela. A five per cent grade was secured on the Cabbage Hill climb. The
total length of this section is 26.8 miles. R. H. Baldock and Oscar
Cutler were the locating engineers on this work. The plans for this
survey are practically complete.


Survey of Oregon-Washington Highway

The State survey of the Oregon and Washington Highway extends from the
end of the pavement ten miles northeast of Pendleton, through Pendleton,
and Pilot Rock to the Morrow County Line west of Butter Creek. This
survey was made in 1917 and a section south of Pendleton was relocated
in 1918. The total length of this line is 42.2 miles. R. H. Baldock and
Oscar Cutler were the locating engineers on this work and the revision
was made under the direction of W. C. Crews.


UNION COUNTY

In the matter of highway improvement Union County has shown considerable
progress. Substantial road building machinery is owned by the County in
units sufficient to allow work to proceed simultaneously in various
sections of the County. It is noticeable however that most of their work
has been done (and justifiably so) on local and feeder roads rather than
on trunk highways. Local funds and equipment are inadequate to make all
the improvements needed when the mountainous sections of the main roads
are considered.

As in other counties the State Highway Commission easily recognized the
necessity and importance of co-operation and accordingly in 1917 plans
were laid and steps taken to extend State and Federal Aid.

During 1917 and 1918 a total of 83.54 miles of survey was made on the
two principal roads of the County. 45.26 miles on the Old Oregon Trail
and 38.28 miles on the La Grande-Joseph Highway.

Agreements were signed by the Secretary of Agriculture providing for
co-operation with the State on equal basis, for the grading of a six
mile section between Union and Telocaset and a 9.37 mile section between
Elgin and Minam. The respective amounts expended on each of these
projects to the date of this report, November 30, 1918, are: $16,642.29
and $3,838.44. State funds amounting to $5,000.00 have been expended for
grading in cooperation with the County on the La Grande-Hot Lake
Section. This road is 7.95 miles in length and involves the opening of a
new road for the entire distance. The State Highway Commission has set
aside funds for graveling this section preparatory to surfacing. The
completion of these three projects will require approximately $66,737.06
from the State, $35,575.50 from the Federal Government, and $3,000 from
the County.

The following summary shows for each project amounts expended to date
and funds set aside to be expended during 1919:


EXPENDED IN 1917 AND 1918

  ===================+==========+=========+==========+==========
                     |   State  | County  |Government|  Total
                     |   Funds  |  Funds  |   Funds  |
  -------------------+----------+---------+----------+----------
  Union Telocaset    |$16,642.29|   ...   |    ...   |$16,642.29
  Elgin-Minam        |  3,838.44|   ...   |    ...   |  3,838.44
  La Grande-Hot Lake |  5,000.00| 3,000.00|    ...   |  8,000.00
  -------------------+----------+---------+----------+----------
      Total          |$25,480.73|$3,000.00|    ...   |$28,480.73
  -------------------+----------+---------+----------+----------


APPROPRIATED FOR EXPENDITURE IN 1919

  ===================+==========+=========+==========+==========
                     |   State  |  County |Government|   Total
                     |   Funds  |   Funds |   Funds  |
  -------------------+----------+---------+----------+-----------
  Union Telocaset    |    ...   |   ...   |$15,000.00| $15,000.00
  Elgin-Minam        |$16,737.06|   ...   | 20,575.50|  37,312.56
  La Grande-Hot Lake | 50,000.00|$3,000.00|    ...   |  53,000.00
  -------------------+----------+---------+----------+-----------
     Total           |$66,737.06|$3,000.00|$35,575.50|$105,312.56
  -------------------+----------+---------+----------+-----------

The absence of figures in the column headed "County funds" in the above
tabulation is explained by the fact that Union County, in the matter of
co-operation, has agreed to expend certain sums on other roads than
those mentioned in the table. The County's appropriation for the
improvement of the La Grande-Kamela section of the Old Oregon Trail is
$40,000.00 and $10,000.00 additional has been stipulated for use in
improving the Elgin-Willow Creek Section of the La Grande-Joseph
Highway. The County has also provided funds for the completion of the
grading between La Grande and Hot Lake.


Union-Telocaset Section Grading

In August, 1918, the State Highway Commission called for bids on the
grading of a six mile section between Union and Telocaset. The Union
County Court was the successful bidder and the Commission awarded the
contract but it later developed that the County could not legally hold
the position of contractor in doing State work. As the other bids were
unsatisfactory the situation resulted in the State taking over the work
and doing it with the State forces, and by November 30, the project was
about 60% complete. The total estimated cost of this work is $30,000.00
and $16,642.29 has been expended to date. Mr. R. A. Pratt is resident
engineer in charge.


Elgin-Minam Section

The State Highway Commission opened bids on the grading of a 9.37 mile
section between Elgin and Minam Hill. In the letting of this work they
experienced the same difficulty as with the Union-Telocaset work. (See
report on the Union-Telocaset grading). The subsequent action of the
State Highway Commission in taking the contract over to be done by State
forces resulted in work starting in August, 1918. Owing to weather and
soil conditions work on this section has closed down for the winter. The
amount expended is $3,838.44 and the total estimated cost is $41,151.00.
Mr. R. A. Pratt, resident engineer for the State Highway Department was
in charge of this work and Mr. C. A. Dunn was superintendent.


La Grande-Hot Lake Grading

In November, 1917, the State Highway Department appropriated $5,000.00
to co-operate on the grading of that section of the Old Oregon Trail
between Hot Lake and La Grande. Grading work started within the month
and two miles were graded when work was closed for the winter.

This work was continued during the present season and up to November 30,
about five miles of grade had been completed. In addition to the
$5,000.00 of State money the County has expended about $3,000.00. It
will require about $3,000.00 to complete the grading and an additional
$5,500.00 for bridges. The bridge plans call for concrete structures.


Survey of the Old Oregon Trail, Union County

The State Highway Department has made a location survey of 45.26 miles
of the Old Oregon Trail in Union County. The survey begins at the
Union-Umatilla County Line near Kamela and continues through La Grande,
Hot Lake and Union and ends at Telocaset. Office plans are complete for
most of this work. Locating engineer D. D. Glass made the survey from La
Grande to Telocaset and R. H. Baldock, locating engineer, was in charge
of the work between Kamela and La Grande.


Survey of La Grande-Joseph Highway, Union County

In 1917 a final location survey was made from La Grande to Minam, a
distance of 38.28 miles. D. G. Glass, locating engineer for the State
Department, was in charge of the crews. Beginning at La Grande the line
runs through Island City, and Elgin and ends at Minam at the confluence
of the Minam and Wallowa Rivers. Plans for this work are practically
complete. The location from Island City to Elgin is to be reconsidered
with the view of making some changes in the route.

[Illustration: A SURVEY CAMP IN EASTERN OREGON]


Union-Telocaset Post Road Project

A co-operative agreement between the State and Government provides for
the construction of a portion of the Old Oregon Trail between Union and
Telocaset. This section, six miles in length, begins at Union and
follows up Pyles Canyon near the location of the present road to a point
1.5 miles north of Telocaset.

The total estimated cost of this project is $30,000.00 making $15,000.00
to be paid by each the State and Government. Union County joins in the
co-operation of the work, in case the total cost exceeds the amount
stipulated in the Federal agreement. If the total cost should exceed the
estimate given in the project agreement, the County agrees to pay the
full amount of such cost.

Work was started on this section August, 1918, and $20,575.50 had been
expended to November 30. R. A. Pratt is resident engineer for the
Department. The work is being done by the State forces under the
supervision of C. A. Dunn, assistant engineer.


Elgin-Minam Post Road Project

The State Highway Commission secured an agreement with the U. S. Office
of Public Roads providing for the construction of a 9.37 mile section of
the La Grande-Joseph Highway. The survey for this improvement begins at
Elgin and follows east in the direction of the present road to the top
of Minam Hill.

It is estimated that this work will cost $41,151.00 or $20,575.50 for
each the State and Government. In case the cost of this work exceeds the
estimate shown in the project agreement, the County agrees to pay such
cost. In this manner Union County is co-operating in this improvement.

Work opened up here in August under the supervision of C. A. Dunn,
assistant engineer, for the Department. State forces are employed on
force account basis. The expenditures to November 30 amount to
$3,838.44, and the project is about 10% completed. R. A. Pratt is
resident engineer for the State Department.


WALLOWA COUNTY

Wallowa County's road problem is entirely local in character as this
district is not touched by a trunk road of the State system. Some very
good natural roads are found in this district, while others are very
bad. The latter designation applies more especially to some of the
mountain roads, which are extremely narrow and very dangerous.

The La Grande-Joseph Highway is very important locally, since it is the
only road connecting the valley with outside points. The people in
general are very much interested in highway possibilities, but the
County funds have proven inadequate to make much of a showing towards
permanent work. Most of the available County funds are required for
maintenance of the existing roads, many of which extend through
mountainous areas. Additional State aid is much needed if any
substantial improvements are hoped for.

A general reconnaissance survey was made in October, 1918, by the State
Highway Department from Elgin to Joseph. The purpose was to gather
general information for the use of the State Highway Commission. This
survey was made by M. O. Bennett, division engineer for Eastern Oregon.

During this visit the matter of Post Road Aid was taken up with the
County authorities. It was understood that the County would make
application at once, but it appears that no further action was taken.

The State Highway Commission has extended aid to Wallowa County by
co-operating on the Flora-Enterprise Forest Road and also helped to
secure Government aid on the same project. The County made an
appropriation to help in the construction of this road. Work is in
progress on this road under the direction of the U. S. Office of Public
Roads. The following statement shows the estimate cost and segregation
of funds:

  State appropriation     $12,324.00
  Federal appropriation    12,324.00
  County appropriation      5,000.00
                          ----------
  Total estimated cost    $29,648.00


WASCO COUNTY


The Dalles-Three Mile Post Road Project

An appropriation has been made, by the State Highway Department, from
the Post Road Fund for co-operation in the paving of a two mile section
of The Dalles-California Highway between the east city limits of The
Dalles and Three Mile Creek.

A project statement has been prepared, requesting $14,830.00 from the U.
S. Office of Public Roads. The State will supply a like amount and Wasco
County $4,000.00. This makes a total of $33,660.00 which is the
estimated cost of the project.

The present gravel road will serve as a base for the pavement which is
to be 16 feet wide. The improvement will include re-ditching of the road
bed and the installation of culvert pipe in several places.

It is planned that work will start early in 1910.


The Pine Hollow-Kingsley Post Road Project

The section of The Dalles-California Highway in Wasco County between
Pine Hollow, near Dufur, and Kingsley is designated by the State Highway
Commission as a Post Road. This section is 4.0 miles long and follows
near the line of the present road. The project begins at the road forks
21/4 miles south of Dufur and ends at a point on the present road 11/2 miles
north of Kingsley.

The plans provide for the grading of the road bed, the estimated cost of
which is $14,500. The State and Government are each requested to
appropriate $2,500.00 and the County will expend $9,500.00. It is
expected this work will be done in 1919.


Antelope Grade Post Road Project

The State Highway Commission has designated as a Post Road a three mile
section of The Dalles-California Highway immediately north of Antelope.
This is known as the Antelope Grade Section. The new road will be a 6%
grade along near the present road.

The total estimated cost of grading to standard width and properly
draining is $30,000.00; and the funds are to be provided as follows:
State $2,500.00; Government, $2,500.00; and Wasco County, $25,000.00.

It is hoped this work will start early in 1919.


Survey--Seufert to the Deschutes River

A survey was made in April, 1918, for the Columbia River Highway between
Seufert and the Deschutes River, along the river for the purpose of
comparison with a previous survey over the hill, conforming closely to
the present road.

This route, which was subsequently adopted, has a summit of 210 feet
against 780 feet on the hill route, and a length of 12.8 miles, a saving
of 2.7 miles in distance. Between The Dalles and Seufert about two miles
was graded to standard width and grade in 1917. The proposed route
follows close to the railroad, which is crossed near Big Eddy on a
proposed overhead bridge and utilizes the old State Portage Railroad
roadbed, as well as the already graded bank of the Government canal.
Near Celilo, another overhead crossing of the O.-W. R. R. & N. Co.
tracks is proposed, and from this point to the Deschutes River the
highway is located between the Oregon Trunk Railroad and the O.-W. R. R.
& N. Co., using about two miles of abandoned railroad roadbed.

This improvement requires only very light construction, except for short
distances, and it is believed it can be kept free from drifting blow
sand by the use of sand fences, as the Portage Railroad is used where
the sand is the worst, and this was kept open with very little
maintenance. With a smooth roadbed, and with nothing to cause drifting,
it is thought that the maintenance on this account will be negligible.

The route is attractive, as it makes available at close range the Locks
at Big Eddy, the Celilo Canal, and the magnificent Celilo Falls. The
estimated cost of this project is $142,500.00. It is proposed to include
this project in the 1919 program.


Deschutes River Bridge.

Among the bridges expected to be built in the near future is the
proposed reinforced concrete arch bridge over the Deschutes river at
Miller, about a mile above the river's mouth. This will be a State and
Inter-county structure, and will connect Sherman and Gilliam Counties on
the Columbia River Highway, and will be located a few hundred feet below
the present old wooden toll bridge which it will replace.

The design, which is practically completed, contemplates seven arch
spans aggregating 580 feet in length with a filled approach at either
end. The estimated cost of the bridge is $75,000.00.


WASHINGTON COUNTY

During 1917 and 1918, the State Highway Department in co-operation with
Washington County has completed the grading, bridging and paving of the
West Side Highway across that County. This work has involved the grading
and paving of 12.5 miles and the construction of three bridges and one
undergrade railway crossing. On this work, when final payments are
complete, the State will have expended $292,000.00 and the County will
have expended $10,000.00.

In addition to this construction, the Department has made surveys
between Beaverton and Hillsboro and between Forest Grove and Gaston, and
has furnished the County engineering services in connection with the
grading of these two sections.


Paving--Multnomah County Line to Newberg

The pavement on the West Side State Highway between the Multnomah County
Line and Newberg is 15.7 miles in length, of which 12.5 miles is in
Washington County and 3.2 miles in Yamhill County. This pavement is a
two-inch standard bitulithic surface on a crushed rock base. It is
sixteen feet wide with a two-foot macadam shoulder on each side. The
grading in Washington County and the paving in both Washington and
Yamhill Counties was done by Oskar Huber of Portland under a contract
awarded him on July 30, 1917. The work was started in August, 1917, and
was completed in October, 1918.

[Illustration: COVERED WOOD BRIDGE OVER THE TUALATIN RIVER ON THE WEST
SIDE HIGHWAY IN WASHINGTON COUNTY. BUILT IN 1918]

The grading in Washington County will cost complete approximately
$39,699.85 of which Washington County has paid $9,395.00. The part of
the paving within Washington County will cost complete $234,750.00 all
of which is paid for from State Funds.


DETAILED STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES TO NOVEMBER 30, 1918 GRADING AND
PAVING MULTNOMAH COUNTY LINE TO NEWBERG

  Engineering                                                   $  9,445.56
  Right-of-Way Costs                                                  49.98
  Construction:
    Crushed Stone Shoulders, 163,663.4 lin. ft.
      @ .06                                        $  9,819.80
    Standard Bitulithic Pavement, 149,764.4 Sq.
      Yds. @ $1.28                                  191,698.43
    Broken Stone, Loose Measure, 34,885.75 Cu.
      Yds. at $2.40                                  83,725.80
    Clearing and Grubbing                             1,250.00
    Common Excavation, 46,773.9 Cu. Yds. @ .34       15,903.13
    Intermediate Excavation, 9,224.4 Cu. Yds. @ .62   5,719.13
    Solid Rock Excavation, 385 Cu. Yds. @ $1.15         442.75
    Overhaul per 100 Lin. Ft., 172,279.2 Cu. Yds.
      @ .01                                           1,722.79
    12-inch Reinf. Conc. Pipe, 1,568 Lin. Ft.
      @ $1.25                                         1,960.00
    24-inch Reinf. Conc. Pipe, 52 Lin. Ft. @ $2.45      127.40
    36-inch Reinf. Conc. Pipe, 96 Lin. Ft. @ $4.25      408.00
    6-inch Porous Drain Tile, 7,191 Lin. Ft. @ .15    1,078.65
    Rip-Rap, 32 Cu. Yds @ $2.75                          88.00
  Force Account:
    Lowering and lengthening existing culverts        1,081.67
    Replacing bridge approach at Tualatin River          50.27
    Special wide ditches alongside road near Four
      Corners                                           814.50
    Back-fill and planking at Onion Flat Trestle        405.94
    Tearing down old trestles at Onion Flat              55.33
    Replacing private water supply crossing              13.31
    Rebuilding Right of Way Fences                       70.85
    Grading at Middleton R. R. Crossing               1,970.47
    Blind Drains                                        189.68
    New 30-foot Culvert                                 223.60
    New 42-foot Culvert and special fill over it        468.26
    Drain Tiling, back-filled with rock                 582.09
                                                   -----------
      Total amount earned by Contractor to Nov.
        30, 1918                                   $319,869.85
  Less amount retained pending completion of
    contract                                         50,388.46
                                                   -----------
      Total paid contractor to November 30, 1918                 269,481.39
                                                                -----------
  Total expended to November 30, 1918                           $278,976.93


Onion Flat Bridge

This crossing consists of a laminated wood deck on heavy stringers
supported by a series of creosoted pile bents. It is on the West Side
Highway about four miles southwest of Tigard and is designed for heavy
traffic loading.

An asphaltic wearing surface prevents moisture coming in contact with
the wooden floor and with the treated piling tends to give the maximum
length of life to the main members of the structure. This bridge is 600
feet long and cost complete $8,372.22.


Fanno Creek Bridge

The Fanno Creek bridge at Tigard on the West Side Highway consists of a
superstructure similar to the Onion Flat bridge, carried on wood bents
on concrete foundations. A sidewalk was built on one side to accommodate
pedestrians. The bridge is 70 feet long and cost $1,882.81.


Tualatin River Bridge

The bridge consists of a covered Howe truss wooden bridge of 144 foot
span and 166 lineal feet of pile trestle approach.

Like the others constructed by the State on main highways, this bridge
is of heavy traffic design, and the bridge and approaches have laminated
wood floors with asphaltic wearing surfaces. Windows are provided at
panel points to provide light and to add to the appearance of the
structure. Cost $12,968.60.


Votaw Undercrossing

A grade separation was made on the West Side Highway near Votaw, wherein
a wooden trestle was constructed to carry the Southern Pacific line
above the roadway. The structure was designed and built under the
supervision of the railroad's engineering department.

Final settlement has not yet been made with the Railway Company, but it
is estimated that the State's share of the cost of this structure will
be $4,000.00. The balance of the cost will be paid by the Railway
Company, no share of the cost being borne by the County.


Survey--Beaverton to Hillsboro

A location survey was started January 1, 1918, from the West City limits
of Beaverton and completed to the city limits of Hillsboro, a distance
of 7.7 miles. The alignment parallels the Southern Pacific Railway on
the north side of the tracks and eliminates four grade crossings. The
entire section was graded by Washington County during the 1918 season.


Survey--Forest Grove to Gaston

A survey was made from Forest Grove to Gaston, a distance of
approximately 6 miles. The alignment follows the existing road with the
exception of a change at Dilley to eliminate two railroad crossings.

Considerable grading was done between Dilley and Gaston, reducing the
grade to five per cent.

Mr. C. G. Reiter, County Surveyor of Washington County, was employed as
locating engineer for the State, and also supervised the grading in both
of the above sections.


WHEELER COUNTY

Wheeler County, being without either rail or water transportation
facilities, is entirely dependent upon its roads for communication with
outside points, as well as between points within the County. All of the
large amount of agricultural products of the county must be transported
for long distances over roads and highways, and likewise, all
manufactured articles and other supplies from points without the County
must be brought in over them. For that reason, good roads are of the
utmost importance to all of Wheeler County, which fact is fully
recognized by the Wheeler County people.

Every effort is being made by the County to build up and improve its
road system, but the funds available within the County are entirely
inadequate. In November, 1916, bonds were voted to the amount of
$80,000.00, the maximum allowed the County under the State laws, but
this amount is hardly enough to make a beginning on the necessary road
construction in the county, as Wheeler County is rough and mountainous,
and road construction is therefore heavy and expensive.

The State Highway Commission realizing the importance of the
construction of roads in this County, and the impossibility of the
financing of their construction by the County alone, early determined to
assist to the greatest possible extent.

Surveys have been made by the Department over all but two miles of the
two most important cross-county roads, the John Day River Highway and
the McKenzie River Highway. During 1917 and 1918 the State Highway
Department expended the sum of $46,997.79, cooperating with the County
in the construction of 4.2 miles of grading and macadamizing between
Fossil and the Gilliam County Line. State aid was also granted the
County to the amount of $14,235.45 for the construction of nine-tenths
of a mile, known as the Bridge Creek Section, on the McKenzie River
Highway just west of Mitchell, the total cost of which was $24,235.45.

For the construction of 25.5 miles on the John Day River Highway between
the mouth of Sarvice Creek and the Grant County Line, the Highway
Department has set aside the sum of $63,345.70 to be added to 63,345.70
of Federal Post Road Funds and $36,000.00 of county funds to provide the
total amount of $162,691.40 which the project is estimated to cost.

The Department has further been instrumental in securing Federal Aid for
the construction of a Forest Road Project 5.5 miles in length between
Mitchell and the Crook County Line, known as the Ochoco Canyon Project.
On this project the State will expend $20,050.00, the Federal
Government, $20,050.00 and the County, $4,900.00, $45,000.00 in all.

In summary, State Aid and Federal Government Aid extended to Wheeler
County during 1917 and 1918 and set aside to be expended in 1919 and
1920, are as follows:

  =========================+==========+===========+==========+===========
                           |          |           | Federal  |
                           |  State   |  County   |  Govt.   |   Total
                           |  Funds   |  Funds    |  Funds   |
  -------------------------+----------+-----------+----------+-----------
  Expended in 1917 and     |          |           |          |
    1918--                 |          |           |          |
  On grading Cummings Hill |$ 7,004.85|$  7,527.50|    ...   |$ 14,532.35
    Sec.                   |          |           |          |
  On macadamizing Cummings | 32,465.44|     ...   |    ...   |  32,465.44
    Hill Section           |          |           |          |
  On grading Bridge Creek  | 14,235.45|  10,000.00|    ...   |  24,235.45
    Sec.                   |          |           |          |
  -------------------------+----------+-----------+----------+-----------
      Total                |$53,705.74| $17,527.50|    ...   |$ 71,233.24
                           |          |           |          |
  Appropriated for Expen-  |          |           |          |
    diture in 1919 and     |          |           |          |
    1920--                 |          |           |          |
  On Sarvis Creek-Grant    |$63,345.70| $36,000.00|$63,345.70|$162,691.40
    County Line Section    |          |           |          |
  On Ochoco Canyon Section | 20,050.00|   4,900.00| 20,050.00|  45,000.00
  -------------------------+----------+-----------+----------+-----------
      Total                |$83,395.70| $40,900.00|$83,395.70|$207,691.40
  -------------------------+----------+-----------+----------+----------


Cummings Hill Grading

On June 19th 1917, a contract was let to the Elliott Contracting Co. of
Portland, Oregon, for the construction of 3.5 miles of grade between the
foot of Cummings Hill, north of Fossil, and the Gilliam County line.
This construction was a five per cent development to eliminate the heavy
grades and narrow roadbed of the former road. Work was commenced on
July 6th, 1917, and completed on October 5th, 1917. The work of the
contracting firm was very satisfactory, and an excellent piece of
grading was secured. The Engineer in charge for the Highway Department
was Mr. B. H. McNamee.

The total cost of the work was $14,532.35, of which the State paid
$7,004.85 and Wheeler County $7,527.50. The detailed cost statement
follows:


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING CUMMINGS HILL, SECTION

  Engineering                                                    $ 1,423.30
  Construction:
    Common Excavation, 11,397 cu. yds. @ .40        $ 4,558.80
    Intermediate Excavation, 6,017.4 cu. yds. @ .70   4,212.18
    Solid Rock Excavation, 2,816.5 cu. yds. @ 1.35    3,802.27
    12-inch Corr. Iron Pipe, 682 Lin. ft. @ .40         272.80
    24-inch Corr. Iron Pipe, 40 Lin. ft. @ 1.00          40.00
    Rubble Masonry, 22.3 cu. yds @ 10.00                223.00
                                                    ----------
                                                                  13,109.05
                                                                 ----------
                                                                 $14,532.35


Bridge Creek Grading

The grading of a nine-tenth mile section in Bridge Creek Canyon was
contracted to the United Contracting Co. of Portland, Oregon, on
November 27th, 1917. This section is on the McKenzie River Highway about
four miles west of Mitchell. In addition to the grading, the contract
involved the construction of a ninety foot bridge over Bridge Creek.

The work was started on February 15th, 1918 and completed on June 20th,
1918. The engineering was in charge of Mr. R. H. Coppock.

The total cost of the work was $24,235.45 of which the State paid
$14,235.45 and Wheeler County $10,000. The detailed cost statement
follows:


DETAILED EXPENDITURE STATEMENT--GRADING BRIDGE CREEK SECTION

  Engineering                                                      $ 635.30
  Construction:
    Common Excavation, 3935.6 cu. yds. @ .60        $ 2,361.42
    Intermediate Excavation, 549.4 cu. yds. @ .75       412.05
    Solid Rock Excavation, 9837.6 cu. yds. @ 1.40    13,772.64
    Overhaul per 100 lin. ft., 363 cu. yds. @ .03        10.89
    12-inch Corr. Iron Pipe, 20 lin. ft. @ .73           14.60
    15-inch Corr. Iron Pipe, 108 lin. ft. @ .83          89.64
    21-inch Corr. Iron Pipe, 60 lin. ft. @ 1.00          60.00
    Rubble Masonry, 1.58 cu. yd. @ 12.50                 19.75
    Guard fence, 100 lin. ft. @ .85                      85.00
    1 90-foot Bridge & approaches:
      Superstructure and trestle (Lump
        sum)                              $ 5,100.00
      Class "A" Concrete in piers, 49.24
        cu. yds. @ $34.00                   1,674.16
                                          ----------
                                                    $ 6,774.16
                                                    ----------
                                                                $ 23,600.15
                                                                -----------
                                                                $ 24,235.45


Macadamizing on Cummins Hill Section

On August 7th, 1917, no satisfactory unit price bid having been
received, the State Highway Department entered into a "cost plus"
contract with the Warren Construction Company of Portland, Oregon, to
macadamize with broken stone the Cummins Hill Section between Fossil and
the Gilliam County line, on the John Day River Highway. The rock for
this work was crushed on the job, and the macadam surface was
constructed sixteen feet wide with a compacted thickness of six inches.

Payment to contractor was made on the basis of actual cost plus a
percentage of 10 per cent on labor and five per cent on materials.

To November 30th, 1918, the State had expended $32,465.44 on this work,
and it is estimated that there are bills outstanding against it to the
amount of $1,500.00.

In addition to the 3.4 miles of grading done by the State on Cummins
Hill the County continued the grading at the foot of the hill for a
distance of 0.7 miles, making a total of 4.2 miles. The full section has
been macadamized, giving Wheeler County 4.2 miles of standard macadam
road.


Butte Creek Summit Grading

During the 1918 season, the County has graded under State supervision, a
one and seven tenths mile section about nine miles southeast of Fossil
on the John Day River Highway. This section is known as the Butte Creek
Summit Section. The construction was paid for entirely by the County.
Engineering supervision was furnished by the State Highway Department,
the engineer in charge of the work being Mr. B. H. McNamee.

The total amount expended by the County, prior to November 30th, on this
work was approximately $30,000.00, and the quantities of construction
completed to this date were as follows:

  Common Excavation   8,000 cu. yds
  Rock Excavation    12,000 cu. yds.
  Pipe, 12-inch         234 lin. ft.
  Pipe, 20-inch          72 lin. ft.
  Pipe, 16-inch         100 lin. ft.
  Clearing                8 acres


Grading between Cummins Hill and Fossil

During April and May, 1918, Wheeler County graded, under the direction
of the State Highway Department, a section of the John Day Highway
between Cummins Hill and Fossil. This grade was .7 of a mile in length
and joined up with the Cummins Hill grading. This improvement cost the
County approximately $4,000.00. Geo. Hibbert was inspector and
transitman in charge for the State Department.


Survey of the John Day River Highway

With the exception of a two mile section immediately West of Fossil, the
entire John Day River Highway through Wheeler County is covered by
location survey made during the past two years. The total length of
survey on this highway is 41.5 miles. For all but about twelve miles, of
this total, the detailed plans are practically complete. The survey of
this highway has been in charge of B. H. McNamee.


Survey of the McKenzie River Highway

The State Highway Department has completed a survey of the McKenzie
River Highway in Wheeler County from the boundary of the Ochoco National
Forest west of Mitchell to the Grant County Line near Dayville, a total
distance of 48 miles. This survey was made by Locating Engineer R. H.
Coppock. The plans are complete except for the eight miles west from the
Grant County line.

From the west end of this survey at Ochoco Forest boundary, the Federal
Office of Public Roads has made a survey to the Crook County line, so
the survey of the McKenzie River Highway is complete all of the way
through Wheeler County.


Survey of Highway No. 14

In 1917, pursuant to a request from the County Court, a section of
Highway No. 14 between Mitchell and Antelope was surveyed. This survey
begins at the point on the Mitchell-Prineville survey about four miles
west of Mitchell and extends 1.4 miles down Bridge Creek to where
connection is made with the present road. This survey was made by R. H.
Coppock, locating engineer.


Sarvice Creek-Valades Ranch Post Road Project

Application has been made to, and approved, by the Federal Office of
Public Roads for Post Road co-operation on a 48.5 miles section of the
John Day River Highway in Wheeler and Grant Counties. 25.5 miles of this
project are in Wheeler County and 23 miles in Grant County. The total
estimated cost of the project is $400,433.79, and the funds are to be
provided as follows: State $157,216.90, Government $157,216.89; Wheeler
County $36,000.00 and Grant County $50,000.00.

The survey for this project parallels the John Day River on the north
bank, through Wheeler County and extends from the mouth of Sarvice Creek
in Wheeler County to Valades Ranch about four miles West of Dayville in
Grant County. In Grant County a crossing is made to the west bank near
the upper end of the Big Basin.

It is expected that construction will be commenced on the Sarvice
Creek-Valades Ranch Project early in 1919.


Ochoco Canyon Forest Project

A Federal Aid Co-operative Agreement has been entered into between the
State, the Federal Government, and Wheeler County for the grading of a
5.5 mile section on the McKenzie River Highway. This section is known as
the Ochoco Canyon Section and extends from the Crook County line to a
point about 16 miles west of Mitchell.

This work is estimated to cost $45,000.00 of which the State will pay
$20,050.00, Wheeler County $4,900.00, and the Federal Government
$20,050.00. It is expected that this section will be built during the
1919 season.


YAMHILL COUNTY

In Yamhill County the State Highway Department has co-operated with the
County in the grading and paving of 3.2 miles between Rex and Newberg
and of 4 miles between Sheridan and McMinnville. The total expenditure
on this work amounts to $147,000.00 of which the County has paid
$18,273.49.

An effort has been made to secure Federal Aid in the construction of a
section of the Portland-Tillamook Highway from Grande Ronde west. With
this in view, the necessary surveys have been made, and it is expected
that Federal Aid will be secured so that the construction may be
undertaken during the 1919 season.


Sheridan Paving--1917

In 1917 the Highway Department constructed with its own forces and
equipment 1.8 miles of concrete pavement from Sheridan east on the
Sheridan-McMinnville Road. This pavement was 16 feet wide, 61/2 inches
thick at the center and 51/2 inches thick at the edges. The mix used was a
1:11/2:3.

In connection with the paving there was a considerable amount of
grading, the total expenditure for grading, culverts, etc., being
$5,651.70. The cost of the 1.8 miles of paving was $31,432.99, the unit
cost being $1.82 per cubic yard.

Yamhill County co-operated in the payment for this work to the amount of
$10,000.00. A complete statement of the costs on this work is given
below.


COST STATEMENT--SHERIDAN PAVING--1917

  Quantity            Item                       Cost     Unit Cost

  2498   cu. yds.  Common Excavation       }
  652    cu. yds.  Intermediate Excavation } $ 4,442.85    $   .906
  1750   cu. yds.  Solid Rock Excavation   }
  182    lin. ft.  12-inch Culvert Pipe          283.90       1.56
  118    lin. ft.  18-inch Culvert Pipe          276.00       2.34
  44     lin. ft.  24-inch Culvert Pipe          134.20       3.05
  290    lin. ft.  6-inch Porous Drain Tile       52.25        .18
  25     cu. yds.  Class "C" Concrete            462.50      18.50
  17,150 sq. yds.  Concrete Pavement          31,198.87       1.82
  5050   lin. ft.  Expansion Joints              234.12       .046
                                            -----------
  Total Construction Cost                   $ 37,084.69
  Engineering                                  1,131.35
                                            -----------
  Grand Total Cost                          $ 38,216.04

  Paid by State                             $ 28,216.04
  Paid by County                              10,000.00
                                            -----------
  Total                                     $ 38,216.04


Sheridan Paving--1918

Early in 1918, Yamhill County requested that the concrete pavement laid
in 1917 be continued to a total length of four miles, and offered to pay
for all grading necessary in connection therewith. This request was
granted by the Highway Commission and in the early spring, construction
was started on the additional 2.2 miles.

The type of pavement laid on this section was the same as that laid in
1917, except that crushed rock aggregate was used instead of gravel, and
the mix was reduced to 1:2:31/2.

[Illustration: STATE OWNED PAVING PLANT IN OPERATION NEAR SHERIDAN IN
YAMHILL COUNTY. ON THE YAMHILL NESTUCCA HIGHWAY]

The coarse aggregate consisted of crushed stone ranging from 1/4 inch to
21/2 inches. For the fine aggregate, both Columbia River and Willamette
River sand was used. The stone was crushed from a quarry operated by the
State on Deer Creek which was near the center of the job and consisted
of an altered basalt of rather coarse texture. The quality of this
stone is not equal to the true basalt; but tests made by the Oregon
Agricultural College showed that it was of good quality. The average
haul on this material was .6 of a mile.

Crushing was begun early in March and 1200 cubic yards of material
stored in a stock pile which was rehandled later by means of an
automatic loader purchased by the State Highway Department for this
class of work. The output of the crusher was insufficient to keep the
mixer running and by means of this stock pile it was possible to keep
the material coming on to the road steadily and finish the job in a
minimum length of time and with the least inconvenience to traffic.

In this connection the experience on this job shows the advisability of
using a stock pile of material to draw from in case of emergencies. When
this is done the work is allowed to go ahead steadily, although a
breakdown at the crusher may occur. The saving made by a steady run more
than offsets the cost of rehandling the material, which is done very
reasonably by the use of machinery.

The sand was shipped to Ballston and Sheridan by railroad, approximately
equal amounts being shipped to both places and was so divided as to get
a minimum length of haul on this material. The average haul was 3.5
miles. At Ballston the sand was unloaded from the cars into bunkers,
which dumped directly into trucks, while at Sheridan no bunkers were
available and the material was unloaded on the ground and rehandled by
means of an automatic loader. No delay was caused by car shortage as we
used our stock pile at Sheridan in emergencies. All the material was
hauled and handled by means of trucks, two of which belonged to the
State Highway Department, others working on a yardage basis.

The pavement, after being struck off, was finished by the roller and
belt method; being rolled from two to four times, according to the
condition of the concrete and later belted with eight and ten inch
belts. The eight inch belt being used first. By using this method of
finishing, we were able to eliminate the use of skilled labor, which
showed a material saving in the finishing item, and at the same time
secured a very satisfactory surface.

As soon as sufficiently hardened, the pavement was covered with earth
from the roadside and kept moist for at least one week while curing. The
earth covering was later removed by means of an ordinary road grader,
when ready to be opened for traffic, the elastite joints being trimmed
at the same operation.

A short stretch of pavement was left out at Deer Creek to allow a fill
to settle during the winter rains. In conformity with our general
practice, sufficient crushed rock was left on the job to complete this
stretch and make repairs.

Elastite joints were placed every thirty feet and extended the entire
width and depth of the pavement. Continuous forms were used on a portion
of this pavement and were found to be much superior to the ordinary
type, and the Department has adopted the continuous form for future
work. These forms are made by using two pieces of form lumber 11/2 inches
by 51/2 inches nailed together. The joints are lapped one-half the length
of the stick. The finished form is 3x51/2 inches and is easily placed on
either tangents or sharp curves.

The concrete was mixed with a sixteen cubic foot Koehring Mixer equipped
with bucket and boom. The plant is owned by the Department.

The grading was paid for by Yamhill County and the crusher, roller,
grader, and scarifier were also furnished by them free of charge. Earth
shoulders were built along the pavement by means of road grader.

Mr. J. M. Baker was Superintendent of Construction on this work.


COST STATEMENT--2.2 MILES, 16-FOOT CONCRETE PAVEMENT, EAST OF
SHERIDAN--BUILT IN 1918

  Quantity and Item                                   Total Cost  Unit Cost

  Grading                                             $ 1,853.07
  19,566 sq. yds., 1:2:31/2 concrete pavement
    Average thickness 6 inches                         36,378.01     $ 1.86
  6,192 lin. ft., Expansion Joints                        247.68        .04
  140 cu. yds., Broken Stone Macadam                      420.00       3.00
                                                      ----------
    Total Cost of Construction                       $ 38,898.76
    Engineering                                         1,166.85
                                                      ----------
    Grand Total Cost                                 $ 40,065.61

5099 bbls. Cement used on this work at a cost of $13,299.00 F. O. B.
Work. 15 yds. of Sand and 120 yds. broken stone left stored on job.


Paving--Multnomah County Line to Newberg

A complete description of the paving of the 15.7 mile section of the
West Side Highway between the Multnomah County Line and Newberg is given
in the Chapter devoted to Washington County. It should be mentioned
here, however, that 3.2 miles of this pavement is within Yamhill County,
and was built by the State at a cost of $57,500.00. The construction of
the subgrade was paid for by Yamhill County, part of it having been done
by County forces and the balance of it by the paving contractor under a
cost plus 10 per cent agreement with the County. For the work done under
this agreement, the contractor was paid $6,153.05.


Survey--Grande Ronde Section

A survey was made in the spring of 1918 between Grande Ronde and the Bee
Ranch at the east end of the Sour Grass road improved in 1916. This is
an important link about 61/2 miles in length on the Yamhill-Nestucca
Highway, connecting as it does the cities of McMinnville, Willamina,
Sheridan and Tillamook. In addition it will afford a short and direct
route between the hay and grain fields of the Willamette Valley and the
dairy ranches of the coast. Further, this highway is used by hundreds of
autoists in summer enroute to the Tillamook beaches.

From the fact that only 21/2 miles of this section are in service as a
postal route, Federal Aid could be applied for only on that section and
cooperation has been requested as follows: United States Government
$15,000; State of Oregon $15,000; Yamhill County $10,000. For the
remaining four miles, Yamhill County has appropriated $5,000 from the
1919 funds.

It is estimated that the total cost of the remaining section will be
$50,000 and it is expected that the work will be done in 1919. The
entire project as proposed will be graded 24 feet wide, conforming to
the State standards as to alignment and grade and surfaced with macadam
12 feet in width, thus closing the gap and affording a road between
Portland and Tillamook which will be open the entire year.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Third Biennial Report of the Oregon
State Highway Commission, by S. Benson, W. L. Thompson, R. A. Booth, Herbert Nunn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OREGON STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION ***

***** This file should be named 35344.txt or 35344.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/3/4/35344/

Produced by Harry Lame, Jason Isbell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
