The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Romance of a Poor Young Man, by
Pierrepont Edwards and Lester Wallace

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Romance of a Poor Young Man
       A Drama Adapted from the French of Octave Feuillet

Author: Pierrepont Edwards
        Lester Wallace

Release Date: February 21, 2011 [EBook #35342]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF A POOR YOUNG MAN ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
produced by the Wright American Fiction Project.)









                          THE STANDARD DRAMA.

                          The Acting Edition.

                              NO. CCXXV.


                            THE ROMANCE OF
                           A POOR YOUNG MAN.

                  A Drama, adapted from the French of
                           OCTAVE FEUILLET,

           BY MESSRS. PIERREPONT EDWARDS AND LESTER WALLACK.

                          TO WHICH ARE ADDED

    A Description of the Costume--Cast of the Characters--Entrances
    and Exits--Relative Positions of the Performers on the Stage, and
    the whole of the Stage Business

    Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1859, by LESTER
    WALLACK, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the
    Southern District of New York.

                               NEW YORK:
                       SAMUEL FRENCH, PUBLISHER,
                    122 NASSAU STREET, (UP STAIRS.)




CHARACTERS REPRESENTED.


    _Manuel, Marquis de Champcey_, Mr. Lester Wallack.

    _Doctor Desmarets,--formerly of the French Army_, Mr. Brougham.

    _M. de Bevannes--a man of the world_, Mr. Walcot.

    _Gaspar Laroque--an aged man, formerly Captain of a Privateer_,
          Mr. Dyott.

    _Alain--a confidential domestic_, Mr. Young.

    _M. Nouret--a Notary_, Mr. Levere.

    _Yvonnet--a Breton Shepherd_, Mr. Baker.

    _Henri_, Mr. Oliver.

    _Louis_, Mr. Coburn.

    _Madame Laroque--Daughter-in-Law to Gaspar_, Mrs. Vernon.

    _Marguerite--her daughter_, Mrs. Hoey.

    _Mlle Helouin--a Governess_,

    _Madame Aubrey--a relative of the Laroque family_,
          Miss Mary Gannon.

  _Louise Vauberger--formerly nurse to Manuel, now keeper of a lodging
          house_, Mrs. Walcot.

  _Christine--a Breton peasant girl_, Miss Fanny Reeves.

  _Guests, Servants, Peasantry, &c., &c._


The events of the Drama take place (during the 1st Act) in Paris,
afterward in the Province of Britanny.

Costumes of the present day.

The Overture, incidental Music, and Choruses composed and arranged by
Mr. Robert Stoepel.




A POOR YOUNG MAN.




TABLEAU I.


    _A Room, simply furnished--Table, Chairs, Arm Chair, Secretaire,
    Side Table--Door C._

    _MADAME VAUBERGER peeps in L._

_Madame Vauberger._ No; he has not yet returned. [_Enters._] Things
cannot go on in this manner much longer--I shall have to speak out, and
plainly too. And why not? Surely he won't take it ill from me--ah, no.
I, who loved his poor mother so, could never--What's this? A purse!
empty! And this key, left carelessly lying about; that's a bad sign.
[_Opens Secretaire._] No, not one solitary sous--his last coin came
yesterday to pay me the rent. In the drawer, perhaps--

    _DR. DESMARETS looks in._

_Dr. Desmarets._ Hallo! [_She starts._] What are you at there?

_Mad. V._ Me, sir? I was just--I was just--

_Des._ Poking your nose into that drawer--that what you call just?

_Mad. V._ I was dusting and putting the things in order, sir.

_Des._ I'll tell you what, Madame V., you're an extraordinary woman.
Yesterday, when I called, you were dusting--half-an-hour ago when I
called, you were dusting--and now, when I call again, you're dusting.
Where the devil you find so much dust to dust, _I_ can't think.

_Mad. V._ Ah, sir, look into this drawer.

_Des._ What for?

_Mad. V._ Is it not the place where, if one had money, one would
naturally keep it?

_Des._ I suppose so. What of that?

_Mad. V._ See, sir, it is empty.

_Des._ What's that to me?

_Mad. V._ And his purse, also.

_Des._ What's that to you?             [_Goes up and puts hat on table._

_Mad. V._ [_Aside._] I dare not tell him that Manuel is without a
meal--starving--I should never be forgiven. His _pride_ would be
wounded, and nothing could excuse that.

_Des._ Well, what are you cogitating about? Looking for something to
dust?

_Mad. V._ I'm thinking of the Marquis, sir.

_Des._ Well, what of him?

_Mad. V._ Is it not dreadful? Brought up as he has been--surrounded by
every luxury--and now reduced to want even. Oh! it is too hard--too
hard!

_Des._ Well, it's his own fault, isn't it? There was enough left from
the wreck of his father's property, to give him a sort of a living, and
he must needs go and settle it all upon his little sister Helen.

_Mad. V._ And for what? To give her the education befitting her rank.

_Des._ Fudge!

_Mad. V._ Doctor Desmarets, your're very unfeeling.

_Des._ Oh, of course, of course. I give him good advice, he rejects it.
I withdraw my sympathy, and then I'm unfeeling. If he can't manage
better with the little that's left him, egad! he may think himself lucky
that he can get his daily meals.

_Mad. V._ Sir, he can't even--[_Aside._] Oh, if I dared--

_Des._ Can't even what? Send for his coupe, I suppose, or drink Chateau
margaux--terrible hardships, truly. When there's nothing else in a man's
pocket, he had better put his pride there, and button it up tight.

_Mad. V._ Some day, sir, we shall find that he has taken poison, or cut
his throat.

_Des._ Ah! and then there'll be nothing to dust.

_Mad. V._ Monsieur, I repeat it--you're unfeeling. But I, who loved and
served his dear mother, whom he so much resembles--

_Des._ Not a bit--hasn't a look of her. The father, the father all over.

_Mad. V._ Of course. So you always say, and everybody knows why. You
loved the poor Marchioness, offered her your hand, and she preferred the
Marquis.

_Des._ Madame!

_Mad. V._ I don't care. I _will_ speak my mind. And because she refused
you, you have no regard for her son.

_Des._ Madame!

_Mad. V._ But if he has his father's face, he has his mother's heart.

_Des._ Much you know about it.

_Mad. V._ And who _should_ know if I don't? Havn't I attended him since
he was an infant?

_Des._ Well, and havn't _I_ attended him since he was an infant?

_Mad. V._ Wasn't I with him during every sickness?

_Des._ Wasn't I with him too?

_Mad. V._ Didn't I nurse him?

_Des._ Didn't I cure him?

_Mad. V._ Wouldn't I follow him through the world?

_Des._ Didn't I bring him _into_ it?

_Mad. V._ Yes, and if things go on at this rate, he won't have much to
thank you for.

_Des._ How do _you_ know? How do _you_ know, you foolish old woman you.

    _MANUEL appears._

_Man._ Heyday! the only two friends I have in the world at high words?
What can have caused this?

_Mad. V._ My lord, the Doctor says you--

_Man._ Me! my dear Doctor, you never were quarrelling about so
unimportant a person, surely?

_Des._ No matter for that. But I have some business with the Marquis, if
this very positive old lady will allow me the luxury of an interview
with him--a _private_ interview. Pray, ma'am, _may_ I trespass on your
indulgence?

_Mad. V._ Truly, Doctor, your campaign in the Crimea has improved
neither your manners, or your beauty.                      [_Exit L. H._

_Des._ Confound her impudence! The attack on my manners I could forgive,
but my beauty--that's a tender point.

_Man._ Ah, Doctor, you must pardon her brusque manner. If she's poor in
courtesy, she's rich in a rarer gift--fidelity.

_Des._ Oh! hang her! let her go. And now to your affairs. Your father's
death occurred while I was with the army, in the Crimea. Rumors reached
me there, but I have never heard the full particulars. I would not
willingly revive a painful theme, but as an old friend--

_Man._ Nay, I shall be more satisfied when you know the facts. When you
left France you know what our position was, and what our style of
living.

_Des._ All the luxuries that money could procure--a mansion in Paris, an
ancestral chateau, and a stable that could boast the best blood in
France.

_Man._ Two months after the death of my dear mother, I went to Italy, by
my father's desire, and for several years I traveled through Europe, at
my pleasure. During this time his letters to me were affectionate, but
brief, and never expressed any desire for my return. Two months ago, on
arriving at Marseilles, I found several letters from him awaiting me,
each of them begging me to return home with all possible haste.

_Des._ I remember, it was some time previous to that, that I heard his
name mentioned in connection with some unfortunate speculations in the
stocks.

_Man._ I arrived at night. The ground was white with snow. As I passed
up the avenue--made still darker by the old trees which overshadowed
it--I could hear the frost shaken from the branches, seeming, as it fell
around me, like a warning of bitter tears to come. Hardly had I crossed
the threshold when my father's arms were around me. I could feel his
heart beating against my own, with a force almost painful. He led me to
a sofa, and placed himself directly in front of me, when, as if longing
to reveal something which yet he dared not name, he fixed his eyes on
mine with an expression of supplication, of agony, of shame, wondrous in
a man so haughty and so proud. It was enough! The wrong he had
committed, yet could not confess, I divined full well--God knows how
fully, how freely I forgave it! Suddenly, that look, which never quitted
me, became fixed, rigid. The pressure of his hand on mine became a grip
of iron. He arose--the eyes wandered, the hand relaxed, and he fell dead
at my feet!

_Des._ [_After a pause._] Well, well, it is a sad history, for he left
utter ruin for your portion. But come, you must not look back. "Forward"
must be the watchword now. Mr. Faveau, your family lawyer, tells me that
the little that remained to you, after paying your father's debts, you
have appropriated to making a fine lady of your sister.

_Man._ To educate her, doctor.

_Des._ Well, well, same thing; so that you, yourself, have literally
nothing to speak of--hardly enough to give you bread.

_Man._ Hardly.

_Des._ Under these circumstances you will perhaps be disposed to the
favorable consideration of a proposal I have to make?

_Man._ Name it, sir, for at present, I confess I have formed no plans of
my own. I was so little prepared to find myself quite a beggar. Were I
alone in the world, I would become a soldier. But my sister, that would
involve prolonged absence from her--perhaps an early death. My
darling--I cannot endure the thought of knowing her compelled to suffer
the privations, the labor, and the dangers of poverty. She is happy at
her school, and young enough to remain there for some years to come. If
I could but find some occupation by which, even were I obliged to impose
the severest restraints upon myself, it would be possible to save enough
for her marriage portion, I should be more than content.

_Des._ An employment to suit a man of your rank--

_Man._ Oh, my dear Doctor--rank--

_Des._ Well, well, of your _education_, then, is not easily found. Now,
mark what I am going to say, and consider it well, before you come to a
hasty conclusion. There is, among my patients, a retired merchant, one
who has been able, by indefatigable industry in trade, to amass a very
handsome fortune. His daughter, an only a child, and of course, the
father's darling, has, by chance, become acquainted with the state of
your affairs. Now, I have reason to know, (being on very confidential
terms with them.) I say I have reason to know that this girl, ambitious,
handsome, rich, and accomplished, would be happy to share your title. I
have the father's consent, and only await the word from you to--

_Man._ Dr. Desmarets, my name is neither for sale, or to let.

_Des._ Humph! Do you know, my lord, that you bear a remarkable
resemblance to your poor mother?

_Man._ You must be mistaken, sir. I have always been told that I was
more like my father.

_Des._ Not a bit! The mother, the mother, sir, in every feature. But,
bless me, it's near eleven o'clock and I have a most particular
appointment. As you decline considering the proposal I have made, we
must think of something else. Au revoir. [_Aside._] The mother--eyes,
nose, mouth. What the devil made that stupid old woman say he was like
his father?                                                   [_Exit C._

_Man._ He's a kind man, though a little eccentric, and apart from his
professional duty, seems actuated by a sincere desire to serve me, and
yet--and yet I could not bring myself to ask his charity.
Hunger--starvation--are not, then, mere empty words. Oh! if I do sin in
my pride, I am punished, for I suffer much. This is the second day
without food. Why, after all, I could go into any Restaurant and dine,
for I am well enough known. I could say I had forgotten my purse--have
done so without scruple in happier times, but _then_ I had the means to
pay, and now--no, no, my sister, not for life, not even for _thee_, will
I descend to lie and cheat. How weak I am; this comes too soon upon my
long sickness. If I could but sleep and so forget my agony. And there
are human creatures who suffer every day as I do now. My sister, my
little sister, I seem to see thy dear face looking down upon me, and
bidding me be comforted. [_Music._] Thou, at least, shall never suffer.
But for those who hear their cries of hunger repeated from the mouths of
starving little ones, well, well, God comfort them; I will not
re--Oh--holy--charity--for--those--who--my sister--my--

    _MANUEL gradually falls asleep. MADAME VAUBERGER enters with a
    Tray containing a dish or two with eatables, a plate, &c. She
    watches MANUEL carefully while she deposits the Tray on the
    chimney-piece and lays a cloth on the table. MANUEL awakes as she
    goes back to the chimney-piece for tray._

_Man._ Eh--who's that? Ah, me! What are you doing, Madame?

_Mad. V._  Did you not order dinner, my lord?

_Man._ Certainly not.

_Mad. V._ Why they told me--

_Man._ Then they were mistaken. It's for some of the other lodgers.

_Mad. V._ But there's no other lodgers on this floor, and I really
cannot think what--

_Man._ At any rate, it is not for me. Take it away.

_Mad. V._ [_After slowly taking off cloth._] My lord has probably
dined?

_Man._ Probably.

_Mad. V._ Dear me, dear me, what a pity. A good dinner spoiled, wasted.
Really, if you had not dined, my lord, it would so oblige me if--

_Man._ Will you go or not? [_She is dejectedly going, when MANUEL
calls._] Louise, I understand, and I thank you, but I am not well
to-day. I have no desire to eat. [_He turns away. MADAME VAUBERGER
quietly comes back and gently places the dinner on the table._

_Mad. V._ Ah, my Lord, if you knew how you wound my heart. Come now, you
shall pay me for the dinner--there--you shall put the money into my hand
the moment you have it. But indeed, indeed, if you were to give me a
hundred thousand francs, it would not cause me half the pleasure that I
should feel in seeing you eat my poor little dinner. Oh, surely, surely,
you can comprehend that.

_Man._ I do, Louise, I do--and as I can't give you the hundred thousand
francs, why, I'll eat your dinner.

_Mad. V._ No; _will_ you?

_Man._ Louise, your hand. Don't be alarmed, I'm not going to put money
into it.                                  [_She timidly gives her hand._

_Mad. V._ Oh! thank you, thank you, my lord, a thousand times. Now, I'll
leave you to your dinner. Ah! how good of you to accept my poor gift.
You have a noble heart.                                       [_Exit C._

_Man._ And a monstrous appetite. My kind, faithful Louise. Well, well,
let us to dinner, since dinner there is. Come, come, here's life for
another day or so, at least, and that's something.

    _DOCTOR and MADAME VAUBERGER heard without._

_Des._ Nonsense, nonsense; I don't believe a word of it.

_Mad. V._ I tell you sir, 'tis true; you might have seen it.

_Des._ [_Entering._] But, confound it, woman--I _didn't_ see it, and it
was your business to tell me.

_Mad. V._ It wasn't.

_Des._ It was.

_Man._ What's the matter now?

_Des._ Matter enough! That stupid woman--

_Man._ Doctor, will you do me the pleasure to dine with me?

_Des._ My lord, you have done wrong.

_Man._ Indeed!

_Des._ For you have wounded a friend. You have been cruel.

_Man._ Cruel!

_Des._ For you have made an old man blush.

_Man._ I!

_Des._ Yes, you! why was I left in ignorance? How could you, Manuel? why
didn't you. Damn it, sir? how dare you starve without letting me know?

_Man._ Sir, I could not--

_Des._ My poor boy; there, there, eat your dinner; I've news for you.

_Man._ News!

_Des._ Yes; eat your dinner.

_Man._ But I want to listen.

_Des._ Well, you don't listen with your mouth, I suppose. Eat your
dinner.

_Man._ But--

_Des._ Devil a word you'll get out of me, if you don't eat your dinner.

_Man._ Well, well.                                              [_Eats._

_Des._ Good! You remember I told you I had an appointment?

_Man._ Yes.

_Des._ Don't talk--eat! [_MANUEL eats._] That appointment concerned you.
[_MANUEL nods._] I think I've found employment for you.

_Man._ Eh?                             [_Pauses with a bit on his fork._

_Des._ In with it. [_MANUEL puts it in his mouth._] Good! You are
aware, of course, that my practice and my residence is in the country.
I merely came to Paris on your account. [_MANUEL lets go his fork
to shake hands with the DOCTOR, who puts the fork into his hand
again._] Well, among the families with whom I am most intimate,
there is one, in particular, of great wealth and importance. The
name is Laroque. The family have had for some years past, a managing
man, a steward, who never was worth much. Indeed, the only
real service he has ever rendered them, he has just performed.

_Man._ Ran away?

_Des._ No, died. The moment I heard of this, I wrote to Madame Laroque,
asking his situation for a friend of mine. On leaving you, I went to the
post office, and found a letter awaiting me, with the full consent of
the family to my request. To be sure the position for a man of your
rank--

_Man._ My rank, under present circumstances, is a mockery. I shall, in
future, take simply my Christian name of Manuel.

_Des._ I have only mentioned you in my letters as Monsieur Manuel,
anticipating that such would be your wish. You will have your own
apartments in a pavilion near the Chateau. Your salary will be so
regulated that you will be enabled to lay by a portion for your sister.
Now, the only question remaining is, will this suit you?

_Man._ Admirably! My dear, kind friend, how shall I sufficiently thank
you?

_Des._ Eat your dinner.

_Man._ But am I fitted for the position?

_Des._ Pretty well. You've learned one great requisite.

_Man._ What's that?

_Des._ Economy. As to the rest, the duties are simple enough. And now
I'll give you some notion of the people you are going to meet. There
are, in the Chateau, without counting visitors, five persons. First,
Monsieur Laroque, celebrated at the beginning of the present century as
a famous privateer Captain. Hence his large fortune. He is now a feeble
old man, mind and memory a good deal the worse for wear. Then there is
Madame Laroque, his daughter-in-law, a Creole--

_Man._ A Creole?

_Des._ Yes, young gentleman, an _elderly_ Creole, with some
eccentricities to be sure, but a good heart. Thirdly, there is
Mademoiselle Marguerite, her daughter, much younger--

_Man._ That's singular.

_Des._ Eat your dinner. She is proud, somewhat romantic, a little
thoughtless,--

_Man._ And her disposition?

_Des._ Sweet. Fourthly, Madame Aubrey, a widow, a sort of second cousin,
old maidish, talky--

_Man._ Disposition?

_Des._ Sour. Fifthly, Mademoiselle Helouin--Governess. Young, good
looking.

_Man._ Disposition?

_Des._ Doubtful. And that completes the catalogue.

_Man._ Delightful! Two good dispositions out of five. The proportion is
enormous!

_Des._ I'm glad you look at things so hopefully. When will you be ready
to accompany me to the Chateau?

_Man._ To-morrow--to-day.

_Des._ To-morrow will do. I shall be here for you early.       [_Going._

_Man._ I shall be ready.

_Des._ [_Runs against MADAME V. who is coming in._] Confound it, woman,
take care!

_Mad. V._ Why, Doctor, you ran against me.

_Des._ I didn't!

_Mad. V._ You did!

_Man._ What's the matter now?

_Des._ Eat your dinner!


END OF TABLEAU I.




TABLEAU II.


    _A Saloon with bay windows opening on a Terrace, from which steps
    descend to lawn and grounds at back--Piano, R. U. E.--Books,
    Papers, Vases, &c., &c._

    _DE BEVANNES, DR. DESMARETS, MAD. LAROQUE, MARGUERITE,
    MADEMOISELLE HELOUIN, MAD. AUBREY discovered. As Curtain rises, M.
    DE BEVANNES is conversing with several young ladies on the terrace
    at back. DESMARETS reading paper, L. C. MADAME LAROQUE wrapped in
    furs, L. reading a book. MARGUERITE near her mother, at tapestry
    work. MADAME AUBREY, R. C. knitting. MAD'LLE HELOUIN arranging
    flowers in vase, R. Great talking and laughing from the party on
    the terrace as the curtain rises._

_Bevannes._ Very well, very well, young ladies, if you insist upon it.
The ladies are determined on a waltz on the terrace.

_Madame Laroque._ What! in the broiling sun?

_Bev._ The roses do not fear the sun. Why should the lilies?

_Ladies_ [_all courtesey._] Oh, how pretty.

_Bev._ Yes, rather neat, I think. [_To MARGUERITE_] Mademoiselle, may I
hope for the honor?

_Mar._ Thank you. Despite your pretty speech, I confess to a fear of
waltzing in the sun. But I'll play for you with pleasure.

                                               [_Goes towards Piano, R._

_Bev._ [_Aside to her._] Always cruel. [_To M'LLE HELOUIN_,]
Mademoiselle, may I request the pleasure?

_Mlle Helouin._ Oh! certainly.

_Bev._ [_Aside to her._] Ever kind.

                [_MARGUERITE plays--they waltz and gradually disappear._

_Mad. L._ Have you seen my new conservatory, Doctor?

_Des._ No, Madame.

_Mad. L._ Well, I must show it to you, if I can drag myself so far.

_Des._ Drag? Why, good gracious! You're the picture of health this
morning--fresh as a rose.

_Mad. L._ Fresh? Frozen. It's a curious fact, Doctor, that since I left
the Antilles, twenty years ago, I have never yet known what it was to
feel comfortably warm.

_Des._ That accounts for your continued good looks. Consult your Cookery
Book, page 18. If you want to preserve things fresh, you must keep them
cold. And you, Madame, [_To MADAME AUBREY_] how do _you_ find yourself?

_Madame Aubrey._ Very weak, Doctor. I ate a tolerable breakfast this
morning.

_Des._ [_Aside._] You may say that. Three eggs and a broiled chicken.

_Mad. A._ And I feel a fullness--

_Des._ [_Aside._] I should think so.

_Mad. A._ In the head.

_Des._ Ah!

_Mad. A._ The fact is, Doctor, I am subject to such continual chagrin,
such cruel mortifications here. Dependent upon others for certain
luxuries which I can't get for myself.

_Des._ Why not?

_Mad. A._ Things are so dear. Ah, Doctor, nothing will soothe me but
death.

_Des._ Well, _that's_ cheap!

_Mad. A._ Brute!                                               [_Aside._

_Mar._ [_at Piano._] Here they come again.

    _She plays. The waltzers appear on terrace. In the midst of this
    dancing, MANUEL comes up steps, as if from lawn below. They
    separate R. and L. and regard him with some astonishment. He has
    a portfolio under his arm._

_Mar._ Well, why don't you go on?

_Des._ [_Aside._] At last, [_aloud._] Madame Laroque, permit me to
present to you, M. Manuel, the new Steward.

    _MAD. LAROQUE rises and salutes MANUEL, at the same time ringing a
    bell. A servant enters and goes to MANUEL, taking from him a small
    portmanteau, which he carries off. MARGUERITE goes over to L. of
    MAD. LAROQUE._

_Bev._ Rather a stylish looking steward!

_Mad. L._ Why, Doctor, what does this mean? You promised a quiet,
simple, steady young man, and you bring me a fine gentleman like this.

    _As MANUEL comes down R. C., MAD'LLE HELOUIN sees him._

_Mlle. H._ [_Aside._] It is the Marquis de Champcey!

                                                   [_Goes up to ladies._

    MAD. AUBREY--MANUEL--DESMARETS--BEVANNES--MAD. LAROQUE--MADEMOISELLE
    HELOUIN--MARGUERITE.

_Mad. L._ Pardon, sir, you are Monsieur--

_Man._ Manuel, Madame.

_Mad. L._ The new Steward?

_Man._ Yes, Madame.

_Mad. L._ You are quite sure?

_Des._ [_Aside._] That's not bad.

_Man._ Madame!

_Bev._ The lady wishes to know whether you are yourself.

_Man._ I have always been under that impression, sir.

                                                    [_BEVANNES goes up._

_Des._ [_Aside._] The conversation is becoming brilliant--I'll leave
them to enjoy it.       [_Exit at back--BEVANNES comes down to MARQUIS._

_Mad. L._ Sir, we are indebted to you for devoting your talents to our
service; we really require them, for we have the misfortune to be
immensely rich.

_Mad. A._ Misfortune, dear?

_Mad. L._ Yes, love; wealth is a heavy burthen.

_Mad. A._ But a very pleasant one.

_Mad. L._ You'd find it hard to bear, dear.

_Mad. A._ I should like to _try_, darling.

_Mad. L._ I feel that I was born for the devotion and self-sacrifice
entailed by poverty. Ah! my dear Bevannes, should I not have made an
excellent Sister of Charity?

_Bev._ You are already the next thing to it, Madame?

_Mad. L._ How so?

_Bev._ [_Indicating MARGUERITE._] The mother of goodness.

_Mar._ Oh, sir.

_Mad. L._ But do you not agree with me?

_Bev._ In what?

_Mad. L._ That wealth is a heavy responsibility.

_Bev._ Doubtless. But then you have the comfort of knowing that
there are always some devoted friends willing to relieve you.

_Mad. L._ [_Rings._] But _my_ fortune is not mine to dispose of--for
my duty obliges me to preserve it for my child.

    _Enter ALAIN._

Alain, show this gentleman to his apartments--but first, you must be
introduced to my father-in-law. Ask if Monsieur Laroque can see the
gentleman. [_Exit ALAIN--MANUEL up stage._] And now, we will take a
stroll to the conservatory. What has become of that horrid doctor?
[_As she rises, her shawl falls off--MANUEL comes forward and assists
her._] Oh! thank you, sir.

    _Re-enter ALAIN._

_Alain._ Monsieur Laroque is coming down, Madame.       [_Exit at back._

_Mad. L._ [_To MARGUERITE._] My dear, will you stay and introduce
Monsieur Manuel to your grandpapa?

_Mar._ Certainly, if you wish it.

_Mad. L._ Now, my dear Bevannes, your arm.

_Bev._ [_Who has been talking to MARGUERITE._] Eh?

_Mad. L._ You shall accompany us--

_Bev._ [_To MARGUERITE._] This is too bad.

                                         [_Gives arm to MADAME LAROQUE._

_Mar._ Oh! Monsieur de Bevannes, how happy you ought to feel--arm in arm
with "the mother of goodness."

_Bev._ I do feel happy--blessed. [_MADAME AUBREY takes his other arm._]
Doubly blessed.    [_Exeunt BEVANNES, MADAME LAROQUE and MADAME AUBREY._

_Mlle. H._ [_Aside._] So, so, my lord Marquis. Well, I will keep your
secret, _perhaps_.     [_Exit--MARGUERITE seats herself as they go off._

_Mar._ [_After a pause._] Is this your first visit to Brittany, sir?

_Man._ It is, Mademoiselle.

_Mar._ It is an interesting country, I believe, to strangers.

_Man._ Deeply interesting; though I travelled through it so rapidly,
that I had hardly time to appreciate its beauties. What I _did_ see,
however, charmed me.

_Mar._ Ah! an admirer of the picturesque, I perceive, like our
governess. You two will get on very well together--you'll be excellent
companions.

_Man._ Mademoiselle--

_Mar._ Oh, yes; she adores trees, rocks, rivers, etcetera--things that,
for my own part, I don't think very interesting.

_Man._ [_Smiling, and throwing himself carelessly into a chair._] Pray,
then, may I ask what you _do_ think interesting?

_Mar._ [_Rising._] Excuse me, sir.

                   [_Goes out with a slight and disdainful inclination._

_Man._ A timely reproof--for I was already forgetting my position.
[_ALAIN is crossing the stage._] My friend, a word with you.

_Alain._ Certainly, sir.

_Man._ Monsieur Laroque is very old, is he not?

_Alain._ Oh, yes sir, _very_ old.

_Man._ He was a seaman formerly, I believe?

_Alain._ Yes sir, and a bold one too. Up in the picture gallery, there
are paintings of some of his most famous battles with the English. Ah!
he was a terrible man. Why, sir, if you'll believe me, when the fit is
on him, he will walk for hours alone in that gallery, in a sort of
dream, muttering to himself, and fancying that he is again on board his
ship in the midst of fire and slaughter, and between you and I, sir,
they _do_ say--but hush! he's coming with his granddaughter.   [_Music._

    _Enter M. LAROQUE, leaning on MARGUERITE._

_Mar._ This way, dear grandfather. So, so. How well and strong you are
to-day.                                [_ALAIN places chairs and exits._

_Laroque._ Always better and stronger when you are near me, my darling,
[_sits down._] Thank ye, thank ye.

_Mar._ Let me present to you Mons. Manuel, our new steward.

    _LAROQUE, on seeing MANUEL, is transfixed and gazes with a sort of
    terror at him._

_Lar._ No--no--no--it cannot be!

_Mar._ What is this?

_Lar._ But I tell you he is dead--dead--

_Mar._ Dearest grandfather! [_To_ MANUEL.] For heaven's sake, sir, speak
to him.

_Man._ Really, Mademoiselle--I--I--

_Mar._ Speak, sir! Say something--anything--

_Man._ I am happy, sir, that I can devote my humble talents to your
service.

_Lar._ But he is dead--

_Man._ Who?

_Mar._ The last steward--                [_Signs to MANUEL to speak on._

_Man._ All the more happy, sir, as I have heard of your many brilliant
exploits, and had relatives who, like yourself, have often fought
against the English--

_Lar._ The English! Aye--aye--aye--they did it--they were the cause, but
they paid it all--paid dearly--dearly.

_Man._ [_Approaching._] Permit me, sir, to--

_Lar._ Ah! No--no--no. He has blood upon him! See--see--see--

_Mar._ Grandfather, dear grandfather! Do not regard him, [_To MANUEL._]
he is often thus--his great age--and--and--oh, sir, pray retire; join my
mother, I beg of you.

_Man._ Certainly, Mademoiselle. [_Aside._] A good beginning, truly.

                                                                [_Exit._

_Mar._ Grandfather, dearest, what terrible thoughts are troubling you?
See, it is I, Marguerite, your child.

_Lar._ Eh! my child! Ah, yes, true, my child, my own dear child; but
where is--are we alone? Who stood _there_ just now?

_Mar._ That was our new steward, Monsieur Manuel.

_Lar._ Manuel--Manuel--'tis very strange! I thought--

_Mar._ What, dear grandfather?

_Lar._ Thought that--that--

_Mar._ Oh, you thought you recognized him? He is like some one you have
seen before?

_Lar._ Yes--yes--yes--like some one I have seen before. But I am very
old, darling, and have seen so many faces in my time. Well, well, I
think I shall like him. Does he play picquet?

_Mar._ Indeed I do not know--

_Lar._ I hope so, I hope so--

    _Enter MAD. AUBREY._

_Mad. H._ Ah, my dear cousin, how do you find yourself now? They told me
you were ill, and almost frightened me to death.

_Lar._ Thank ye, cousin, thank ye. It was only a passing weakness.

_Mad. A._ Indeed, I rejoice to hear it, for I was fearful of some
sudden--Oh, why did you not send for me? 'Tis very unkind of you
to forget those who love you so.                               [_Weeps._

_Mar._ Grandpapa, there's one for you.                  [_Aside to him._

_Lar._ [_To MAD. AUBREY._] Well, well it's very kind of you to be so
fearful of _something sudden_, but you needn't--I've made my _will_.
[_Aside to MARGUERITE._] There's one for _her_!

_Mad. A._ Come now, take my arm, a walk upon the terrace will do you so
much good. There, don't be afraid to lean on me.

_Lar._ You're very kind, cousin. Thank ye, thank ye. [_Going._]
Marguerite, my darling, ask him if he plays picquet.

_Mar._ I will.

_Lar._ Umph! do you think he does?

_Mar._ I have no doubt of it.

_Lar._ [_As he goes out with_ MAD. AUBREY.] I hope so--I hope so--I
hope so!                              [_Exeunt LAROQUE and MAD. AUBREY._

_Mar._ My poor grandfather; spite of his failing memory, he sees through
the disinterestedness of our good cousin Aubrey. But those wild words,
his terror at the appearance of this young man, what could that mean? Or
had it any meaning? [_Sees MAD. LAROQUE and MANUEL coming in at back._]
My mother--and leaning on the arm of that person!

_Mad. L._ Precisely my own opinion, sir, my impression exactly; this
is really charming; we agree upon every point.

_Man._ I am flattered, Madame, to think such should be the case.

_Bev._ [_Without._] 'Pon my honor, young ladies, I can't, I really
can't!

    _Enter BEVANNES, surrounded by ladies, exclaiming_, "You must,
    Indeed!"

_Bev._ Would you believe it, Madame? Those unconscionable ladies
insist on another waltz.

_Mar._ Oh, indeed I cannot play any more--I must finish this to-day--It
is a promise--

_Man._ Pray do not let that inconvenience the ladies--I will play a
waltz with much pleasure.                              [_Touches Piano._

_Bev._ Sir!

_Mar._ [_Haughtily._] Thank you, sir--it is not requisite.

_Man._ [_Aside._] Forgetting again.                  [_Goes up Terrace._

_Bev._ [_Aside._] Pretty cool!

_Mar._ Very presuming of that steward.

_Mad L._ Very polite of that _gentleman_.

_Bev._ Highly disgusting to _this_ gentleman.

_Mad. L._ Well, de Bevannes, you must find some other amusement for the
ladies.

_Bev._ 'Gad, I'll soon do that. It's positively fatiguing to be in such
general request with them. They can't do without me for one moment--they
absolutely--

    _Turns and perceives MANUEL, who, during the preceding dialogue,
    has entered into conversation with the ladies, and has, by this
    time, offered his arm to two of them--They all accompany him off._

_Bev._ [_Aside._] Well, if I were given to strong sentiments, I should
wish that fellow at the deuce. As it is, I'll content myself with simply
damning his impudence.

_Mad. L._ Do you know, my dear, that I don't feel quite easy in my mind
about that young man.

_Bev._ [_Aside._] Nor I, either.

_Mar._ Why not, mamma?

_Mad. L._ He is much too charming to make a good steward.

_Mar._ Really; I do not perceive it. A person may be honest and
well-behaved, although he does happen to play on the piano.

_Bev._ I don't know that; I flatter myself I have seen something of the
world, and experience has specially taught me to beware of the man who
plays the piano.

_Mar._ Mamma, dear, will you hand me those scissors?

_Mad. L._ Yes, my child. [_Perceives MANUEL'S portfolio._] Whose
drawing-book is this?

_Mar._ That? oh! that is the steward's--I saw it in his hand when he
came in.

_Mad. L._ I positively must take a peep. Oh! De Bevannes, look!
beautiful! What a charming accomplishment it is to draw well.

_Mar._ Yes, for an engineer, or a builder--

_Bev._ Or an actor--

_Mar._ Why gracious! Monsieur de Bevannes, you have said a good thing.

_Bev._ Have I? Allow me to apologize.

_Mar._ Not at all; it's your _first_ offence.

_Mad. L._ How beautifully finished these groups are.

_Bev._ Positively, they're not so bad.

_Mad. L._ Bad! my dear sir; they're exquisite. Look, for instance at
that horse--is it not perfection?

_Bev._ It would be, doubtless--only it happens to be a cow.

_Mad.L._ A cow?

_Bev._ I think so; horses don't go about with two horns.

    _Enter MANUEL._

_Man._ Your pardon, ladies; but I believe I left my drawing-book--

_Mad. L._ Allow me to return it, sir--and to thank you for an accident
which has afforded us much pleasure.

_Man._ Madame, you are too kind--so kind, indeed, that you have too long
refrained from permitting me to commence my duties. With your consent, I
will at once set about them. Your farm at Langeot, of which you spoke to
me, is not more, I think, than a mile or two from this. I will walk over
there this afternoon, and--

_Mad. L._ Walk! over such a miserable bad road as it is. Indeed, sir, I
could not allow it.

    _Enter MADAME AUBREY._

_Mad. A._ Hush! Pray, _pray_, not so much noise. My dear cousin has
composed himself to sleep.

_Bev._ Noise! it appears to me we were pretty quiet.

_Mad. A._ Ah, sir, you might think so; but the least sound jars upon
his poor nerves.                                               [_Weeps._

_Bev._ [_Aside._] I never saw such a devil of a woman as this is, to
cry.

_Man._ But I assure you, Madame, that I would rather walk. If I pretend
to be your steward--why steward I must be, and not fine gentleman.

_Mad. L._ [_To_ MARGUERITE.] My dear, would it be proper to allow M.
Manuel to walk?

_Mar._ I believe it is usual for the steward to do so. However, I see no
reason why he should not ride, if he chooses. There are plenty of horses
in the stable.

_Mad. A._ Ah!                                                  [_Weeps._

_Bev._  What's the matter, Madame?

_Mad. A._ Talking of riding always overcomes me.

_Bev._ Excuse my peculiar mode of expression--but you appear to me to
pass your life in being perpetually overcome.

_Mad. A._ Women are but fragile flowers.                       [_Weeps._

_Bev._ They seem to require a deal of water.

_Mad. A._ But horses, sir--talking of horses, puts me in mind of a pet
I had.

_Mad. L._ A pet horse, dear?

_Mad. A._ No, love, a donkey. Oh!                              [_Weeps._

_Bev._ [_Aside._] Now she's watering the donkey.

_Mad. A._ I had the dear little creature for two years. Just long enough
to--pray listen, sir.                                      [_To MANUEL._

_Man._ I beg your pardon, Madame--I'm all attention--I heard. The
creature had two ears just long enough--                   [_All laugh._

_Mad. A._ No, no; I said I had him for two years--just a sufficient time
to love him like a child--when he died--died, sir, of one of those
diseases peculiar to that class of quadruped.

_Man._ Children?

_Mad. A._ No, sir, Donkies! Dear me, it was, Umph! let me see, you must
know, sir, what I mean?                                  [_To BEVANNES._

_Bev._ Measles?

_Mad. A._ No, no, but no matter; He died--

_Bev._ Peace to his ashes. But as you were saying, Madame Laroque, there
are plenty of horses in the stable, and, really, all but ruined for want
of exercise.

    _Enter DR. DESMARETS._

_Des._ Yes, that's what you'll _all_ be, if you continue to lounge away
the days as you do.

_Mad. L._ Ah, Doctor, we've missed you dreadfully.

_Des._ What's the matter? anybody sick?

_Bev._ You ought to have been here just now, Doctor; Madame Aubrey has
told the most touching tale--

_Des._ Of a donkey? I know, I've heard it often.

_Bev._ But with regard to a horse for M. Manuel. There's Black Harry--

_Des._ Black Harry! Nobody can ride the brute! He's perfectly
untameable! Why, de Bevannes, you tried it yourself and couldn't.

_Bev._ Ahem! Oh--ah--yes, but I had no spurs.

_Des._ Spurs! Why, you couldn't even get upon his back!

_Bev._ Eh--why--no--not exactly--[_Aside_] Confound him!

_Man._ [_To BEVANNES_] And is Black Harry so very unmanageable?

_Bev._ 'Pon my word I don't see it. He has an insuperable objection to
being mounted, but if you can get upon his back, and _being_ on his
back, can _keep_ there, why, of course, it's a great point in your
favor.

_Man._ [_Smiling._] Certainly an important one.

_Des._ If you except a partiality for biting, and ditto for kicking,
occasionally shying, and always prone to running away, he's a pleasant
beast.

_Mar._ But such a beauty! I never saw a horse I should like so much to
ride, if he were but properly broken.

_Man._ [_To MAD. LAROQUE_] Madame, have I your permission?

_Mad. L._ Certainly.                                    [_MANUEL rings._

_Bev._ [_Aside._] What's he at now?

    _Enter ALAIN._

_Man._ Tell one of the grooms to saddle Black Harry.

_Alain._ Sir!

_Des._ What?

_Mad. L._ No--no--

_Man._ [_To_ ALAIN.] Did you hear my order?

_Alain._ Yes, sir. [_Aside._] There'll be work for the Doctor to-day.

                                                                [_Exit._

_Bev._ [_Aside._] Good.

_Man._ Pray do not fear, Madame, I have been used to restive horses.
I'll just make his acquaintance now, and if I can succeed in gaining a
small portion of his esteem, I will do myself the honor of riding him
daily until he is fit for your daughter's use.

_Des._ [_To BEVANNES._] What the devil made you mention that confounded
animal? You don't like the new steward, eh?

_Bev._ Not particularly.

_Des._ He's good looking.

_Bev._ Inconveniently.

_Des._ And you want his neck broken?

_Bev._ No. But I should like his nose put out of joint.

_Mad. L._ I do not think I ought to permit this.

                                             [_Noise below the terrace._

    _Enter ALAIN._

_Alain._ The horse is ready, sir.

_Bev._ I will lend you a pair of my spurs. Alain, get my spurs as you go
down.

_Alain._ Very well, sir.                                        [_Exit._

_Mad. L._ Let me entreat you, sir.

_Man._ I do assure you, there is nothing to fear. With your good wishes
I am certain of success.                             [_Exit down steps._

_Des._ [_On a terrace._] Why, here are all the servants and grooms.
Quite an assemblage.

    _Noise--Cries of_ "Hold him," "Quiet, sir," "Out of the way,"
    "Stand clear," &c.--_Enter LADIES and MLLE HELOUIN._

_Des._ A nice, quiet animal. [_Leans over._] Manuel, my dear boy. Sir!
if you break your leg, you may mend it yourself--I won't.

_Bev._ [_On a sofa._] Doctor, report progress. [_Aside._] I'll bet a
thousand francs he doesn't even mount him.

_Mar._ [_Who has overheard him._] I'll take that bet, sir.

_Bev._ Eh? oh! as you please Mademoiselle.

_Des._ By the Lord, he's up!             [_Noise as before--then shout._

_Bev._ In the air?

_Des._ No, in the saddle. [_Noise again._] Ah, he's off!

_Bev._ Off the horse?

_Des._ No; off on a gallop. [_Noise gets more distant._] Egad! they're
all scampering after him. What's he doing now? The ditch! take care!

_Mad. L._ He'll be killed.

_Mad. A._ Oh! oh!                                              [_Weeps._

_Mar._ The horse can never do it.                     [_Shouts distant._

_Des._ Ah! he's--

_Bev._ In it?

_Des._ No, _over_ it! Back again! [_Shouts distant._] Here he comes.
Egad! Black Harry's had enough of it.         [_Shouts approach nearer._

_Mar._ [_Aside._] There's some mystery about this man. He has hardly
arrived, when all eyes seem turned to him. There certainly _is_ a
mystery.

_Mlle H._ It will be cleared up, Mademoiselle.

    _Enter ALAIN._

_Mar._ What do you mean?

_Mlle H._ Hush!

_Alain._ [_To BEVANNES._] Your spurs, sir.

_Bev._ Oh! I hope they assisted him.

_Alain._ Didn't want 'em sir.

    _Great shouting below--The ladies, who have been witnessing the
    ride, crowd upon the terrace, waving their handkerchiefs, and
    appear surrounding and congratulating MANUEL as he comes on up
    steps._

_Des._ [_To BEVANNES._] Somebody's nose is out of joint.


END TABLEAU II.


Lapse of Three Months.




TABLEAU III.


    _The Park of the Chateau Laroque. ALAIN discovered arranging
    Portfolio and Drawing materials._

_Alain._ Now really I do thank Madame for deputing me to wait more
especially on Monsieur Manuel. Steward or no steward, he's a perfect
gentleman; of that there can't be a doubt. What a pity it is that
Mademoiselle Marguerite and he don't like one another. When he says
white, she says black. When she goes one way, he goes another, yet
everybody else likes him. M'lle Helonin, our Governess, is absolutely in
love with him, and the wonderful influence he has obtained over old
Mons. Laroque, in this short time, is unaccountable. He has hardly been
here three months, and they say that all the money will be left
according to his advice--but that's going rather far, even for gossip.
Well, now, his drawing materials are all ready for him, and--here he is
to employ them.

    _Enter MANUEL._

_Man._ Alain, did you, by chance, pick up a half finished letter
anywhere in my room?

_Alain._ No, sir.

_Man._ Strange! I commenced it yesterday, and left it on my table,
intending to finish it this morning. I have searched the room
thoroughly, and it is nowhere to be found.

_Alain._ Was it of much importance?

_Man._ Merely inasmuch as it related to family and business matters. It
was for the Doctor, in case he should call when I was from home.
However, let it go. I'll write another when I return. [_Sits down and
prepares drawing materials._] Did not Mademoiselle Marguerite go out on
horseback yesterday alone?

_Alain._ Yes, sir.

_Man._ How was it you did not follow her, as usual?

_Alain._ Oh, sir, she often goes without me. She's a capital rider, and
she says, to be alone sometimes, makes her feel more self-dependent, and
you know, sir, it won't do to contradict her, for though a charitable,
kind-hearted, young lady, she's rather wilful, and terribly proud.

_Man._ Somewhat, perhaps, but her general manner appears to me more the
result of a sad and gloomy thoughtfulness, than mere pride.

_Alain._ Ah, well, I suppose, sir, that, like most young ladies of her
age, she's a little bit in love.

_Man._ In love?

_Alain._ Yes, sir, Monsieur de Bevannes has been paying her great
attention for some time past, and it would be a grand match, for, after
Monsieur Laroque, he is the richest gentleman in the neighborhood, and
of excellent family. Ah, sir, what a pity it is _you_ are not rich.

_Man._ Why so, Alain?

_Alain._ Because--no matter. Have you any orders for me, sir?

_Man._ Merely to have a good look for that letter when you go to my
room.

_Alain._ I certainly will, sir.                                 [_Exit._

_Man._ Married--married--and to _him_. Well, and why not? Fool that I
am! Despite of all that should preserve and fence my heart as with a
wall of steel, from every impulse which could induce forgetfulness of my
bitter lot, and the one sacred object of my life, still will that coward
heart indulge in dreams--wild dreams of one day laying its most precious
offerings at the feet which would but spurn them.

    _Enter M'LLE HELOUIN, with basket._

But I will conquer yet, and if the struggle be hard, the victory will be
the more worthy.

_Mlle H._ [_Aside._] He is alone. Hitherto, I have kept his secret well;
whether I will continue silent, depends upon himself. Courage, and the
poor hireling may yet be a Marchioness. [_Comes down to him._] Oh!
Monsieur Manuel, how beautiful that is! You see, while you have been
painting the woods, I have been gathering flowers. You know we have a
ball to-night.

_Man._ Indeed? I was not aware of it.

_Mlle H._ You positively don't seem to know or care about anything that
goes on. You are worse than indifferent, you are unsociable--

_Man._ Pardon me, not unsociable. But I know my station, and think it
better not to risk being reminded of it.

_Mlle H._ [_After a pause._] Monsieur Manuel--

_Man._ Mademoiselle--

_Mlle H._ Have I ever offended you?

_Man._ No, indeed.

_Mlle H._ I have been vain enough to think, at times, that you had some
friendly feeling for me.

_Man._ And so I have. It is but natural. Our fortunes and positions are
the same, or nearly so. Both dependent on the caprices of those who
employ us, both alone, friendless. This should create sympathy at least,
if not friendship.

_Mlle H._ You would not fear, then, to tell me of my faults?

_Man._ Not if you desired it.

_Mlle H._ Indeed I do desire it.

_Mlle H._ But I only know of one.

_Mlle H._ Pray name it. Nay, I shall receive it as a kindness.

_Mlle H._ Well, then I think you admit and encourage somewhat too great
a familiarity with the family in whose employment we are. Your motives
may be, indeed, I'm sure they _are_, perfectly innocent; still they will
not be so considered, for in this world, the unfortunate are always
suspected.

_Mlle H._ True, true. Spoken with a delicacy and candor all you own--I
thank you sincerely--and you will always continue as now--my true
friend?

_Man._ I shall feel honored in the title.

_Mlle H._ A true--a _dear_ friend?

_Man._ [_Aside._] What is she driving at?

_Mlle H._ A friend that loves me?

_Man._ [_Aside._] Hallo! we're getting tender!

_Mlle H._ A friend that loves me, ardently--do you hear?

_Man._ Distinctly.

_Mlle H._ And do you comprehend?

_Man._ [_Half aside._] I'm afraid I do.

_Mlle H._ Do you remember the old nursery rhyme--

  "Pluck from the flower its leafy store--
  Love me little, love me more;
  Hearts change owners, yet combine,
  If mine is yours, and yours is mine."

Come, now, let us see if you know which line should be yours. Shall I
commence?

_Man._ If you please.

_Mlle H._

  "Pluck from the flower it's leafy store--[_A pause._]
  Love me little, love me more; [_A pause._]
  Hearts change owners, yet combine,
  If----

_Man._ I respectfully decline."

_Mlle H._ [_Throwing away the flower, which she has been picking to
pieces_] Then, sir--

    _Sees BEVANNES, who enters._

Indeed, I could look at it all day, it is so beautiful--but I positively
must go. Monsieur, an revoir. [_Aside to MANUEL, as she goes._] You have
misunderstood me.                                               [_Exit._

_Man._ Have I? Then I must be a greater fool than I thought.

_Bev._ [_Aside._] Pretty close quarters. What the deuce is that
governess after? And now for a little scientific pumping. [_Comes
down._] Ah, Monsieur Manuel, at your drawing, eh? Beautiful, beautiful,
indeed.

_Man._ You flatter.

_Bev._ Not at all--but to change the subject--by the by, do, I interrupt
your work?

_Man._ Not in the least.

_Bev._ Well, I was going to compliment you on the vast affection and
confidence you have inspired in poor old Laroque.

_Man._ I believe he really has a kindly regard for me.

_Bev._ Regard! my dear sir--you are absolutely wound around his heart.
His affection for his grand-daughter is very great, but no one has the
influence over him that you have. Now, in the strictest confidence, I'm
going to be very frank with you--and mark me well, you will not find it
to your disadvantage hereafter, if you are equally frank with _me_.

_Man._ Really, I don't quite--

_Bev._ No; but you will presently. Without flattery, I think you--

_Man._ [_Referring to his picture._] Too green.

_Bev._ Eh? Oh, exactly. I was about to say I think you, in every way, a
gentleman, therefore I don't hesitate to confide in you the fact that
yesterday, after dinner, I was just--

_Man._ [_To picture._] A little blue.

_Bev._ Eh? Oh precisely. I was just on the point of proposing to Madame
Laroque for her daughter's hand, when it suddenly struck me that I
should possess a double claim, if I could, in the first place, influence
you enough in the young lady's favor to make it certain that the bulk of
Monsieur Laroque's property would be left to her.

_Man._ Monsieur de Bevannes, you really very much over-rate--

_Bev._ Pray forgive me, but you hardly know yourself, the importance of
your good offices in this matter. I was going on to say that my marriage
with Marguerite is all but a settled affair, and, of course, it is my
duty to promote her interests in every possible way. I think you must
concede that?

_Man._ Surely, but--

_Bev._Permit me. Now I wish to call to your mind that Madame Laroque,
though a worthy excellent woman, is one of very simple tastes and
habits, and, should too large a portion of the property be left to her,
it would tax and embarrass her to an extent that would be painful to my
feelings. I hope you appreciate my disinterestedness in the matter.

_Man._ Oh, thoroughly! But I am still at a loss to imagine where my
interference would be either necessary or effectual.

_Bev._ My dear friend--

_Man._ [_Aside._] Now _he's_ getting tender!

_Bev._ One word from you as to the proper disposition of the money
would--

_Man._ Monsieur de Bevannes, let me end this at once, by telling you
that, in my opinion, any interference from me in the family affairs of
M. Laroque, would be a gross and unseemly abuse of his confidence.

_Bev._ And this is the return you make for mine?

_Man._ I did not solicit it, sir.

_Bev._ Sir, permit me to take your hand.

_Man._ Really--

_Bev._ You have stood the test, you are a noble fellow. You are--

    _Enter MADAME AUBREY._

[_Aside._] There's Mrs. Waterspout, by jove! [_Aloud._] You seem puzzled
at my manner--I will take another opportunity of explaining. Suffice it
now to say you have _misunderstood_ me.                         [_Exit._

_Man._ My understanding seems to be terribly at fault to-day.

_Mad. A._ [_Aside._] De Bevannes has left him. A good opportunity for
me. [_Comes down._] Beautiful! Exquisite indeed!

_Man._ Madame--

_Mad. A._ Truly, each new picture you finish, is more lovely than the
last. Oh!                                                      [_Weeps._

_Man._ What is the matter?

_Mad. A._ The painting of that sheep's head--

_Man._ Yes, Madame--

_Mad. A._ Reminds me of my own portrait, taken in happier years, long
passed away.

_Man._ But there are as happy ones in store for you, I hope.

_Mad. A._ That will depend greatly upon you, Monsieur Manuel.

_Man._ On _me_?

_Mad. A._ Yes. Do you know, Monsieur Manuel, that I find my poor cousin
Laroque very much changed,--

_Man._ Indeed he is.

_Mad. A._ And for the worse. In fact, he appears to me to be sinking
fast.

_Man._ I'm afraid such is the case.

_Mad. A._ How fond he is of you--you, it is well known, possess his
entire confidence.

_Man._ I have been fortunate enough to make my poor services acceptable
to him.

_Mad. A._ Now, just between ourselves, in the strictest confidence; do
you happen to be aware how the property will be left?

_Man._ I do not, Madame.

_Mad. A._ I am in a state of painful apprehension, lest the dear old
gentleman should over-estimate the desires and requirements of Madame
Laroque, and should, therefore, curtail any little legacy coming to
_me_, to make _her_ portion larger, which would be absolutely throwing
money away. I hope you understand my entire want of selfishness in this
matter?

_Man._ I think I do.

_Mad. A._ I was sure you would. Now, if you will use your power and
settle this affair to my advantage, all I can say is, so noble an action
would not go unrewarded.

_Man._ I should hope not.

_Mad. A._ You will find me _substantially_ grateful; you understand me?

_Man._ Entirely.

_Mad. A._ And I you?

_Man._ Not quite; but in order that you may--I must tell you,
Madame--that when you offer me money to rob your benefactor, and mine,
you entirely and totally mistake the person you are addressing.

_Mad. A._ Oh! oh!                                              [_Weeps._

_Man._ It grieves me to be so abrupt, but--

_Mad. A._ It is not that, it is not that--but, to be thought capable of
such--to be accused--oh, sir! you have cruelly _misunderstood_ me.

                                                       [_Exit, weeping._

_Man._ Another misunderstanding! That makes three friends I have secured
this morning. One or two more of the same sort, and my business here
will be soon finished.

    _Enter MLLE HELOUIN._

_Man._ Here comes the first misunderstanding again.

_Mlle H._ M. Manuel, I thought you might like to know that the Doctor
has just arrived--

_Man._ Thank you--I'll go to him at once.                       [_Exit._

_Mlle H._ So eager to avoid me. Have a care, my lord Marquis--spite of
my insignificance, you may learn to rue the day you made me conscious of
it.

    _Enter BEVANNES._

And here is one on whom, if I don't very much mistake, I may rely for
aid.

_Bev._ Upon my honor, Mademoiselle, you make quite a pretty picture--a
wood nymph's reverie; sweet subject, now, for the pencil of our friend,
the steward.

_Mlle H._ Our friend, the steward, as you term him, has loftier subjects
for his pictures, either aerial or substantial.

_Bev._ Really!

_Mlle H._ And in the former quality his aspirations are sublime.

_Bev._ Mademoiselle, you are an entertaining person, but I never guessed
a conundrum in my life.

_Mlle H._ In plain terms, then, this romantic gentleman aspires to
create an interest in the heart of Marguerite.

_Bev._ O come! I can stand a great deal, but that's rather _too_ good.

_Mlle H._ But if I can prove it?

_Bev._ The thing is too absurd.

_Mlle H._ I have just parted from Madame Aubrey.

_Bev._ I congratulate you.

_Mlle H._ You jest, M. de Bevannes, but you may one day wake to find the
steward rather a dangerous person. Madame Aubrey has picked up a letter
of his, which was blown out of the window of his room, into the park.
Would you like to see it?

_Bev._ Mademoiselle, I don't pretend to more virtue than my neighbors,
but if I can only get at facts by reading another man's letters, I'm
afraid I shall remain in ignorance.

_Mlle H._ Marguerite is coming. Would you like to hear the communication
I have to make?

_Bev._ The contents of the letter?

_Mlle H._ No, but still a somewhat startling discovery.

_Bev._ On the whole, I think I'll take my departure; for when there's
mischief to be concocted, and two women to brew it, it would be the
grossest vanity in any man to think he could improve the cookery.

                                                                [_Exit._

_Mlle H._ Now if I can instill but one small drop of the poison called
suspicion, her proud, impetuous spirit, will complete the work itself.

    _Enter MARGUERITE._

_Mar._ Really, a very touching scene. The affection existing between the
good doctor and our steward is remarkable. If he had been M. Manuel's
father, he could hardly have been more cordially received.

_Mlle H._ And I assure you that M. Manuel's father could not serve him
at this moment as the doctor can.

_Mar._ My dear governess, you seem to know more of this young man than
you choose to reveal. I remember well your mysterious words to me the
day he first rode and conquered that horse.

_Mlle H._ Perhaps I have been to blame for having remained silent so
long. But right or wrong, I have, until now, looked upon it as a duty to
keep this person's secret inviolate.

_Mar._ His secret!

_Mlle H._ Nor would I reveal it now, but that his base intentions are no
longer doubtful, and silence would be criminal. However, I must exact
your promise that the knowledge of it shall remain, for the present,
between ourselves.

_Mar._ You have my word. Proceed.

_Mlle H._ Four years ago, when you were in Paris--you are aware that I
was in the habit of visiting some of my old friends at my former school?

_Mar._ I remember.

_Mlle H._ Well, I often saw there this very M. Manuel. He visited the
school to see his little sister. His father was the well known Marquis
de Champcey.

_Mar._ Ah!

_Mlle H._ It was the talk of the school that the family were even then
much reduced. Now, they are totally ruined. The father is dead, and the
son has, through the good offices of a friend, been placed in a position
to regain the fortune he has lost. By what means I leave to your
penetration to discover.

_Mar._ And is it so! [_A pause._] But, after all, the conduct of this
young man in no way justifies suspicion. I see him but seldom. In truth,
he actually avoids me.

_Mlle H._ Of course he does. Reserve creates inquiry, inquiry, interest.
Oh, he has been well tutored.

_Mar._ Enough. I thank you sincerely for the warning. But relieve your
mind of all anxiety; I shall know how to deal with this conscientious
gentleman, be assured.

_Mlle H._ Indeed I feel the happier that I have at last confided this
fact to you. Ah, my child, to what snares, what treachery, what deceit,
does the possession of wealth expose the innocent. The thought of them
makes the poor governess almost contented with her humble lot. Come,
shall we walk towards the house? As we go, I shall be able to bring to
your recollection many circumstances, trifling in themselves, but which,
when considered in connection with what I have now told you, will serve
to bring full conviction to your mind.

        [_Exeunt MARGUERITE, leaving her basket of flowers on the bank._

    _Enter MANUEL._

_Man._ And now, having enjoyed the honor of a tete-a-tete with each of
those most interested in inquiring into matters upon which I'm strictly
determined to be silent, I presume I shall be permitted to continue my
work undisturbed.             [_He has reseated himself at his drawing._

    _MARGUERITE re-enters to find her basket. He rises. She merely
    looks haughtily at him and, in carrying off the basket, lets a
    rose fall on the ground._

_Man._ Really, her manner is more than haughty. 'Tis almost rude. [_He
picks up the flower._] I suppose now, she'd grudge me this poor flower,
yet who, though loving wildly and hopelessly as I do, would not think it
a fair prize? No, I will return it. I will not be guilty of one action
which shall give my heart the power to whisper "Thus should'st thou not
have done."

    _Re-enter MARGUERITE._

_Mar._ [_Aside._] As I supposed. Have the kindness, sir, to return me
that flower. I am not in the habit of presenting boquets to--gentlemen.

_Man._ Under which conviction, Mademoiselle, I was on the point of
bringing it to you.

_Mar._ [_Aside._] Oh! for some way to make him feel how I despise him.
Do you know, M. Manuel, seeing so little of you, lately, I was under the
impression that death had deprived us of another steward--

_Man._ Highly flattered that you should condescend to be under any
impressions concerning so insignificant a person.

_Mar._ I thought that so gifted a gentleman could hardly do anything
without a motive, and now I am informed that your absence is
attributable to the fact that you spend all your evenings with our noble
relative, Mademoiselle Delonnais.

_Man._ I certainly do, and I deny myself that pleasure the less because
the lady happens to be old enough to be my grandmother. Her ancestors
reigned here formerly, and she--the last of a noble race--poor and
infirm, bears so well the dignity of her name, her age, and her
misfortunes, that I feel almost a filial affection for her. Besides, it
was your mother who first introduced me to her.

_Mar._ Oh! no one means to reproach you; on the contrary, I dare say
Madame Laroque is obliged to you for your attention to the good old
lady.

_Man._ You may remember, too, it was your wish--

_Mar._ Oh, if you want praise or admiration from me, you must be content
to wait. Though young, I have some experience of life. I know that there
are two motives to most human actions. I know that M'lle Delonnais has a
small independence. I know she has no heir, therefore a little extra
attention and--

_Man._ Mademoiselle, permit me to express for you my sincere pity.

_Mar._ Sir!

_Man._ Permit me to express for you my sincere pity.

_Mar._ Your pity?

_Man._ Yes, madame--if unjust suspicion be the bitter fruit of
experience in one so young. Nothing can merit more compassion than a
heart withered by misbelief, almost before it has begun to exist.

_Mar._ Are you aware of what you say, sir? Are you aware to whom you
speak?

_Man._ Entirely conscious, Mademoiselle, of both.

_Mar._ [_Bitterly._] Perhaps you expect me to ask your pardon?

_Man._ Assuredly I do. Wealth can afford to humble itself--poverty
cannot.

_Mar._ [_As she is going, turns with a haughty humility._] Then, sir,
I ask your pardon.                                              [_Exit._

_Man._ Oh! my sister, my darling Rose! It needs all my love for thee
to make endurance of these insults less than cowardice! Coldness and
antipathy have increased to absolute hate and persecution. She is
determined to drive me hence. She will succeed at last, and then--

    _Enter DOCTOR DESMARETS._

Ah! my dear Doctor!

_Des._ I've eaten some lunch, had the dust brushed off, and now I'm
going to brush some more on.

_Man._ How so?

_Des._ Just got a letter--patient very sick--twenty miles ride there and
back. Pleasant life, a doctor's.

_Man._ Where is it?

_Des._ About four miles beyond the ruins of Elfin.

_Man._ The ruins of Elfen.

_Des._ Yes; but what's the matter with you? you look feverish and queer.
Anything wrong between you and the family?

_Man._ Why, no. But--

_Des._ But--what? They tell me you're quite a great man here--old
Laroque can't live without you--angry because you don't spend all your
evenings at the Chateau--and the ladies, without exception, are crazy
about you.

_Man._ Pardon me--there's one _important_ exception--Mlle Marguerite.

_Des._ What the devil! You don't mean to tell me you can't agree with
_her_.

_Man._ I do assure you--she loses no opportunity to humiliate, and even
openly insult me. Indeed, it has lately become insufferable--so that I
am going to tax your friendship once more, to seek for me some other
employment.

_Des._ Now don't be hasty, my dear boy. By Jove! here she comes--no she
don't--she perceives you--and there she goes. She don't escape _me_
though.

_Man._ Nay, my dear doctor, I beg of you--

_Des._ Stuff! nonsense! I'll just give her a piece of my mind.  [_Exit._

_Man._ I very much fear the Doctor's zeal in my cause will lead him into
trouble with this proud girl--but I am resolved. Here, I will not, _can_
not remain. Rose, my darling, thy marriage dowry must be sought and won
elsewhere. I will at once visit my poor old friend, and say farewell.
Marguerite I will see no more--no faltering now--a good resolve once
taken, action should be speedy. To-night the horse I have almost learned
to love, because she would one day ride him, shall bear me for the last
time.                                                           [_Exit._

    _The DOCTOR and MARGUERITE are heard outside--then enter._

_Des._ Can't help it, if I _do_ offend you. The young man is my friend--

_Mar._ Doctor--

_Des._ My friend, Mademoiselle--and I never desert a friend, even though
he has incurred the displeasure of your proud ladyship.

_Mar._ Do you not regard _me_ as a friend?

_Des._ I should rather think so; known you since you were a baby;
disposition altered since then--

_Mar._ For the better?

_Des._ Don't know that. When you are angry now it's a storm--_then_ it
was only a squall.

_Mar._ This is no jesting matter. Doctor Desmarets, I have always
considered you a man of honor.

_Des._ Much obliged to you. I've been under the same impression myself.

_Mar._ What then is the meaning of this plot!

_Des._ Plot!

_Mar._ This young man, this steward you have so kindly supplied us with,
he has been recognized. He is known!

_Des._ Well, suppose he is; what of it?

_Mar._ Why does he bear a false name?

_Des._ He don't.

_Mar._ Doctor--

_Des._ Manuel is his Christian name. I suppose he may make what use of
it he pleases. Whether he puts it first or last, is nobody's business
but his own.

_Mar._ His motive?

_Des._ His motive, Mademoiselle, is worthy of himself, and proceeds from
a sense of honest pride, which many would do well to imitate. He is a
gentleman, and a man of honor, reduced to sudden poverty, and compelled
to labor for a livelihood. Now, I'm not acute enough to perceive any
_plot_ in all this. But I _do_ perceive that you are doing your best to
drive him from this place.

_Mar._ Doctor, your word is enough. I believe you, and I thank you. Oh,
it is so sad to look only on the gloomy side of things. I thank you _so_
much, and never liked you half so well as I do to-day.

    [_While speaking this speech, she searches for the rose she has
    taken from MANUEL, and, on finding it, places it in her bosom._

_Des._ No?

_Mar._ No!

_Des._ What a pity--

_Mar._ Eh?

_Des._ That I can't stay to luxuriate in your friendship. I have only
time to say good-bye to your mother, then I must be off.

_Mar._ Well, now, I'll tell you what I'll do. To prove I'm in earnest,
I'm going to take my horse, and bear you company part of the way.

_Des._ My child, it will be dark before I get there.

_Mar._ But there'll be a lovely moon, and I want to see the ruined tower
of Elfen by moonlight. So say no more, for I'm resolved.

_Des._ Well, my experience, professional and personal, has taught me
that when a woman is determined--

    _Enter MADAME LAROQUE--DE BEVANNES._

_Mad. L._ You are right, my dear Bevannes, I confess it.

_Bev._ Oh, there's no doubt he is, absolute perfection, the _rara avis_,
so long sought for, found at last.

_Mad. L._ Laugh as you please, I positively adore him.

_Bev._ You'll ask me to the wedding, I hope?

_Mad. L._ Go along with you. Well, my child, have you persuaded that
obstinate man to stay till morning?

_Des._ That obstinate man regrets he must go within the hour.

_Alain._ [_without._] Go away, you troublesome little thing!

    _Enter CHRISTINE and ALAIN._

_Mad. L._ What's the matter?

_Alain._ This little girl will insist on searching the park for some
gentleman she wishes to see, belonging to the Chateau.

_Mad. L._ That will do--leave her here.                   [_Exit ALAIN._

_Bev._ Now small specimen of rustic humanity, what do you want?

_Mad. L._ What is your name, little one?

_Christine._ Christine, Madame. My grandfather--

_Bev._ Never mind your pedigree--which of us do you want?

_Mad. L._ Be quiet. Well my dear?

_Chris._ My grandfather is very old and blind, if you please,
and--and--oh! I want to see the _nice_, _good_ gentleman.

_Des._ Bevannes, she don't want _you_.

_Chris._ The _handsome_ gentleman.

_Bev._ Doctor, she don't want _you_.

_Chris._ Please, Madame, may I tell you what happened yesterday?

_Mad. L._ Yes, child, go on.

_Chris._ My grandfather has a dog that leads him about--poor old
Spot--such a pet--

    _Enter MADAME AUBREY._

_Mad. A._ A pet! are you talking of a pet?

_Bev._ Yes; but don't weep, Madame--it isn't a donkey. Go on, little
girl.

_Chris._ Well, yesterday, we three--grandfather, Spot and I, were
sitting near the stream, in the village, by the mill-dam, when some
wicked boys--oh! such dreadful wicked boys, came by. They seized poor
Spot and threw him into the water. He was nearly being crushed by the
mill-wheel, when a dear, kind gentleman, who was riding by on a
beautiful black horse--

    _Enter MANUEL._

Oh! there he is. Oh, sir! I'm so glad I've found you.

_Man._ [_Aside._] Oh, confound it! what brings you here, you little
pest?

_Chris._ Don't be angry, sir--you rode away so fast, yesterday, I had no
time to thank you, and I wish to do so now.

_Bev._ Beautiful subject for a nautical drama: "The Desperate Diver; or,
The Drowning Dog of the Dam."

_Man._ Ridiculous enough, I admit. However, I did jump into the water
after poor Spot.

_Chris._ You did, you did, indeed! Ah! sir, [_to_ BEVANNES,] you
laugh--but perhaps if you were old and blind, you wouldn't think it such
a joke.

_Bev._ I assure you, my dear, it would have given me infinite pleasure
to have saved your dog.

_Des._ You save a dog? Why you can't swim.                 [_All laugh._

_Bev._ Here are ten francs, child, go away.

_Chris._ And now, sir, [_To_ MANUEL.] I'll go directly, if you'll give
me just one kiss.

_Man._ [_Angrily._] Upon my word--

_Mad. L._ Now I insist upon it you do. Poor little thing, I'm sure she
deserves it.

_Man._ [_Laughing._] Well, then, [_Kisses her._] now, go home, there's
a dear.

_Chris._ Oh! I will, I will, good-bye.

_Mad. L._ Well, haven't you got one for me?

_Chris._ Oh, dear, yes, Madame.                        [_Kisses MAD. L._

_Bev._ You're forgetting your money.

_Chris._ Oh, dear, no, sir.                    [_Takes it and curtsies._

_Bev._ Now a kiss for me?

_Chris._ Oh, dear, no, sir!

                  [_Curtsies and exits. All laugh except MADAME AUBREY._

_Mad. A._ Oh!                                                  [_Weeps._

_Bev._ Weeping for my disappointment, Madame?

_Mad. A._ No--sir--no.

_Mad. L._ A most interesting little girl.

_Mad. A._ That's it, that's it. She reminds me of a circumstance that
occurred in my youth, before my marriage. You must know I had a little--

_Des._ Hallo!                      [_Takes MARGUERITE hastily up stage._

_Bev._ Ahem!                                    [_Takes MADAME LAROQUE._

_Mad. A._ Eh! What! [_Calling after them as they go off._] You don't
understand me! A little _niece_--Oh! this is too dreadful!

                                                    [_Sinks into chair._


END OF TABLEAU III.




TABLEAU IV.


    _Interior of a room in the Tower of Elfen. A large breach in the
    wall at back, through which the distant country is dimly seen.
    Night coming on._

    _YVONNET discovered upon the balcony, listening. Singing in the
    distance. When the singing is done, Enter MANUEL._

_Man._ What are you at there, my good fellow?

_Yvonnet._ [_Startled._] I was listening to the singing, sir.

_Man._ Who are the singers?

_Yvon._ The reapers, sir, returning home.

_Man._ You, I suppose, are the keeper of these ruins?

_Yvon._ Yes, sir. I am the shepherd that minds the sheep, and shows the
tower to strangers.                                        [_Shows key._

_Man._ [_Giving money._] There.

_Yvon._ Thank you, sir.

_Man._ Are you never afraid here all alone?

_Yvon._ Afraid! No, indeed. That is, not in the day-time, but at night--

_Man._ Ah, ah, then you have fairies, or spirits, or ghosts here, eh!

_Yvon._ [_Disdainfully._] Sir, do you take me for a superstitious fool!
It's all very well for people who don't know any better, but I--

_Man._ Then you do not believe in anything of the kind?

_Yvon._ I should think not, indeed. But if you come to talk about the
white lady, that's quite another matter.

_Man._ Oh! so there's a white lady, is there?

_Yvon._ Yes, sir, there is indeed, and she walks about on the top of
that tower over there, and where there are no stairs either. But she
is never seen in the day, only in the night, when it is quite dark.

_Man._ [_Laughing._] Yes, she is seen when it is too dark to see.

_Yvon._ [_Looking out._] Ah! Confound those sheep, at their old tricks
again. [_Shouts._] Hi! Hi! I don't believe there's such a troublesome
set of brutes in the whole country, always climbing where they have no
business. Hi! Hi!                                     [_Throws a stone._

_Man._ Why don't you jump down there?

_Yvon._ Try it yourself, if you want to break your neck, my fine
gentleman. Are you going to stay long? It is getting late.

_Man._ Don't be uneasy, I shall go presently.

_Yvon._ The sooner the better. I ain't a coward, but I feel more
comfortable away from here.                                     [_Exit._

_Man._ This is a fine old ruin. How is it that I have never found it out
before? I must bring my sketch-book here some day. Alas! I forgot that
for me there is no future here, to-morrow--'Tis but a sad farewell that
I must bid the scenes I had begun to love so well. Wretched heart! Is
it, then, because reason, honor, everything, forbids my loving her
that--Ah! were I not the guardian of an existence more precious than my
own, I should long ago have fled this torture!               [_Goes up._

    _Enter MARGUERITE._

_Mar._ This is most fortunate, when the moon rises the view will be
charming. [_Suddenly sees MANUEL._] Sir, I beg your pardon. I was not
aware, indeed--                                                [_Going._

_Man._ Excuse me, Mademoiselle, I am not at home here--permit _me_ to
retire.                                                        [_Going._

_Mar._ [_Crossing._] Stay, sir. As we happen to be alone, will you
answer me fully and frankly, one question. They tell me my manner
towards you is abrupt, unkind, even at times, offensive.

_Man._ I have never complained.

_Mar._ But you would leave us?

_Man._ Mademoiselle.

_Mar._ And they say that I am the cause. Your departure, sir, would
occasion my mother sincere sorrow, which I am anxious to spare her, if
it be in my power; but I am at a loss to know what explanation to make
you--what am I to say? that the language which has offended you, is not
always sincere--that perhaps, after all, I myself can appreciate joys
and pleasures more exalted than those which the mere possession of
wealth can give. Well, it is possible--but am I so much to blame, that I
use my powers to stifle thoughts which are forbidden me.

_Man._ Forbidden?

_Mar._ Yes, forbidden. It may, perhaps, appear like affectation, to
complain of a destiny which so many envy--but, like my mother, I believe
that were I less rich, I should be the more happy. You have reproached
me with my continual distrust. But in whom _can_ I trust? I, who from my
infancy have been surrounded--do I not know it too well--but by false
friends, grasping relatives, and suspicious suitors! Do you suppose that
I am weak and foolish enough to attribute to my own attractions, the
care, the solicitude, with which so many of these parasites surround me;
and even if a pure and noble heart, (should such a thing exist in this
world,) were capable of seeking and loving me for what I _am_--not for
what I _have_--I should never know it--[_with meaning_]--for I should
never dare the risk! And this is why I shun, repulse, almost hate, all
that is beautiful and good--all that speaks to me of that heaven, which
is, alas! forbidden me. [_The reapers are again heard singing in the
distance--with emotion and in an undertone._] What is that?

               [_Listens--lets her head fall upon her hands, and weeps._

_Man._ Tears!

_Mar._ [_With transport._] Well, yes, I can weep. Enough--I did not
intend, sir, to burthen you with so much of my confidence; but now you
know me better. You see I have a heart, and if ever I have wounded
yours, I hope you will forgive me. [_Gives her hand, which he kisses,
respectfully._] See; the pledge of our friendship shall be this flower,
which I rudely demanded from you this morning. [_Gives rose._] Now let
us go, [_returning_,] and never let this subject be revived between us.

_Man._ Never!

_Mar._ But before I go, I must see the view from yonder height.

_Man._ I beg you will not venture--do not run such a risk.

_Mar._ Oh! I am not afraid.

_Man._ At least take my hand, then.

    [_She mounts the platform outside of the window. It begins to grow
    dark._

_Mar._ The height is fearful, but the view is very beautiful. I could
gaze on it forever.

    _Enter YVONNET. He looks round without seeing them._

_Yvon._ Ah! he's gone at last. I shan't be long in following him; I
don't like this place.                  [_Exit, locking door after him._

    [_Night comes on, the moon lighting the scene beyond. MARGUERITE
    comes down from tower, aided by MANUEL._

_Mar._ There comes the night, in good earnest; fortunately, the moon
will help us to regain our horses. Come, sir, let us hasten.

                 [_Low music from orchestra. MANUEL tries to open door._

_Man._ That stupid fellow has fastened it while we were upon the tower.

_Mar._ [_Anxiously._] Call to him, he cannot be far off.

_Man._ [_Upon platform._] Hallo! Come back, will you? Now he sees me,
but he only runs the faster--takes me for the white lady, I suppose.
Confound the fool!

_Mar._ [_Looking about._] No other means of egress! What is to be
done?--they will die with anxiety at home.

_Man._ Stay! I can descend by those trees, perhaps--

_Mar._ 'Tis useless--there is an inclosed court-yard below.

_Man._ It is in vain--this door resists all my efforts. I know not what
to do.                       [_While MARGUERITE has gone upon platform._

_Mar._ Great Heaven! I see it all. [_To MANUEL, with restrained
passion._] Marquis de Champcey!

_Man._ [_Turns quickly._] My name!

_Mar._ [_Slowly._] You boast a long ancestral descent. Pray tell me,
sir, are you the first _coward_ of your name?

_Man._ Madame!

_Mar._ [_Violently._] It is you--_you_ who have bribed this boy to
imprison us here!

_Man._ Merciful Heavens!

_Mar._ Ah, I comprehend your purpose. I understand it all. To-morrow
this _accident_ will be noised abroad; the ever-ready tongue of scandal
will be busy with my name, a name which, if less ancient than your own,
is full as stainless, and you trust to my despair to make me yours! But
this vile trick, which crowns all your base maneuvering, I will thwart.
I tell you, sir, that I would incur the world's contempt, the cloister,
anything--even death itself--rather than the disgrace, the ignominy, the
shame, of uniting my life to yours!

_Man._ [_Calmly._] I entreat you to be calm. Call reason to your aid. I
understand and respect your distress, but let not your anxiety prompt
you to do me wrong. Consider! How could I have prepared such a snare,
and even were it in my power, how have I ever given you the right to
think me capable of such baseness?

_Mar._ [_Passing L._] All that I know of you gives me that right. For
what purpose do you enter our house, under a false name, in a false
character? We were happy before you came. You have brought us sorrow,
misery, which we dreamed not of. To attain your object, to repair the
breach in your fortune, you have usurped our confidence, sported with
our purest and most holy sentiments. Have I not seen all this? And when
you now pledge to me your honor--that honor which was too poor and weak
to save you from these unworthy actions--have I not reason to doubt?
Have I not the right to scorn and disbelieve?

_Man._ Marguerite, listen to me! I love you, it is true, and never did
love more ardent, more disinterested, more holy, live in the heart of
man. But here, with the eyes of Heaven upon us, I swear that, if I
outlive this night, all beloved as you are, were you upon your knees at
my feet, never would I accept a fortune at your hand. Never! My heart is
yours, yours to break, to crush, to trample in the dust, if it so please
you, but my honor, Madame, is my own and that I will preserve. And now
pray--pray for a miracle. It is time.              [_Runs to the tower._

_Mar._ What would you do? God of mercy! You shall not--you shall not!

_Man._ Think, Marguerite, your name!

_Mar._ You shall not! Forgive me! _If you love me_, forget what I have
said, for pity's sake, for mine!

_Man._ [_Disengaging himself._] Loose your hold.

       [_He repulses her, and leaps upon tower. Singing heard afar off._

_Mar._ [_Falling on her knees._] Manuel! Manuel! Madman! hear me. It is
death!

_Man._ It is honor!                              [_Throws himself down._

    [_MARGUERITE with a shriek, falls insensible._


END OF TABLEAU IV.




TABLEAU V.


    _Handsomely furnished Room in Chateau Laroque--Doors R. and L.,
    and U.--Candles lit._

    _DE BEVANNES, MAD. LAROQUE, MAD. AUBREY, ALAIN, MLLE HELOUIN
    discovered--MAD. LAROQUE is walking about in much agitation._


_Mad. L._ [_To ALAIN._] You say she went out on horseback?

_Alain._ Yes, Madame.

_Mad. L._ Did she say at what hour she would be back.

_Alain._ No, Madame.

_Bev._ Did she not tell you she would be early in the ball-room this
evening?

_Mad. L._ She did; and that only makes me the more apprehensive. This
anxiety is torture.

_Bev._ Be assured, Madame, she is safe. You know she is often out late
on fine evenings.

_Mad. L._ But never after dark. Can nobody even tell which way she went?

_Mlle H._ There is one person, I think, might give us some information.

_Mad. L._ Oh! who? Why did you not say so before?

_Mlle H._ I have no doubt M. Manuel could enlighten us, if he chose.

_Mad. L._ Monsieur Manuel! what should _he_ know about it?

_Bev._ Exactly. I do not clearly perceive why the steward must be better
informed of the young lady's movements, than her mother.

_Mlle H._ Nor I. Yet I think it would be worth while to ask him.

_Mad. L._ Alain, ask Monsieur Manuel, if he will be so good as to come
to me, at once.

_Alain._ Monsieur Manuel has also gone out on horseback, Madame, and has
not yet returned.

_Mlle H._ Ahem!

_Mad. A._ Ah, ha!

_Bev._ And pray, at what time did he go out?

_Alain._ Just before Mademoiselle Marguerite, sir.           [_A pause._

_Mad. L._ You are all marvellously silent! What do you imagine? what do
you infer? Speak, if you would not drive me mad! Still silent! [_To MLLE
HELOUIN._] Mademoiselle, your looks convey some hidden meaning. [_To
MAD. AUBREY._] Cousin.

_Mad. A._ Oh!                                                  [_Weeps._

_Mad. L._ What's the use of that, Madame? speak out. I always knew you
were a fool--don't make me think you are a complete idiot! Bevannes,
_what_ does all this mean?

_Bev._ Alain.

_Alain._ Sir?

_Bev._ Did Mademoiselle go out alone?

_Alain._ No, sir; with the Doctor.

_Mad. L._ Ah! then all is well.

_Bev._ Humph!

_Mad. L._ Bevannes, what _do_ you mean? will you explain or not?

_Mlle H._ Madame, your generous nature and partiality for the steward,
has somewhat blinded your judgment; those who love you have been more
watchful. This Monsieur Manuel is--

    _Enter MANUEL--His dress disordered--His face pale, with slight
    marks of blood upon his forehead._

_Man._ Here, Madame, you did me the honor to send for me.

_Mlle H._ You have just returned, sir?

_Man._ This moment--I met Alain on the stair.

_Mad. L._ But you are hurt, Monsieur--there's blood upon your forehead.

_Man._ Nothing of importance, I assure you; the horse fell with me, and
got a few scratches--nothing more--a little cold water will set all to
right.

_Mad. L._ This seems to be a night of misfortunes.

_Mad. A._ [_Sighs._] Ah!

_Mad. L._ _Do_ be quiet.

_Man._ What has happened, Madame?

_Mad. L._ Marguerite went out on horseback just after you, and has not
yet returned.

_Man._ Oh, don't be alarmed--I met her.

_Mad. L._ Oh! when? where?

_Man._ About six o'clock, on the road to Elfen--she told me she was
going on to look at the ruins.

_Mad. L._ Good heavens! the ruins are in the midst of the forest, and
the roads dreadful! She must have lost her way! Alain!

    _Enter ALAIN._

Order the carriage. [_Exit ALAIN._] I will send directly--I will go
myself.

_Man._ You may rest certain, Madame, that you will find her. In the
meantime, I will get rid of the evidences of my trifling fall. Be
assured your daughter is quite safe.                            [_Exit._

_Mad. L._ Come, Bevannes, order your horse, and ride by the carriage.

_Bev._ Thank you, but, with your permission, I'll ride _in_ the
carriage. The road _is_ a bad one, and if one horse stumbles, another
may.

_Mad. L._ Well, well, any way you please, only come.            [_Exit._

_Mad. A._ Ah, poor girl, poor girl--                           [_Weeps._

_Bev._ Don't be so distressed, Madame. It's not your little niece.

_Mad. A._ Monsieur de Bevannes, you are a brute!

_Bev._ So is a donkey, Madame, and yet one died rich in your affection.
Ah, if I could only have inherited a portion of his wealth.     [_Exit._

_Mad. A._ I wonder if he means that. He never said anything so civil
before. I've a great mind to--                                 [_Going._

_Mlle H._ Stay--that letter of the steward's which you found in the
park--

_Mad. A._ Well?

_Mlle H._ Have you got it with you?

_Mad. A._ Of course.

_Mlle H._ Give it to me.

_Mad. A._ To _you_! Why?

_Mlle H._ No matter. Suffice it that my hopes, and yours--the very life
of all our plans--depend on the use I shall make of that letter.

_Mad. A._ Oh, well, take it. [_Gives letter._] I'm sure you'll make much
better use of it than I can. [_Aside._] Upon my life I'll go and ask
Bevannes what he meant by that.                                 [_Exit._

_Mlle H._ Why, why did nature endow me with a heart to suffer, an
intellect to comprehend? Had I been born a fool, like that woman, this
dependent state would have brought with it calm endurance, if not
happiness. But, as I _am_, it is misery. How easy is bounty to the rich.
How natural is virtue to the happy. He heard my words as he came
in--must have divined their purport. Well, well, if I have taught him to
despise me, he shall learn to fear me, too. He dared to read me a
lesson, and I hate him for it, even though I profit by it. If I must
fall, he shall share the ruin he has caused.

    _Enter MARGUERITE._

_Mar._ Helouin!

_Mlle H._ Marguerite!

_Mar._ Hush! To prevent remark, I came by the small stairway, through
the conservatory. My mother has been anxious?

_Mlle H._ Much alarmed. She has gone to seek you.

_Mar._ I know it. I have sent Alain to overtake and bring her back.
Before she comes, I have a word to say to you. It is of Monsieur Manuel.
I have strong reason to believe that you have most strangely misjudged
his character and his intentions.

_Mlle H._ I know him to be the Marquis de Champcey.

_Mar._ And _I_ know that if his birth be noble, his heart is no less so.

_Mlle H._ It is very recently, then, that you have made the discovery.

_Mar._ True. Now mark. You have seen the ruins of Elfen?

_Mlle H._ I have. I was once there with a party, and was the only woman
who dared ascend the tower.

_Mar._ You know the danger, then. Well, I care not now if all the world
should hear it. We were alone. By accident, imprisoned in those ruins. I
rashly, blindly, _falsely_ accused him, and he, to save my honor and his
own, plunged from that tower in to the gulf beneath!

_Mlle H._ But he escaped.

_Mar._ I know it and have thanked God for the miracle. I had not
strength to implore.

_Mlle H._ Upon my word, this is an extraordinary man.

_Mar._ Mademoiselle--

_Mlle H._ And understands so well how to turn his talents to the best
account. Why, poor child, and you don't see through all this? Yesterday
it was a swimming match, producing an admirably planned and effectual
scene. To-night, it is an exhibition of daring activity. The gentleman
has been brilliantly educated.

_Mar._ You evidently hate him.

_Mlle H._ And why? On my own account? No! What is he to _me_? But when I
see that he dares to bring his plots and machinations here, and intends
you for their victim, I am free to confess, I _do_ despise and hate
him!

_Mar._ These are grave accusations. What proof have you to support them?

_Mlle H._ Ah, you suspect me. For the sake of this stranger, you doubt
the truth of one you have known for years? Well, be it so--I will give
you proof, since you demand it. Do you know his handwriting?

_Mar._ I do. I have had to look over many papers he has copied for my
mother.

_Mlle H._ Look at that letter. Now listen: [_Reads._] "_My dear
Desmarets: I follow your instructions exactly. But will they avail to
win for me the bright reward for all I have to endure. I do not think
the dowry wilt be as large as I had hoped._--

_Mar._ Great Heavens!

_Mlle H._ "_But I have sworn to win it, and though there are many
obstacles here to make the task a hard one, yet, to achieve it, I will
serve, like Jacob, for forty years, if need be_--What a pity he did not
finish it. This was found under the window of his room by Madame Aubrey
and, by her, handed to me.

_Mar._ Enough. My resolution is taken.

    _Enter MADAME LAROQUE and BEVANNES._

_Mad. L._ Oh, my dear child! What a state I have been in about you. How
did you get back? What happened?

_Mar._ The shepherd, who locks up the tower of Elfen, happened to fasten
it before I left. Some reapers returning home, heard my cries and
brought him back to release me, that is all.

    _Enter MANUEL._

_Mad. L._ Ah, Monsieur, you have recovered from the effects of your
fall, I hope?

_Man._ Entirely, Madame.

_Mad. L._ [_To MARGUERITE._] But you, my child, must be fatigued,
nervous--

_Mar._ On the contrary, dearest mother, I never felt better or more
cheerful than to-night, which I will prove to you whenever the ball
commences.

_Bev._ The ball! why, surely, you'll never think of--

_Mar._ Dancing? Indeed but I shall though--and you, M. de Bevannes,
will be my first partner, will you not?

_Bev._ With the greatest delight--but pray, let me advise--

_Mar._ Advise nothing--you shall be my chief cavalier for the evening.

_Bev._ But my dress--

_Mar._ Your residence is hardly two miles from this; you can go home,
dress, and be here again--all within an hour.

                                            [_Speaks to MADAME LAROQUE._

_Bev._ [_Aside._] This anxiety portends something. Bevannes, my boy, the
chase is nearly over, for the quarry is in sight.

_Mar._ Nonsense, my dear mother! I will have my own way for once.

_Mad. L._ For _once_!

_Mar._ My carriage shall take M. de Bevannes, and bring him back. Where
are all the servants? Here, some one--oh! the steward! go and order my
carriage.

_Mad. L._ [_Surprised at her tone of voice._] My dear.

_Man._ [_Quietly rising and ringing a bell, which summons_ ALAIN, _who
enters_.] I believe Mlle Marguerite has some orders for you.

_Alain._ Mademoiselle--

_Mar._ I have none--you may leave the room.               [_Exit ALAIN._

_Bev._ Come, come, this sort of thing won't do.

_Mar._ Monsieur de Bevannes.

_Bev._ As you please--but permit me to regret that I have not the right
to interfere here.

_Man._ Your regret is unnecessary, sir--for if I did not see fit to obey
the lady's orders, I hold myself at yours.

_Bev._ Enough, sir; I shall act accordingly.

_Mad. L._ Gentlemen, I beg, I entreat--

_Mar._ Monsieur de Bevannes.

_Bev._ Mademoiselle?

_Mar._ Have the goodness to follow me--I must speak with you in the
presence of my mother only. Not a word, if you would ever speak with me
again--follow me now, at once.              [_Exit with MADAME LAROQUE._

_Bev._ [_To MANUEL._] I believe, sir, we comprehend each other?

    _MANUEL bows--Exit BEVANNES--MANUEL turns and encounters the look
    of MLLE HELOUIN, who curtsies and exits._

_Man._ I see plainly now to whom I owe all this. Well, well, what
matters it to whom? The one thin ray of light upon my desolate and
gloomy path has vanished. Pshaw! This is no time for dreams or vain
regrets.                                                       [_Rings._

    _Enter ALAIN._

Has Dr. Desmarets returned?

_Alain._ No, Monsieur.

_Man._ The moment he arrives I must see him.

_Alain._ I know--I know all about it. I overheard. Oh, sir, this is most
unfortunate.

_Man._ It is, but unavoidable. I did not seek it--

_Alain._ And that devil of a Bevannes is a fine swordsman, and the best
pistol-shot in Brittany.

_Man._ So much the better. The contest will be the more equal.

_Alain._ Indeed!

_Man._ I have had much practice with both weapons.

_Alain._ Oh then, pray do me one favor, sir. Don't kill him, but hit him
in the leg. He's so deuced proud of his leg and foot.

_Man._ There, that will do. Let me know the instant the Doctor arrives.

_Alain._ I will sir, I will, but don't forget. Pray don't forget the
leg--the leg, sir, if you love me.                              [_Exit._

_Man._ For myself, it matters not, but my sister, my little darling,
helpless sister--should I fall--Oh! Heaven, let my errors be so atoned,
and look down in pity on the orphan child, bereaved of earthly succor,
to be the more dependent upon thine.

    [_As he raises his head, he perceives BEVANNES approaching, and
    his bearing becomes calm and resolute._

    _Enter BEVANNES._

_Bev._ Monsieur Manuel, can I have a few words with you?

_Man._ I am at your service, sir.

_Bev._ What I am about to say, considering our position, may seem
irregular, but I obey orders which cannot be disputed. Besides, I
believe no man can doubt my courage--

_Man._ Not I, be assured, sir.

_Bev._ To be brief, I am commissioned by the ladies to express their
regret for what has just occurred. M'lle Marguerite, in a moment of
forgetfulness, gave you certain orders, which it was plainly not your
province to fulfil. Your susceptibility was justly wounded. We admit
it, and--

_Man._ Not one word more, sir, I entreat.

_Bev._ Your hand. [_MANUEL gives his hand._] The ladies also desire me
to express their hope that this momentary misunderstanding will not
deprive them of your good offices, the value of which they fully
appreciate, and I am extremely happy in having acquired within the last
few minutes, the right to join my entreaty to theirs. My most ardent
wish is about to be gratified.

_Man._ Indeed?

_Bev._ And I shall feel personally obliged if you will not refuse us
your aid upon the eve of an event which family affairs and the failing
health of old Monsieur Laroque compels us to hasten.

    _Enter ALAIN with a box containing deeds, &c._

Oh, thank you. Place it on the table. [_ALAIN does so and exits._] These
are the private papers and memoranda of Mons. Laroque, and the ladies
beg, as a proof of their entire confidence, that you will examine them
and take notes of such matters as will prove important to the marriage
contract.

_Man._ I shall obey their orders to the best of my ability.

_Bev._ Thank you, my dear fellow. I feel assured you will, and now, I
trust, we shall in future, understand one another better. I do not think
that, hitherto, either of us has formed a correct estimate of the other.
I protest to you that I'm disposed to like _you_ immensely. For myself,
I'm a very nice man, but I must be cultivated. Cultivate me, my dear
sir, and I give you my word you'll find me one of the most agreeable
fellows you ever knew; you will, indeed. Cultivate me, I beg.   [_Exit._

_Man._ Well, well. He is her equal in fortune, and therefore, of course,
above suspicion. Poor girl! She is unaware that, in this world the
greatest beggars are not, always the poorest. She would see how I can
support the torture she inflicts. She shall be gratified, for she shall
see me even at the foot of the altar. But she will not triumph there,
for her pride, lofty as it is, shall pale before my own. Now to my
work. [_Sits and turns over papers._] Nothing here that I have not
seen before. "Title Deeds to"--Umph! "Legacies to my children."
"Marriage portion for Marguerite" and--Ah! What's this? My name!
"The Antilles"--yes, I remember, our family had large estates there,
but that, was long ago. Let me see, let me see. [_He reads, and as he
does so his face expresses, first, surprise, and then conviction and
triumph._] Great Heaven! And can this be so? Miserable old man. This,
then, is the secret of your wanderings, your visions, and of my unsought
influence. And now, _now_ I have them in my power. They shall find that
there is still some blood left in the heart that they would crush. This
proud, unfeeling girl, has yet to learn the meaning of that bitter word,
_humility_, and she _shall_ learn it.      [_MARGUERITE speaks without._

_Mar._ He will soon return, dear mother. Meantime I will prepare for the
ball.   [_She enters, crosses slowly, and exit, after a look at MANUEL._

_Man._ No--no--I can _not_! Never, never, by my act, shall the blush of
shame crimson that noble face. Laroque cannot live long. Let his crime
and his confession die before him! [_Music._] To my deep love I
consecrate the sacrifice.

    _Burns paper. While he contemplates it burning, MADAME AUBREY looks
    in unseen by him._


SCENE II.--_A hall in the Chateau._

    _Enter BEVANNES and ALAIN, meeting._

_Bev._ Alain, who arrived just now?

_Alain._ The Doctor, sir. He's gone to Monsieur Laroque's room.

_Bev._ Is Mademoiselle Marguerite's carriage ready for me?

_Alain._ Quite ready, Monsieur.

_Bev._ Very well. Tell the ladies I shall be back in an hour, at most.

_Alain._ You'll have to drive fast, sir, to do it in the time.

_Bev._ I shall make my toilette less perfect than usual, and take an
elaborate revenge another time.

    _Enter DESMARETS._

_Des._ Bevannes that you? where are you off to?

_Bev._ Home, for a short time.

_Des._ Better stay where you are--the ladies may want your assistance.

_Bev._ I know--at the ball--

_Des._ Ball? stuff! If I don't mistake, you'll have something else
to think of. Alain, let that prescription be sent to the village
immediately.

_Alain._ Yes, Doctor.                                           [_Exit._

_Bev._ Why, what's the matter?

_Des._ Old Laroque is very ill to-night. By the by, what's this he told
me about a marriage in the family?

_Bev._ Quite true. The fair Marguerite has become alive to my
merits--she knows me at last.

_Des._ And accepts you?

_Bev._ Of course.

_Des._ Little fool.

_Bev._ Sir!

_Des._ I don't mean _you_.

_Bev._ Ah!

_Des._ I tell you what, my friend, you hardly know what you've
undertaken. I wish you joy--I wouldn't have the management of girl for a
trifle. Ecod! if she takes a fancy to the _moon_, she'll expect you to
give it her.

_Bev._ Oh, I'm not afraid. However, I'll go and dress, as it is her
wish, and take the chance of the ball coming off.

_Des._ And you've determined to marry her?

_Bev._ Most certainly.

_Des._ Spite of all her caprices?

_Bev._ Decidedly--

_Des._ And if she wants the moon--

_Bev._ She must fetch it herself.                               [_Exit._

_Des._ Queer match--what does it mean? As to her loving that fellow, I
don't believe a word of it. Now to the old man--it won't do to leave him
alone--he's got one of his wandering fits on him, and he'll be all over
the house if I don't look to him. What a nice quiet life a doctor's is.

                                                                [_Exit._


SCENE III.--_Same as First--Music._

    _MANUEL discovered asleep--MAD. AUBREY opens door and looks in._

_Mad. A._ Worn out with the day's excitement, he's asleep at last.
[_Comes in._] What could that paper have been, I saw him burn? Ah!
there's the envelope he threw away, when he put it in the flame.
[_Picks it up._] So, so--what's that? a footstep.               [_Exit._

    _MONSIEUR LAROQUE opens door and looks in--He is very pale and
    appears much exhausted--He looks back and beckons, as if to
    followers--Music ceases._

_Lar._ This way--this way--quickly--but silently. Silently, men or
we shall spoil all. Remember, they are _English_, and spare not! no
quarter! no quarter, mind--but softly--softly--and fire not until I give
the word! Then--then--every drop of Saxon blood shall float a world of
crime from off my soul! One moment--_now! now!_

    _He raises his arm, as if to strike, when he sees MANUEL, upon whose
    face the lamp throws a powerful light--A pause._

Heaven have mercy! 'tis he. At such an hour as this I can _not_ be
mistaken! It is he--[_MANUEL awakes._]--My Lord Marquis!

    _MARGUERITE appears._

_Man._ What is this?

_Lar._ Pity--pity--and forgive me.

            [_MANUEL all at once comprehending, advances to M. LAROQUE._

_Man._ Miserable man, I pity, and I forgive.

_Mar._ What does this mean?

_Man._ Oh, nothing, Mademoiselle, but I thought it better to humor his
delirium.               [_LAROQUE staggers. MANUEL places him in chair._

    _Enter ALAIN, DESMARETS, MADAME LAROQUE and MLLE HELOUIN._

_Mar._ Grandfather, dearest, speak to me--it is Marguerite, your child,
to whom you were always so good, who loves you so. You have some
thought, some remembrance which torments you. Is it not so? Tell me,
dearest, tell your own Marguerite.                             [_Music._

    _LAROQUE looks up, makes one or two endeavors to speak, when his
    head again falls on his breast._

_Mar._ Mother! mother! Oh Heavens! Can nothing be done?

    _DR. DESMARETS places his hand on LAROQUE'S heart, and looks at
    MANUEL, who, in answer to an appeal from MARGUERITE and MADAME
    LAROQUE, points upwards._


END TABLEAU V.


Lapse of Some Months.




TABLEAU VI.


    _Saloon in the Chateau Laroque splendidly decorated and furnished.
    Arches R., L. and C. ALAIN and Servants discovered arranging
    furniture, lighting lamps, &c._                            [_Music._

_Alain._ There now. I think everything is pretty well arranged here,
so run away all of you and see to the preparations outside. [_Exeunt
servants._] 'Pon my life I'm nearly done up. All of a sudden to change a
house that has, for the last five months appeared like a mourning coach,
into a dandified, bright-looking mansion prepared for a marriage fete,
requires more inventive genius than ever I shall get credit for. If I
could only extend my transforming powers to the faces of the family, I
should be much gratified, for such a grim-looking household exists not
in Brittany at this moment. There's M'lle Marguerite. The nearer the
time approaches for the marriage, the paler she grows. Madame Laroque
does nothing but freeze and shiver, Mons. Manuel is absent for days
together, and Madame Aubrey weeps a good tea-cup full about every two
hours. Cheerful work, very.

    _Enter MADEMOISELLE HELOUIN._

_Mlle H._ Alain go and tell Monsieur Manuel I wish for a few moments'
conversation with him.

_Alain._ Monsieur Manuel, M'lle? Why, bless you, he's been at Largeot
for the last three days.

_Mlle H._ He has returned. I saw him ride into the court-yard some
fifteen minutes since.

_Alain._ Where shall I tell him to come to you, Mademoiselle?

_Mlle H._ Are all your preparations made here?

_Alain._ Yes, Mademoiselle. I have sent the servants to other work.

_Mlle H._ Request, Mons. Manuel, then, to see me here, and to come
instantly, as it is important I should speak to him at once.

_Alain._ Very well, Mademoiselle.                               [_Exit._

    _Mlle Helouin goes to Arches and ascertains that no one is near to
    listen._

_Mlle H._ And now, Manuel Marquis de Champcey, we will try the issue.
How often and how vainly do I question my own heart. Were Manuel other
than he is, should I pursue him thus? What motive sways my action? Is it
love? Ambition? Both? I know not, and will not reflect. There lies the
path. Some resistless impulse urges me along, nor will I, _can_ I
swerve, till all is won or lost.

    _Enter MANUEL._

_Man._ Mademoiselle, good evening. Alain informs me that you wish to
speak with me.

_Mlle H._ For a few moments. Your stay at Langeot has been shorter than
usual.

_Man._ I returned a day earlier than I had intended. Respect for the
family suggests that I should not be absent on an occasion like the
present.

_Mlle H._ An occasion that gives you an opportunity of showing that you
possess _moral_, as well as physical courage, of no common order.

_Man._ You are pleased to be enigmatical.

_Mlle H._ I shall indulge in no enigma that you cannot speedily solve.
And now. Manuel, take good heed of what I say, but I warn you do not
judge me by a common standard. My nature and my sad dependant lot, place
me beyond the pale of those born for a happier fate. From the first hour
we met, my heart was drawn insensibly towards you. Still that heart was
safe. A mere spark existed, which reason and reflection might have
killed; you yourself, in defining the bond of sympathy between us,
raised from that spark a flame.

_Man._ Madame, in justice to myself, I must interrupt you. Never by word
or deed have I--

_Mlle H._ Go on sir, pray do not spare me. Never have you _encouraged_,
you would say. Well, I grant it. Be it so. Your reserve and coldness
could not alter me. What fire but burns the fiercer in the frosty air?
And yet if you have pride, so too have I, and I will confess that
something more exists to keep the flame alive than love. Ambition, and
the hope to triumph over one who is a rival. These, I am free to own,
would be incentives enough for me, if love existed not.

_Man._ Mademoiselle, at the risk of appearing vain, I must tell you you
are most fortunate.

_Mlle H._ Indeed sir, how so?

_Man._ In saying all this to a _gentleman_.

_Mlle H._ Oh, sir, of that I'm well aware, by birth--

_Man._ And _principle_. I do not affect to despise the one, but I
take more pride in the other. The first, is for the present, buried.
Therefore, if you have any appeal to make, let it be to the last.

_Mlle H._ I _have_ an appeal to make, but, even though compelled to
differ with so sage an adviser, I shall make it to an ally more powerful
than either.

_Man._ And what is that?

_Mlle H._ Self interest.

_Man._ You think so?

_Mlle H._ I'm sure of it.

_Man._ Will you permit me to suggest that an important ceremony is to
take place in this room to-night, and the hour approaches.

_Mlle H._ Well, then, if I appear abrupt, attribute it to your delicate
reminder, and not to my own desire. You love Marguerite Laroque--

_Man._ Mademoiselle, this is beyond--

_Mlle H._ You love Marguerite Laroque. That love is hopeless.
Everything is prepared for the ceremony you speak of, and if a shade of
doubt as to her destiny existed, it can live no longer now. I possess a
secret which, if given to the world, will compromise your honesty as a
man, your honor as a gentleman, and sink the proud name you bear to a
depth that even the despised governess could look down upon with pity.
Manuel Marquis de Champcey, give _me_ the title _she_ can never bear,
and I am silent. A wife none the less devoted because, at first,
unsought--a friend none the less sincere, though newly found.

_Man._ Mademoiselle, you are a singular instance of a well known fact.

_Mlle H._ And what may that be, sir?

_Man._ That the cleverest people sometimes do the silliest things. Had
you been a simple, uneducated rustic, you would have reflected seriously
before you lowered yourself in the opinion of the man you professed to
love. But, as you are--accomplished, shrewd, and resolute, you have
taken the worst road by which to gain the end you coveted. Nay more; you
have allowed impulse to snatch the reins from principle, and those
unbroken steeds, Passion and Ambition, have taken the bit in their
mouths, galloped off with common sense, and I very much fear it will
cost you some time and trouble to come up with them. I need hardly add,
Mademoiselle, that I decline continuing this conversation.      [_Exit._

_Mlle H._ [_After a pause._] Be it so. The sooner ended the sooner to my
work. I swear, the thought of the revenge I'll take on this proud fool,
makes me all but rejoice in failure. [_Music heard without._] The guests
are arriving. I must not be found here.                         [_Exit._

    _Enter ALAIN, then two servants, who arrange tables, chairs, &c.
    Enter MADAME LAROQUE, M'LLE MARGUERITE, M DE BEVANNES, DESMARET,
    MONS. NOURET, M'LLE HELOUIN, MADAM AUBREY, MANUEL and Guests._

_Mad. L._ [_to servants._] That will do, you may retire.

                                           [_Exeunt ALAIN and servants._

_Des._ Before you proceed to business, Monsieur Nouret, I will make a
few preliminary remarks, if you will allow me.

_Mons. Nouret._ Certainly, Doctor. Pray speak.

_Des._ For the information of those friends of the family who are yet
unacquainted with the facts, I wish to state that, before the death of
M. Laroque, he wrote a letter to be given to me, his oldest friend, when
he was no more. I shall read a short extract. [_Reads._] "For these
reasons it is my earnest desire, nay positive injunction, that my
grand-daughters' marriage shall take place within six months of my
death, with the same ceremonies and rejoicings as though I were still
living, and the reading of the will shall immediately succeed the
marriage." And now, Monsieur, before proceeding, it is necessary for you
to state that all is ready for the reading of the will immediately on
our return.

_Mons._ N. I trust all _will_ be ready, Doctor; but, at present, I
cannot say it is so, for although I find the will and codicils of the
deceased to be in the most perfect order, and numbered in regular
succession, I have, thus far, been unable to discover the first of the
series, marked No. 1. All the rest are here--2, 3, 4, and 5--but 1 is
wanting. Now the legacies are, with the exception of a few to the old
servants, entirely to Mons. Laroque's blood relations.

_Mad. A._ [_Weeps._] Oh!

_Mons. N._ Be comforted Madame, he was indeed a kind man. His blood
relations have all been thought of.

_Mad. A._ But I'm _not_ a blood relation. Oh!                  [_Weeps._

_Mlle H._ Is it not possible that the missing paper may contain--

_Mad. A._ No doubt of it, no doubt of it. And that is burnt.

_All._ Burnt!

_Mlle H._ You saw Mons. Manuel, the steward, burn a paper. You found the
envelope, and gave it to me?

_Mad. A._ I did, but I never--

_Mlle H._ Silence! [_Gives envelope to MONS. NOURET._] Examine that,
sir.

_Mons. N._ It is the hand-writing of the deceased, and the envelope of
the peculiar size and make of all the others.     [_All look at MANUEL._

_Mad. L._ Monsieur Manuel, what have you to say to this?

_Bev._ Speak, sir.

_Man._ The lady is right, I _did_ burn the paper.

_Mad. L._ Great Heavens!                                    [_All rise._

_Man._ But she is mistaken as to the purport of the document.

_Bev._ Upon my soul this is a little too strong.

_Mad. L._ Oh, Monsieur Manuel, do not tell me you have so far abused our
confidence. Do not tell me that one whom I had begun to love almost as a
son, has fallen low enough to commit so vile an act. I am an old woman,
sir, and in the course of nature, you must outlive me. My child is
provided for. You shall share with me while I live, and all I have shall
be yours at last if you will but refute this, if you will but give me
the joy of knowing you are innocent.

_Mons. N._ Come sir, this painful matter may be set at rest, perhaps, if
you will tell us the content of that paper.

_Des._ Manuel, my son.

_Mad. L._ Oh! for my sake!

_Man._ [_Looks at MARGUERITE and says._] I will not speak.

                                                      [_Exit DESMARETS._

_Mad. L._ [_After a short pause._] Then sir, much as it pains me,
you must, clearly understand that we can live no longer under the
same roof.

_Man._ [_Going._] I know it, madame.

_Mar._ And [_He turns at the sound of her voice_,] have you _nothing_,
not _one_ word to say in your defence?

_Man._ Not one word.                                            [_Exit._

_Mad. L._ Oh Marguerite, my joy on this occasion is lost in this most
unhappy discovery.

_Mar._ [_Aside._] And my misery doubled. Do not follow me, dear mother,
I will rejoin you directly.                                     [_Exit._

_Mad. A._ Oh!--                                                [_Weeps._

_Bev._ My dear madame, I beg to remind you that this is my wedding day.
Pray reserve your tears till after the ceremony. [_Re-enter DESMARETS._]
My friends, if you will adjourn to the reception room, the carriages
will be ready immediately.           [_Exeunt guests and MADAME AUBREY._

_Des._ [_To M'LLE H._] Mademoiselle, you do not appear as much shocked
as we are by this unfortunate discovery.

_Mlle H._ Simply, Doctor, because, knowing the gentleman, I am not
surprised.

_Des._ You are not?

_Mlle H._ Not at all.                                           [_Exit._

_Des._ Umph! Bevannes, my dear fellow, I'm loth to delay an event which,
by a popular but pleasant fallacy, is supposed to be the happiest in a
man's life, but I must request, before we go to the chapel, that you
will give me a few moments of your attention.

_Bev._ Certainly Doctor; the evening's before us. Pray vary the
entertainment according to your own taste.

_Des._ My dear madame, I must also request _your_ presence, and, as what
I am about to say is important, and guests are still arriving, this
apartment will soon become too public for our purpose, therefore, with
your permission, we'll retire to the library which, as the works it
contains are purely instructive, is about the last place our fashionable
friends are likely to visit.

_Mad. L._ Had we not better wait until we return from--

_Des._ By no means. What I have to say must be said at once, and so,
madame, permit me.                                        [_Offers arm._

_Bev._ Doctor, that's a remarkably nice young man you recommended for
steward.

_Des._ Never mind him. We'll talk about him to-morrow.        [_Exeunt._

    _Enter MANUEL, dressed for traveling._

_Man._ For her, for her, this bitter, bitter trial. Oh, let that thought
sustain me. Falsely I had imagined that the change from the sweet dreamy
days of my youth, to the stern realities of my manhood, had created for
me that tower of strength to the unfortunate--endurance. But, no, no;
too truly do I feel that, until this moment, I have not known what utter
misery is--one last, last look at scenes made sacred by her presence; at
objects hallowed by her touch, and then, and then--

                                               [_He sinks into a chair._

    [_Enter MARGUERITE. She comes down slowly._]

_Mar._ Manuel!

_Man._ Marguerite!

_Mar._ Hush! move not, nor speak till you have heard me. I am here to
ask forgiveness.

_Man._ Forgiveness?

_Mar._ Now, now, I know your truth, too late, oh, Heavens! too late late
I know your pure, unselfish heart. You bore suspicion, insult, scorn,
but I believed you not. How nobly you risked life for honor; yet I
believed you not.

_Man._ At last then--

_Mar._ At last, conviction came; that letter you mislaid--

_Man._ Relating to my sister--

_Mar._ Aye, and _not_ to me. I know it now, Desmarets told me all.

_Man._ And could you think--

_Mar._ I did, I did. Oh, do not scorn me, but grant my prayer, the
first, the _last_ you'll ever hear from Marguerite. There is some
mystery hidden beneath your refusal to speak of the paper you
destroyed--some reason which refers to _me_. Do not deny it, for I know
it. You cannot deceive the watchful eyes of love--for _I love you_,
Manuel. We _must_ part, and forever. My word is pledged already for my
marriage with Bevannes. But by the love which you professed for me, for
your dear sister's sake, for _mine_, [_she kneels_,] clear your good
name of this foul stain. Oh, Manuel! Manuel! do it in pity for the rash,
unhappy girl, who, with ruin staring at her from the fatal rock,
suspicion, spite of reason, spite of warning, wildly, madly dashed
herself upon the shore and made her heart a wreck.

    [_Enter M'LLE HELOUIN._]

_Mlle H._ Good. I could not have wished it otherwise. [_To MAD. LAROQUE
and DESMARETS who appear with MAD. AUBREY, guests and MONS. NOURET._]
Look, Madame! Look, sir! Observe the faithful, loyal steward, who, not
content with fraud and betrayal of his trust, still lingers on the scene
of his disgrace. Behold the proud _gentleman_, who completes his list
of honorable actions by ensnaring the affections of that unthinking
girl--the betrothed wife of another, the daughter of his benefactress.
[_MADAME LAROQUE and DESMARETS raise MARGUERITE, who is almost
fainting._] Well, you hear all this; you witness it--you are men and
stir not--your friend is betrayed--an aged lady insulted in your
presence, yet there stands the man, erect and fearless. Will you
bear this, I say, or will you cast him forth like the dog he is?

                         [_The gentlemen make a movement toward MANUEL._

_Des._ Stop. Before Mons. Manuel departs, I have a piece of intelligence
to communicate, which it is important for _him_, as well as you, to
hear. You will the better comprehend it, if I request your patience
while I read a portion of this paper, left in my care by Mons. Laroque,
with discretionary power to destroy or reveal its contents as my
judgment should dictate. Under present circumstances I choose the latter
course. This is in the old man's own handwriting, and you will admit, is
an important episode in his history. The events described occurred in
the West Indies. [_Reads._] "On the approach of hostilities between the
French and English, my father, Pierre Laroque, who was steward to the
then Marquis de Champcey, received orders to sell immediately, the
magnificent estates on the island, and then to join the Marquis (who
commanded a small French fleet) and to bring with him the money realized
from the sale. The estates were sold for a very large sum. With this
money my father and myself started to join the Marquis, but, on our way
were interrupted by an English frigate and taken prisoners. My father
died defending himself. I was promised my life, and permission to escape
with whatever money we had with us when taken, if I would reveal the
hiding place of the French fleet. How shall I write the words? _I
yielded._ A large English force attacked them. The Marquis was killed,
and I came to France a wealthy, but dishonored man." Such is the
confession left in my hands. Such is the confession which makes the
present Marquis de Champcey master of this and all the property the old
man left, and such is the duplicate of the paper which that young man
destroyed.

    [_Great sensation among all the dramatis personae. The Doctor leads
    MARGUERITE to MANUEL, then turns and embraces MAD. LAROQUE. Guests
    crowd round MANUEL, congratulating him._]

_Mlle H._ [_To MADAME AUBREY._] Hark'ye Madame--

_Mad. A._ Oh! go away, you nasty thing. You've made a pretty mess of it.
You've caused me to do mischief enough. I won't be corrupted by you any
more.         [_She goes to MANUEL and shakes hands with him violently._

_Mlle H._ [_Aside._] Baffled. Foiled at every turn. [_Enter BEVANNES._]
Ah! no. One hope _is_ left. Mons. de Bevannes, you are well arrived. In
good time to defend your honor, which is greviously in peril here. That
man, the steward, by a strange reverse of fortune, has become master of
this great estate.

_Bev._ So I have already been informed.

_Mlle H._ Well, look there. Have you eyes?

_Bev._ Madame, you wound my vanity.

_Mlle H._ Do you not see that the new master here is likely to become
lord where you alone should reign? Will you tamely submit and give her
up?

_Bev._ Madame, you just now reflected on my person, now you do worse;
you attack my heart. Do you think I am the man to step between two
devoted young creatures for my own selfish ends? No! The moment I found
the dear girl was penniless, I destroyed the contract, and in the most
generous manner, gave her back her word.

_Mad. L._ I won't go near her. I do believe she'd bite me. Doctor, will
_you_ have the goodness?

_Des._ [_To MLLE HELOUIN._] Mademoiselle, you were very anxious just now
for somebody to turn out--I don't wish to be ungallant--but what is
going to take place here will coincide so little with your arrangements,
that the ladies think--that perhaps--

_Mlle H._ Enough, sir. [_To MANUEL._] If I am criminal, you shall not
call me hypocrite. I go, and as a parting gift, take from me such wishes
for your future, as bitter scorn and baffled hate may leave.    [_Exit._

_Bev._ A very nice young person that.

_Des._ But come, come, what the deuce are you all standing here for?

    [_Enter ALAIN._]

_Alain._ Please Madame, the grounds are lit up, the carriages ready and
all the country folks are waiting.

_Des._ Come. The bride and bridegroom. Come along.

_Mar._ Now--at once? Oh, Doctor.

_Des._ Now--at once? Of course; do you think all our pretty preparations
are to go for nothing?

_Bev._ Mademoiselle, I've got myself up utterly regardless of expense,
and if _somebody_ ain't married, I shall withdraw my consent.

_Mad. A._ Oh, Mons. de Bevannes do not let that deter you, if you meant
what you said the evening Mons. Laroque died.

_Bev._ I!

_Mad. A._ Why, be it so.

_Bev._ Be it so? Be it what, Madame?

_Mad. A._ I will dispense with further courtship.

_Bev._ You may, for an indefinite period.                 [_They go up._

_Des._ So, as soon as Manuel has changed his dress--

_Mar._ Nay, dear Manuel, you shall not change it. For the last time,
obey the headstrong girl. In that dress you often bore her taunts and
insults; in that same dress you shall receive her vows of love and duty.

_Man._ Let it be so then. I will but ask one ornament--the bud you wear
upon your breast. [_She detaches it from her dress._] Look at it,
dearest. It lacks the rich color and the gorgeous blush of one you gave
me once before. But that was lost and trampled under foot. There let it
fade, and typify the errors and misfortunes past, whilst this, just
putting forth its beauty into life, shall be an emblem of dear hopes and
happiness to come.

    [_ALAIN gives a signal--the same chorus as in fourth tableau is
    heard. The curtains are suddenly drawn back from the three arches,
    showing the park and grounds splendidly illuminated with colored
    lamps, and the peasantry assembled, in their picturesque Breton
    holiday costume; a troop of little girls headed by CHRISTINE,
    form, and strew flowers before MANUEL and MARGUERITE, and the
    Curtain falls on a Tableau._]


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Romance of a Poor Young Man, by
Pierrepont Edwards and Lester Wallace

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF A POOR YOUNG MAN ***

***** This file should be named 35342.txt or 35342.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/3/4/35342/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
produced by the Wright American Fiction Project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
