Project Gutenberg's The Riverside Bulletin, March, 1910, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Riverside Bulletin, March, 1910
       Houghton Mifflin Books for Spring and Summer

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: February 22, 2011 [EBook #35353]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIVERSIDE BULLETIN, MARCH, 1910 ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Ernest Schaal,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                        HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
                               BOOKS FOR
                           SPRING AND SUMMER


    THE RIVERSIDE BULLETIN                               MARCH, 1910


        [Illustration: _Illustration by James Montgomery Flagg_
        From "THE RIGHT STUFF," by IAN HAY]


        4 PARK STREET        [Illustration]      85 FIFTH AVENUE
            BOSTON                                   NEW YORK




                [Illustration: Stephana, the heroine of
            "THE DUKE'S PRICE" by DEMETRA and KENNETH BROWN
              From illustration in color by A. G. Learned]




                        HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
                    _Spring and Summer Publications_
            THE RIVERSIDE BULLETIN               MARCH, 1910

      _The Prices here given are subject to change on publication_




                                _Fiction_


                            THE DUKE'S PRICE
                      By Demetra and Kenneth Brown

    With illustrations in color by A. G. LEARNED. 12mo, $1.20 _net_.
        Postage extra.

International marriage novels have been many of late, even as the number
of American girls marrying abroad has increased, but this one is
strikingly different from the type that has become almost hackneyed. The
heroine, a beautiful girl, the daughter of a New York multi-millionaire,
marries a French Duke, and goes to live with him in the ancestral
chateau. So far, the situation is familiar. But this Duke is not the
melodramatic villain too often seen. He is a gentleman and a good
fellow, and in the misunderstandings that arise the reader's sympathy is
evenly divided between the lonely wife and the proud and unhappy young
Duke. The development of the story is of absorbing interest, leading to
an exciting and thoroughly satisfactory climax. Not the least of the
attractions of the story is that the authors know the world that they
write about. Mrs. Kenneth Brown (Demetra Vaka) will be remembered as the
author of "Haremlik," the brilliant study of the life of Turkish women
which was one of the most notable and successful books of 1909. The
collaboration of the Kenneth Browns is one of the most interesting
literary partnerships in contemporary fiction. Kenneth Brown numbers
among his books "Eastover Court House," "Sirocco," and other successful
novels.


                        [Illustration: IAN HAY]


                            THE RIGHT STUFF
                               By Ian Hay

    With frontispiece illustration by JAMES MONTGOMERY FLAGG.
        12mo, $1.20 _net_. Postage extra.

Like Locke and Snaith, Ian Hay is a young British writer whose keen
sense of humor and genial insight into human nature will make an instant
appeal to the large audience of novel readers. "The Right Stuff" tells
of the progress of a young Scottish lad from the lowly surroundings of
his home in the hills, through Edinburgh university, through gruelling
years as a newspaper hack in London, to the position of private
secretary to a man deep in political life of the London of to-day. In
this position he comes into daily touch with the immediate members of
his patron's family, and ultimately, through a series of highly amusing
episodes, takes to himself one of the sprightly twin sisters of his
superior's wife.

Such is the story. The charm and the real fun lie in the constant
surprises and whimsies of the twin sisters, in their irrepressible young
brother,--a peer of that infant prodigy, The Admirable Tinker,--whose
slang is infectious and novel, and above all in the character and doings
of Robin the hero. Since Barrie's "When a Man's Single," readers have
not been introduced to so canny a young man, or one so altogether
likable and human. His extraordinary proposal alone is a chapter that
will make Ian Hay famous, but in all his doings he is a hero that will
delight the reader's heart, and long be remembered as "The Right Stuff."
(_Ready in May_)


                            THE TWISTED FOOT
                        By Henry Milner Rideout

    Author of "Dragon's Blood," "The Siamese Cat," "Admiral's
        Light," etc. With 8 illustrations by G. C. Widney.
        12mo, $1.20 _net_. Postage extra.

                [Illustration: From "THE TWISTED FOOT"]

"Clean and wholesome danger,"--that is the phrase, borrowed from the
book itself, that the editor of London _Punch_ chose to describe the
engrossing interest of "Dragon's Blood," Mr. Rideout's brilliant novel
of last year. Still more applicable is it to his new story, "The Twisted
Foot." This is an interesting, absorbing narrative of mystery and
adventure in the Malay Islands. Seldom has a novelist hit upon a more
haunting series of happenings than those which involve the American
hero, the charming heroine, the mysterious Englishman, the more
mysterious Asiatics, that live in the book. Over all is shed the glamour
and mystery of the Far East--of tropical seas and remote islands. It is
Mr. Rideout's best story. A brilliant series of drawings by Widney add
not a little to the interest of this notable book. (_Ready in May_)


                              AN ARMY MULE
                       By Charles Miner Thompson

    Author of "The Calico Cat," etc. Illustrated by F. R.
        Gruger. 16mo, $1.00 _net_. Postage extra.

That interesting village which was the scene of the episode of "The
Calico Cat" furnishes Mr. Thompson with the material for another highly
diverting tale. The Army Mule in question is one Mr. Job Bixby, a
veteran of the Civil War. The story of what happened to him on the day
set for his wedding, and the surprising complications that ensued from
the innocent trick played by two mischievous boys, make a thoroughly
amusing piece of humor. In addition to its taking humor, the story has a
vivid reality of character and incident.

The illustrations are by Gruger, whose character drawing contributes
much to the interest and amusement furnished by Mr. Thompson.
                           (_Ready in April_)


                             THE GODPARENTS
                        By Grace Sartwell Mason

    Illustrated by F. Vaux Wilson. 12mo, $1.10 _net_. Postage extra.

                    [Illustration: "THE GODPARENTS"]

How a well-poised young woman just about to sail for her fourteenth
summer in Europe was hurried from the steamer by a strange young man,
how she went with him to the mountains of Pennsylvania, and, chaperoned
by her competent French maid, camped out in the woods for three idyllic
weeks, saved a diverting little boy from designing persons, and entered
upon a happy love affair, is told in this unique and charming story. The
book has that happy mingling of humor and romance, unusual incident and
engaging characters that have made such stories as "Our Lady of the
Beeches" and "Pines of Lory" linger in the memory of their readers as
the most enjoyable of tales.

The author, Mrs. Mason, will be remembered as joint author of "The Car
and the Lady," one of the most successful automobile romances ever
written. (_Ready in April_)


                           COUNTRY NEIGHBORS
                             By Alice Brown

    Author of "The Story of Thyrza," "Rose MacLeod," "The
        County Road," etc. 12mo, $1.20 _net_. Postage extra.

Among the short-story writers of the day, Miss Alice Brown stands
unapproached for the ability and power of her tales of New England life.
The present collection, which contains the best of her stories written
since her earlier successes, is of notable interest. Lovers of her short
stories will find it the equal of any of her earlier collections. The
following are a few of the sixteen titles: The Play House, Saturday
Night, The Auction, A Grief Deferred, Partners, The Challenge, Gardener
Jim, The Masquerade.


                          THE ROYAL AMERICANS
                         By Mary Hallock Foote

    Author of "The Desert and the Sown," "Coeur d'Alene," "The
        Led-Horse Claim," etc. 12mo, $1.25 _net_. Postage
        extra.

This new novel from the brilliant pen of Mrs. Foote is in a new vein for
her, but in one that will win many readers. It is an ample, leisurely,
delightful historical romance of the days of the Colonial Wars and the
American Revolution, and gets its title from a famous Colonial regiment
which readers of "The Last of the Mohicans" will remember. The story
begins with the birth of the heroine the night of the fall of Fort
Ontario in 1756, and runs to and through the Revolution. The principal
characters are this girl, her widowed father, an officer in the Royal
Americans, his ward, a wild girl of white parentage whom he rescues from
a long captivity among the Indians, a number of fine young men, and
numerous subsidiary characters, real and fictitious, including fine
delineations of Ethan Allen and the famous Schuyler family. The plot
involves woodland adventures and satisfactory love affairs with a final
happy outcome. The book is an admirable historic picture of the time,
but it is distinguished from most historical novels by Mrs. Foote's
remarkable gift for portraying the relations between people, which gives
to it all a human reality seldom found in books of this type.


                         THE PROFESSIONAL AUNT
                          By Mary C. E. Wemyss

                   16mo, $1.00 _net_. Postage extra.

The large public that took delight in "Elizabeth and her German Garden,"
and the larger public that likes to read of the ways of children and
enjoys a good love story, will welcome this delightful book. It deals
with the experiences of a charming young woman whose married sisters
have made her a "professional aunt." The ways of children, their moods
and manners, have never been more vividly and seductively portrayed.
There is a zest in the account of household happenings that wins the
reader at once, but the book is much more than a story about children.
The love affairs of "Aunt Woggles" and her own charming personality will
become permanent memories.

                      [Illustration: MRS. WEMYSS]

This is the author's first full-sized novel. She is an Englishwoman, one
of a family of fourteen children, and she married an officer in the
English army. "The Professional Aunt" will make her many friends on both
sides of the sea.


                        LITTLE BROTHER O' DREAMS
                       By Elaine Goodale Eastman

    Printed and bound in distinctive style. Narrow 12mo, $1.00 _net_.
        Postage extra.

This tender and poetic story has a power of imaginative pathos that will
take it straight to the heart of the sensitive reader. "Little Brother
o' Dreams," the shy, poetic elf of the woods, who makes friends with the
rich man's child from the city and grows up to be both a bee-man and a
poet, the lover of his childhood's friend, will stay in the memory as
one of the unforgettable characters of contemporary fiction. It is not a
novel for the man in the street, but for discerning readers it will have
a rare and unique charm. Mrs. Eastman has already won distinction, both
as a poet and as an authority in child culture.


                          JOHN FORSYTH'S AUNTS
                          By Eliza Orne White

    Author of "The Wares of Edgefield," "Lesley Chilton," "A
        Browning Courtship," etc. New Edition. 12mo, $1.50.

Three delightful New England "maiden ladies" figure in these eleven
short stories, which Miss White has so connected that they have a
continuous interest and combine the merits of the short story with those
of the novel. The three heroines belong to an old family, which is
devoted to old ways, old furniture, and has an aversion to anything
which savors of modernity and the parvenu. Miss White excels in the
delineation of such characters, and she makes them all very real and
life-like, so that the reader soon learns to look at them as persons and
not as mere creations of an imagination. There is humor, too, in the
stories--humor of a quaint but intensely satisfying nature. The love
affairs have the delicate fragrance of mint and lavender, and savor of
long ago. Contrasted with this is the modern time, which conflicts with
the old and gives the bit of excitement found in the volume.

This book was first published by McClure, Phillips & Co., with whom it
went through several editions in 1901.




                             _For Children_


                               FLUTTERFLY
                        By Clara Louise Burnham

    Author of "The Quest Flower," "Jewel," "The Right
        Princess," etc. Illustrated in color. 12mo, 75 cents.

    [Illustration: Her father wanted her to move slowly about and be
                              dignified.]

Flutterfly was a little princess, and her true name--much too long and
hard for common use--was reserved for state occasions. Her father, the
king, was a cold and dignified person, who was often much annoyed by the
playfulness of little Flutterfly, and when one day she stole away from
the palace to go skating with the pages, he threatened her with heavy
punishment. First he locked her up in her own room, but that very night
her window was magically changed into the opening of a fairy world,
through which she went into Freezeland. The rest of the story tells how
she encountered Jack Frost, how she was befriended by a Giraffe, a Swan,
and a marvelous Horse, how she came to the ice palace of King Crystal,
and how finally after many adventures she safely reached home again.
And there she lived happily ever after, for Love had transformed the
sorrowing King.

The book is most attractively illustrated in color by Miss Emily Hall
Chamberlin, whose work is well known to the readers of juvenile
literature.




                                _Drama_


            HUSBAND, and THE FORBIDDEN GUESTS By John Corbin

    Literary Director of the New Theatre, New York; author of
        "An American at Oxford," "Which College for the Boy,"
        "The Cave Man," etc. 12mo, $1.25 _net_. Postage extra.

Few developments in the last decade have been so startling and important
as the wide-reaching improvement that has been made in the standards of
the American stage, and there have been numerous indications that the
drama--not only the closet, but the acting drama--is again coming into
its own as a form of literature to be _read_. Peculiar interest,
therefore, attaches to this brilliant play by a man who occupies a post
of the first importance in promoting the improvement of the American
stage.

"Husband" is a powerful embodiment in dramatic form of a typical
American situation,--an overworked, harassed man--a wife feverishly
desirous of social success and pleasure. How the short story works out
must be left for the reader to discover. It is enough to say that it
goes from scene to scene with ever-increasing intensity of interest, and
that the conclusion is a strong, optimistic one, big with meaning for
American readers.

To "Husband" is added a brief one-act piece entitled "The Forbidden
Guests," in which the problem of race suicide and the unwelcome child is
handled with unforgettable imaginative force. Mr. Corbin was for many
years dramatic critic of the New York _Sun_.




                            _Outdoor Books_


                   SPORT AND TRAVEL IN THE FAR EAST
                             By J. C. Grew

    Illustrated. Small 8vo, $3.00 _net_. Postage extra.

                             [Illustration]

Lovers of travel and sporting adventure will find Mr. Grew's book a
mine of good reading. He has been an enthusiastic sportsman, and has
hunted game of all sorts in nearly every part of the world, including
Singapore, the Malay Peninsula, Northern Hindustan, New Zealand,
Kashmir, and China. He has killed the cave-dwelling tiger, the ibex in
the Himalayas, the black bear in Baltistan, the pigeon in Egypt, wild
pigs in the Malay Peninsula, with other game too numerous to mention.
He is an observant traveler, a ready and picturesque writer, while he is
one of the few sportsmen-authors who contrive to give their readers the
story of sporting incidents as they actually occur. The result is a book
of remarkable variety of interest and instructiveness. It is lavishly
illustrated from a large collection of remarkable photographs taken by
the author and reproduced with great care.

Mr. Grew, who is in the diplomatic service of the United States, is at
present a member of the American Embassy to Germany. (_Ready in April._)


                            WILDERNESS PETS
                            By Edward Breck

    Author of "The Way of the Woods." With illustrations from
        photographs and drawings. Square crown 8vo.

             [Illustration: MR. BRECK AND TWO OF HIS PETS]

This is a book of unusual interest for young people. The author, after a
brilliant career in many lands, has of late spent much of his time in
the woods of Maine and Nova Scotia, and has taken as a hobby making pets
of the wild creatures of the woods. From the thieving crow to the black
bear and moose, there is scarcely an animal with which Mr. Breck has not
been upon familiar terms. His close study of the ways of his animal
friends is woven into an attractive narrative of the experiences of
Uncle Ned Buckshaw and a group of young people while camping out in the
Nova Scotia forest. Young readers will find it an intensely interesting
book, from which they will derive a wide and sound knowledge of the
habits of wild animals.

                         (_Ready in April._)


                                SWIMMING
                        By Edwin Tenney Brewster

    With frontispiece photograph of Annette Kellerman and
        numerous diagrams. 16mo, $1.00 _net_. Postage extra.

For any one who wants to learn to swim, to swim better, or to teach
some one else to swim, Mr. Brewster's little handbook will be of
unique helpfulness. It is a compact and well-arranged manual, giving
instructions so clearly and entertainingly that the reader, given the
opportunity for practice, can scarcely fail to acquire the art of
swimming in all its branches in a short space of time. A particularly
useful section of the book is that which presents the best method for
teaching very small children to swim. The rapid increase in swimming
instruction in public and private schools has been a notable feature of
the last few years. Mr. Brewster's manual will be particularly useful to
teachers of swimming, while to those who for any reason cannot obtain
expert instruction it will be invaluable, since it will make it possible
to acquire correct swimming without the wasteful habits of muscular
action found in those who acquire the art by the customary haphazard
process. The book is fully illustrated with clear and serviceable
diagrams of positions and motions. (_Ready in April._)


                       NOTES ON NEW ENGLAND BIRDS
                          By Henry D. Thoreau

    Arranged and edited by FRANCIS H. ALLEN. With illustrations
        from photographs. 12mo.

No one has written more poetically of our native birds than Thoreau, and
some of his best writing was inspired by the songs and the flight of
birds. The fourteen volumes of his Journal, which are sold only by
subscription to the entire set of his Writings, contain a wealth of
matter of the deepest interest to lovers of nature, and what he has to
say of birds alone makes a good-sized volume in itself. Mr. Allen has
taken out this bird material, arranged it in systematic order according
to species, and annotated it where notes seemed necessary. The result is
virtually a new volume of Thoreau's works, for the book is Thoreau's
own, not a mere selection from his writings, and a large part of it has
hitherto been practically beyond the reach of the average book-buyer. It
is of interest and value scientifically as well as from the literary
point of view, and it will be welcomed by all bird-lovers, whether or
not they have had a previous acquaintance with Thoreau.

The editor is well known as an ornithologist, being a full member of the
American Ornithologists' Union, and he has had the advantage of an
intimate acquaintance with Thoreau's Journal, of which he was associate
editor with Mr. Bradford Torrey. The volume is attractively illustrated
with photographs of live birds in their natural surroundings. It will be
a book of permanent value.


                   LITTLE GARDENS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
                          By Myrta M. Higgins

    Illustrated from photographs. Square 12mo, $1.10 _net_.
        Postage extra.

     [Illustration: THE RIGHT WAY TO TAKE A WEED OUT OF THE GROUND]

This small, convenient book gives just the information that is needed by
boys and girls and older people who are helping them to make gardens at
home. It is written to the large number of boys and girls in ordinary
circumstances, whose gardens must be limited as to position, extent,
cost, etc., yet it will be equally useful to those of larger means who
wish to find out for themselves the joys of a little garden. It should
prove helpful also to teachers and social workers who are making school
gardens and encouraging improvement work, and should supply a need for
some time felt by Improvement Societies and Home Garden Associations.

It aims first to give the reader a broad outlook beyond the limits of
his own garden, taking the individual garden in its relation to the
whole garden land of the community and to the great world garden itself.
Then beginning with the autumn it furnishes timely suggestions for
garden work throughout the varying seasons. It gives simple directions
for choosing the site, laying out beds, selecting seeds, planting,
raising, caring for, and harvesting the flowers and vegetables. It does
not try to supply technical botanical information, but seeks to deepen
the interest of the young gardener in all the details of his daily work
by showing him something of the meaning and manner of the plant life
with which he has to deal. It is furnished with a goodly number of
illustrations which add to its interest and usefulness. Nearly all these
are from photographs taken by the author while at her work.

Miss Higgins has had a varied experience in both school and home
gardening with children of all ages.




                          _Present-Day Topics_


                             PERSONAL POWER
                        By William Jewett Tucker

                 Crown 8vo, $1.50 _net_. Postage extra.

As president of Dartmouth during the period when it was growing from
a small New England college to one of the largest institutions of
its kind in the United States, Dr. Tucker came to feel very keenly
the need of quickening in young men the sense of personal power.
This may be accomplished through various agencies, notably through the
competition of business; but no business exists for this purpose. By
common consent, however, the college stands for just this influence.
From time to time, therefore, Dr. Tucker gave the Dartmouth students
addresses, or less formal talks, on themes like the Estimation of
Power, the Distribution of Personal Power, the Morally Well-bred Man,
Moral Maturity, and the Recovery of Personal Power. Several of the
most suggestive and stimulating of these talks are now gathered for
publication. The volume contains also a group of four addresses made
at the opening of successive college years, on the general subject of
the Moral Training of the College Man, taking up successively the
training of the Gentleman, the Scholar, the Citizen, and the Altruist.

                   [Illustration: WILLIAM J. TUCKER]

The immense popularity of ex-President Tucker at Dartmouth will of
course commend this book to all men who have been connected with that
college during the last sixteen years, but the interest will not stop
there. He is almost equally well and favorably known to the public at
large, as a wise educator and an eloquent preacher, for he has been
heard in many prominent pulpits and was for several years a professor in
Andover Theological Seminary.


                         THE HEALTH OF THE CITY
                           By Hollis Godfrey

                                  12mo.

Few contemporary topics are so pressing, or attracting so much
attention, as city sanitation to help the health of cities. Mr. Godfrey,
well known for his work in popular science, has been making a study of
these questions for many years, and by his papers in the _Atlantic
Monthly_ and elsewhere, has come to be an authority in the field. This
book brings together the results of his studies, in a volume that will
be of interest to every intelligent citizen, and of the highest
usefulness to all engaged in welfare work. The topics treated are: city
air, water, milk, food, ice, noise, waste, plumbing, and housing. Mr.
Godfrey's writings are entertaining as well as instructive, and the book
is the best handbook of this important subject obtainable--(_Ready in
April._)


                      THE CONQUEST OF CONSUMPTION
                       By Woods Hutchinson, M.D.

    Clinical Professor of Medicine. New York Polyclinic; author
        of "Preventable Diseases," etc. Illustrated. 12mo,
        $1.00 _net_. Postage extra.

Dr. Hutchinson has won a unique place for himself as a brilliant writer
upon medical topics. In this book upon one of the most pressing themes
of the time, he is at his best. The list of chapters of the book
indicates its helpful and timely character: A Message of Hope, The Enemy
Himself, What Happens to the Bacillus in the Body, The Weapons of War,
Fresh Air and How to Get It, Sunlight: the Real Golden Touch, Food the
Greatest Foe of Consumption, Work and Rest, Intelligent Idleness, The
Camp and the Country, Cash and Consumption, Climate and Health,
Specifications for the Open-Air Treatment at Home. In addition to this
there are some practical appendices dealing with the construction of
open-air sleeping porches, camp building, etc. It is a book which should
be in the hands of every tubercular patient, as well as of all those who
are interested in stamping out the great white plague.

The illustrations consist of five full-page plates showing various
styles of sleeping porches for home use, and a diagram of a tent.


                      EVERY-DAY BUSINESS FOR WOMEN
                           By Mary A. Wilbur

                   12mo, $1.25 _net_. Postage extra.

The aim of this book is to furnish simple and accurate instructions for
the conduct of "Every-Day Business,"--such business as inevitably falls
to the lot of thousands of American women, both married and single. The
methods of banking, the management of a check-book, foreign exchange,
getting money in emergencies, how to send money, bills and receipts, the
relations of employer and employee, relations with railroads and hotels,
simple bookkeeping, on sending things, taxes and customs, the use and
transference of property, stocks and bonds, wills and estates--all these
are clearly and even entertainingly explained, and the woman who has
read the book will find herself saved many daily moments of doubt and
many annoying errors. It is a book which should be in every home, on
every woman's writing-table.

Miss Wilbur has been for many years a teacher of banking and political
economy in Miss Dana's celebrated school at Morristown, New Jersey, and
the present work is the result of practical experience in teaching the
elements of correct business procedure.


                      WOOL-GROWING AND THE TARIFF
                          By Chester W. Wright

    Instructor in Political Economy in the University of
        Chicago. Harvard Economic Studies, Vol. V. 8vo, $1.50
        _net_. Postpaid.

The continued discussion following the passage of the recent tariff
bill indicates that we are now at the beginning rather than the end
of a period when public attention will more than ever centre upon
this subject. In the history of our tariff no other schedule has
attracted so much attention or been the cause of more controversy
than that relating to wool and woolens. It was the failure of
Congress to make any substantial change in duties on them which led
President Taft to single them out in particular as his chief cause
for any dissatisfaction with the present tariff. The one point made
clearest of all in the recent tariff discussion was the need for a
thorough knowledge of the facts and genuine scientific study. In this
volume, based upon years of research, the author has studied the
wool-growing industry of the country in connection with the tariff
duties on wool and woolens. He shows an unexpected variety and
complexity of forces, and proves the superficiality and fallacious
character of much of current discussion. The duties on wool are shown to
be of little real importance in the growth of the industry. Incidentally
the book also presents a history of the woolen manufacture, touches on
many points in the history of American agriculture, and throws light
upon a number of the broader problems in the economic history of the
United States. It should appeal to those interested in our country's
industrial history as well as to those interested in the tariff
question.


                     COPYRIGHT: ITS HISTORY AND LAW
                        By Richard Rogers Bowker

                   Author of "The Arts of Life," etc.

This work, the outgrowth from an earlier book on copyright published by
Mr. Bowker in 1886, with bibliography by Mr. Thorvald Solberg, covers
the development of copyright from the earliest time (and in England as
well as in the United States), to the passage of the new American code
of 1909, inclusive of such interpretation as this has already received
in the courts. It treats in full all the several features of the code of
1909 and is intended for the use of authors.--artistic, dramatic, and
musical as well as literary.--publishers, lawyers, and the public. Mr.
Bowker, as editor of the _Publishers' Weekly_, has followed copyright
development for many years; and as Vice-President of the American
(Authors') Copyright League, participated actively in the preparation of
the new code. Appendixes give the text of the code, the Royal Copyright
Commission digest of British copyright law with summary of later
legislation, the International Copyright Union conventions, etc. This
work will take a position at once as the standard handbook on the
subject of copyright. (_Ready in May_)




                        _Essays and Literature_


                           ESSAYS ON THE SPOT
                         By Charles D. Stewart

    Author of "Partners of Providence," "The Fugitive Blacksmith,"
        etc. 12mo.

                   [Illustration: CHARLES D. STEWART]

Mr. Stewart is seen here in a new role. The six papers that are brought
together in the book fall into three groups. The first group, consisting
of "Chicago Spiders," "The Story of Bully" (an extraordinary ox), and
"On a Moraine," has to do with certain curious observations and
reflections connected with the three subjects in question. For insight,
imagination, and intellectual vigor, they are very notable, and strike a
new note in American essay-writing. The second group, consisting of
Kubla Khan and The Study of Grammar, shows Mr. Stewart as a literary
critic and analyst of the first rank. His interpretation of the meaning
of Kubla Khan will create a sensation among scholars and lovers of
poetry, while his shrewd and entertaining remarks on the present method
of studying grammar will provoke animated educational discussion and
cause a reminiscent chuckle in many an old school-boy and girl. Finally,
by itself, comes "We," a vivacious, penetrating parody of Kipling's
famous story, "They,"--which indirectly suggests some far-reaching
thoughts on literary art.


                     AT THE SIGN OF THE HOBBY-HORSE
                      By Elizabeth Bisland Wetmore

    Author of "The Life and Letters of Lafcadio Hearn," etc.

In this group of essays upon some of her intellectual hobbies, Mrs.
Wetmore's penetrating mind and vivacious style are seen to exceptional
advantage. She writes upon topics that are very much alive--subjects of
debate and discussion among cultivated people everywhere. A few of the
topics treated are The Morals of the Modern Heroine, The Child in
Literature, The Contemporary Poets, Strong Meat for the Masses (_i.e._,
literary meat), The Books of the Bourgeoisie, The Little Member (_i.e._,
the tongue), Upon Making the Most of Life, etc. In tone and flavor, the
essays are somewhat between the bookish character of such collections as
Sedgwick's "Great Writers" and the personal, whimsical note of those of
Miss Repplier and Mr. Crothers. They are always vigorous in thought and
expression, and uncommonly readable. They will be read and talked of.
(_Ready in April_)


                      AN APPROACH TO WALT WHITMAN
                           By Carleton Noyes

    Author of "The Enjoyment of Art" and "The Gate of
        Appreciation." Illustrated. Large crown 8vo, $1.50
        _net_. Postage extra.

For any one desiring to get at the true spirit and meaning of Walt
Whitman's poetry, there could be no better introduction than this
compact and illuminating volume. Mr. Noyes, who has made a life-long
study of Whitman, writes of him with peculiar insight and clarity. The
chapters deal with Whitman the Man, with his Art, his Human Appeal, his
Attitude toward God and Religion, and, finally, with his unique message
to the individual reader. The book is in no sense a competitor with any
of the biographies of Whitman,--but, rather, complementary to them. No
lover of the Good Gray Poet can afford to overlook it, while many who
have been perhaps but indifferently interested in Whitman will find this
book a stimulus to further study. It is illustrated with a rare
photograph reproduced in photogravure, together with a facsimile of an
interesting piece of unpublished manuscript.

Mr. Noyes was for several years an instructor in the English Department
of Harvard University, but is now devoting himself entirely to letters.
                           (_Ready in April_)


                           LETTERS TO MY SON

This is a unique book of intense human interest, written by a
well-known English author whose name is, by her own desire, withheld.
These Letters, or confessions, tell the story of a woman's early
wedded life with remarkable poignancy, and with a humor, tenderness,
picturesqueness, and lack of self-consciousness, that cannot fail to win
thousands of readers, especially women. The volume is unlike all other
books of fiction. It cannot be described; it must be read. It is, in
short, the book of a woman's heart written with a mingling of frankness
and reserve, of strong feeling and literary skill that will make a
permanent impression. (_Ready in May_)


                          A STUDY OF THE DRAMA
                          By Brander Matthews

    Illustrated. Crown 8vo, $1.50 _net_. Postage extra. [Also,
        School Edition, $1.25 _net_. Postpaid.]

                    [Illustration: BRANDER MATTHEWS]

This book does for the theatre what Bliss Perry's "Study of Prose
Fiction" does for the novel. It is a clear and able study, not of the
closet-drama, but of the actual stage play. It is not a history of the
drama, though a great deal of sound dramatic history comes in
incidentally. It is rather an exposition of the conditions which
determine the method in which a play is constructed and which make for
its significance and success. In its helpfulness for the intelligent
play-goer who wants to understand what he sees and judge plays readily
and soundly, it is unique. Prof. Matthews has been for many years
professor of dramatic literature in Columbia University, and as a writer
upon the drama he has won a position of undisputed authority. This book
embodies the results of his life-long studies. It is illustrated with
plans and views of famous theatres.


              ENGLISH LITERATURE IN ACCOUNT WITH RELIGION
                          By Edward M. Chapman

    Author of "The Dynamic of Christianity." Large crown 8vo,
        $2.00 _net_. Postage extra.

This unusual book is a study of the debt of English literature, through
the past century and a half, to the religious impulse. "The path of
literature leads primarily to that of religion," says Mr. Chapman; "they
are brethren of one blood, interdependent, and necessary to each other."
In this relation, Mr. Chapman illustrates from the literature he
studies, taking up in order practically all the important English
writers from Cowper to the present day. He writes well and
entertainingly, and never with a narrow theological preoccupation. No
serious student of literature can read the book without drawing from it
a flood of new light upon the ideals of the nineteenth century, while it
has of course special interest for those vitally concerned with
religious matters.




                        _Biography and History_


                         THE LIFE OF MARY LYON
                       By Beth Bradford Gilchrist

    With portraits and other illustrations. Square crown 8vo,
        $1.50 _net_. Postage extra.

Of the many notable women of the nineteenth century, few did work of
such lasting importance as Mary Lyon, through whose influence the
movement for the higher education of women was begun. As the founder of
Mount Holyoke College, the story of her life and the force of her
personality are already traditionally known to thousands of college
women throughout the United States, but the world at large, which knows
her chiefly as a celebrated name, will for the first time learn from
Miss Gilchrist's admirable biography of her great personal magnetism and
charm. Miss Gilchrist has done her work well and sympathetically, and
has painted a permanent addition to the portraits of the world's great
women. It is a fit companion to the remarkable "Life of Alice Freeman
Palmer," one of the most successful books of 1908. In the best sense it
is a book of inspiration.


                          MY FRIEND THE INDIAN
                          By James McLaughlin

    Illustrated. Large crown 8vo, $2.50 _net_. Postage extra.

This is an authoritative book of engrossing interest. The author, as
Indian Agent and Inspector, has had intimate relations with Indians for
a period of nearly forty years. It was he who ended the Ghost Dance
trouble in 1890 by the arrest of Sitting Bull, and so successful have
been his negotiations with the Indians in many difficult and complicated
cases that he is known among them as "The Negotiator." The story of his
life and work is unique in the rich literature dealing with the subject
of the American Indian. He tells of many thrilling episodes in Indian
history, including for the first time the Indian side of the story of
the Custer tragedy at Little Big Horn, and the story of Chief Joseph's
famous retreat with his Nez Perces. Along with these intensely
interesting reminiscences, there are studies of the Indian character
that are of first importance. The author tells of the Indian's daily
customs in love and war, of his way of looking at things, and of his
religion. The whole, in short, is a thrilling narrative of adventure and
a firsthand study of the Indian character that cannot be passed by. It
is fully illustrated with unusual pictures of Indians and their life.
(_Ready in April_)

                   [Illustration: AN UNTAMED INDIAN]


                            COLONIAL MOBILE
                          By Peter J. Hamilton

    Revised and enlarged edition. With illustrations and maps.
        8vo, $3.50 _net_. Postpaid.

Mr. Hamilton has found a new historical field in the region, originally
the stronghold of the greatest tribes of Indians, then explored by the
Spaniards and settled by the French, and long a debatable ground between
the Latins on the Gulf and the Anglo-Saxons on the Atlantic. The
Alabama-Tombigbee Basin, the original Louisiana, of which Mobile was the
metropolis, shifted from one side to the other in the contest until even
Edward A. Freeman declared it an historical puzzle.

Opportunity is taken in this revised and enlarged edition to emphasize
the American rather than the local features. There is a new study not
only of the early explorers like De Soto, and of the Southern Indians
and of colonial systems, but of the interaction of Latin and British
institutions whose fusion resulted in a new type of American. Previous
writers have contented themselves with the Latin or the British element;
this is the first study of their conflict as seen from the centre of the
field. In its department the book has become a standard.

Among the new material of this edition may be mentioned much light on De
Soto, Pardo, and De Luna, on the Spiritu Santo question, on French and
Spanish institutions. We find the first presentation of the British
legislation, Indian policy and boundary, and American territorial and
social evolution in the South-west. In the appendix are for the first
time made available the Pardo Narratives of exploration and rare
biography. The new illustrations, too, are a distinct feature. Many are
of unpublished maps from European archives, and show the gradual
emergence of the states at the expense of the Indian nations, and places
and relics pictured are of general interest.




                                _Travel_


                       THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA
                          By Lindon Bates, Jr.

                     Illustrated. Large crown 8vo.

Not long after the Russian railroad across Siberia was opened, Mr. Bates
traveled along it to Irkutsk, and thence by sledge along the old post
road to Urga in Mongolia. His readable and entertaining narrative of his
experiences, adventures, and impressions of the country and people
constitutes a firsthand account of Siberia of unique interest and value;
while the new light that the book throws upon some of the most important
questions involved in the reconstruction of the Far East makes it one
that must be considered by all serious students of this field. It is
fully illustrated from interesting photographs by the author.

Mr. Bates is a graduate of Yale University, and a civil engineer by
profession. He has, however, given much time to public affairs, and as a
member of the legislature of the State of New York has taken a prominent
stand in reform politics, and in the sound administration of the
public's business.


                      1910 SATCHEL GUIDE TO EUROPE
                             By W. J. Rolfe

    With colored maps and street plans. Pocket size, flexible
        leather cover, $1.50 _net_. Postpaid.

39th annual edition carefully revised. It includes Great Britain,
Belgium, Holland, Germany, Switzerland, France, Austria, and Italy,
besides valuable general information. As the _Travel Magazine_ says, "It
is one of the most valuable little companions that any tourist can
possibly have."




                         _For the Bride-to-Be_


                                HER BOOK
                            By Mabel M. Swan

    Flexible covers. Crown 8vo, $2.00 _net_. Postage extra.

This book is intended first of all for practical use--as a record book
to be kept from the time of the announcement of a girl's engagement to
her wedding day. The diary is supposed to begin at the time the
engagement is announced, giving opportunity for recording luncheons,
teas, "showers," and all other pleasant happenings that accompany an
engagement. There are pages for lists of the people to be invited to the
wedding, and those to whom announcements are to be sent; for lists of
gifts, names of givers, and dates of acknowledgment of gifts; pages for
photographs, newspaper clippings, descriptions and samples of her
trousseau, of her wedding gown, veil, and flowers from her wedding
bouquet; and for lists of bridesmaids and ushers.

It is intended secondly as a gift book, as a book to be kept for future
years, to recall one of the happiest times in a girl's life. The pages
have attractive marginal decorations and a quality of paper suitable for
taking writing ink is used. No more appropriate or acceptable gift can
be imagined, when a girl is engaged. (_Ready in May_)




                       _Philosophy and Religion_


                      THE PRINCIPLES OF PRAGMATISM
                           By H. Heath Bawden

    Formerly Professor of Philosophy at Vassar College and at
        the University of Cincinnati. Crown 8vo, $1.50 _net_.
        Postage 14 cents.

In the history of philosophy there have been few more notable phenomena
than the rapidity with which the school of thought known as Pragmatism
has gained ground among careful thinkers in the last few years, and,
unlike many schools of thought, it has, as expounded by the brilliant
pen of William James and other leaders, contrived to interest many
readers not ordinarily attracted by philosophical subjects. Professor
Bawden's book on "The Principles of Pragmatism" is a careful, logical,
and lucid exposition of this system of thought, and thoughts bearing on
other intellectual fields. The professional philosopher will find it
important and significant, while for the lay reader it will be a most
useful exposition of this most modern of intellectual currents.
Professor Bawden is well known in philosophical circles for his
constructive thinking.


               THE EARLIEST SOURCES FOR THE LIFE OF JESUS
                      By Francis Crawford Burkitt

    In the Modern Religious Problems Series. 12mo, 50 cents
        _net_. Postage 5 cents.

The author of this book is a graduate of Trinity College, Cambridge, and
has been Norrisian Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge,
England, since 1905. He has made a special study of the Semitic
Christianity that once flourished east of the Roman Empire, and believes
that the rise of the Christian Church can be understood only in relation
to the hopes and fears of the Jewish nation during the first century.
Our view of these hopes and fears must profoundly modify the critical
judgment that we pass on the Gospels and the sources from which we may
suppose them to have been derived. In a previous work, called "The
Gospel History and its Transmission," Professor Burkitt considered the
problem how it came to pass that any historical record of the Life of
Jesus should have survived. In the present volume the main positions
taken up are (1) the general historicity of the sketch of our Lord's
career given in the Gospel of Mark, and (2) the impossibility of making
a satisfactory reconstruction of the lost source or sources used (in
addition to Mark) in the Gospels according to Luke and Matthew.


                           PAUL AND PAULINISM
                            By James Moffatt

    In the Modern Religious Problems Series. 12mo, 50 cents
        _net_. Postage 5 cents.

The author of this monograph made his first contribution to the
criticism of the New Testament in 1901 by the publication of "The
Historical New Testament," a work which was at once recognized in
Germany and America, as well as in Great Britain, as an original and
fruitful statement of its position. In 1907 Dr. Moffatt delivered the
Jowett Lectures in London upon The Spirit in the Early Church. These
have not yet been published, but the present monograph is a compact and
popular outline of the argument developed in the first and second of the
Lectures. Dr. Moffatt has contributed articles on various aspects of
Paul to the Encyclopedia Biblica, the new edition of the Encyclopedia
Britannica, and the critical reviews. He writes out of a prolonged study
of the subject, both on its critical and on its constructive side, so
that the present monograph may claim to have behind it that original
research without which no contribution to the literature of Paulinism is
entitled to a hearing.


                          THE CHURCH AND LABOR
                           By Charles Stelzle

    In the Modern Religious Problems Series. 12mo, 50 cents
        _net_. Postage 5 cents.

This little book seeks to make clear the steps which have been taken to
bring the Church and Labor into closer relationship with one another,
and to point out methods of still closer relationship. Mr. Stelzle was
born in a tenement house district in New York City. At eight years of
age he left school and went to work in a tobacco factory. Later he was a
newsboy, and then a machinist, which has given him the right to be a
member of the International Order of Machinists, and to have access to
the Labor Unions of this country. He annually attends the two weeks'
convention of the American Federation of Labor as a fraternal delegate,
and his addresses have created the greatest enthusiasm. He is now
directing some laboratory work for the Presbyterian Church among the
foreign-speaking people of New York City. He is director of the
Department of Christian Sociology in one of the leading schools for
Christian workers, and as Superintendent of the Presbyterian department
of Church and Labor, has done yeoman service in bringing the Church to
an appreciation of the laboring man, and the laboring man to an
appreciation of the Church.




                                _Poetry_


                 COMPLETE POEMS OF RICHARD WATSON GILDER

    With photogravure portrait. Crown 8vo, $1.50. Also in leather
        bindings.

This complete edition of Mr. Gilder's poems appeared under his
supervision a year and a half ago. It contains his final selection from
his nine previous volumes, together with his last pieces, and is a
notable and permanent addition to the library of American song.


                           POEMS OF BELIEF
                        By Theodore C. Williams

    Translator of "Virgil's AEneid" and "Elegies of Tibullus."
        With frontispiece by Elihu Vedder. 12mo.

Mr. Williams, whose recent edition of the AEneid is regarded by the
_Harvard Graduates' Magazine_ as "the best English translation of the
present time," offers in this new volume about seventy poems which may
be divided into three groups,--religious, occasional, and translations
from the Latin. The poems express devoutly and freely the common
experiences of the religious life, but are not ecclesiastical; and
though not doctrinal, the accent is rather upon truth than feeling. The
standpoint is ethical idealism. As _The Christian Register_ has said,
Mr. Williams is "a religious idealist who is at heart a true poet ... as
well as a thorough classical scholar and a winning religious teacher."




                       _Riverside Press Editions_


                            A POET IN EXILE
                      BEING SOME EARLY LETTERS OF
                                John Hay

    Edited by Caroline Ticknor. Limited Riverside Press
        Edition. With portrait. 8vo.

A highly interesting and significant episode in the life of John Hay is
presented in this unusual little book in the original documents. In
1858, young Hay, then twenty years of age, graduated from Brown
University and went to study law in a dingy law office in Warsaw,
Illinois. This was his poetic period of storm and stress. Remote from
the literary friendships that had been a delight and inspiration in
college, exile as he felt himself, he poured himself out in some
interesting unpublished poems and particularly in a series of letters to
his friend, Miss Nora Perry, the poet of Providence, who was one of the
most interesting women of her time. The slender volume, which contains
these letters and poems published for the first time, will be of
extraordinary interest to book-lovers, collectors, and the many admirers
of Mr. Hay. It is octavo, of about 64 pages, printed from type on
Batchelor hand-made paper, and bound uncut in paper-boards with paper
label. The frontispiece is a contemporary portrait of Hay engraved on
copper by Sidney L. Smith.

                             [Illustration]


                              PAN'S PIPES
                       By Robert Louis Stevenson

    Riverside Press Edition of 550 numbered copies, 500 for
        sale. Small 16mo.

There are few more charming essays in modern letters than Stevenson's
characteristic whimsical discourse which he has entitled "Pan's Pipes,"
a faithful rendering of that pagan spirit which is eternal in the human
heart. The delicacy and classic air of the essay has made it seem a
peculiarly fit subject for exquisite typographical treatment. In this
edition, Mr. Bruce Rogers has given it an embodiment of simple
neo-classic charm which leaves little to be desired. The little book
consists of 18 pages printed from type on a special quality of Italian
hand-made paper and decorated with medallions of fauns and satyrs
adapted from old engraved gems. The binding is of brilliant red paper on
thin boards, stamped with a representation of a maze, also taken from an
old gem.




                             _Educational_


                           American Education
                          By Andrew S. Draper

    Commissioner of Education of the State of New York. With an
        introduction by Nicholas Murray Butler, President of
        Columbia University. 12mo, $2.00 _net_. Postpaid.

Dr. Draper gives in this book the results of his unusually wide and
fruitful experience as city superintendent, state superintendent,
president of a state university, and Commissioner of Education of the
State of New York.


                      The Principles of Education
                         By William C. Ruediger

    Asst. Professor of Educational Psychology, Teachers
        College, George Washington University. 12mo, $1.25
        _net_. Postpaid.

Professor Ruediger discusses the teacher's education and training and
presents a very satisfactory summary and interpretation of the best
educational theory underlying the aims of education, the administration
of schools, and methods of teaching.


             The First Book of Stories for the Story-Teller
                            By Fanny E. Coe

    Teacher of English in the Boston Normal School. 16mo,
        80 cents _net_. Postpaid.

This collection of stories has been especially prepared by Miss Coe for
teachers and parents of children of the age of those in the first grade
in our public schools.


                         European Hero Stories
                          By Eva March Tappan

    Profusely illustrated. Square 12mo, 65 cents _net_. Postpaid.

This book, in a picturesque but historically accurate narrative,
portrays the preeminently great characters of European history, from
Alaric the Visigoth to Napoleon.


                           The British Isles
                        By Everett T. Tomlinson

    Profusely illustrated from photographs. 12mo, 60 cents
        _net_. Postpaid.

This book tells the story of a journey which the author took in company
with a party of young people through the British Isles. An introduction
summarizes the geographical facts of the British Isles, and sketches the
history of the English people. An appendix contains statistics of areas,
population, production, etc.


                           Little-Folk Lyrics
                       By Frank Dempster Sherman

    School Edition. Illustrated. 16mo, 60 cents _net_. Postpaid.

Mr. Sherman's poems have been widely recognized for their special appeal
to children. They are written in a vein similar to Stevenson's "Child's
Garden of Verse."


                          Old Ballads in Prose
                          By Eva March Tappan

    School Edition. Illustrated. 12mo, 40 cents _net_. Postpaid.

There is no more fascinating chapter of literature for children than
that of the old English ballads. The most suitable of these ballads for
school use, written in Miss Tappan's best narrative style, are offered
in this book. The book is illustrated by Fanny Y. Cory.


                        The Basket Woman Stories
                             By Mary Austin

    Author of "The Land of Little Rain," "Isidro," etc.
        Prepared for School Use. Illustrated. Square 12mo. _In
        press_.

One of the most delightful collections of Indian stories ever published.
They are either legends as told around the camp fires of the Paiute
Indians of the Pacific coast, or are based upon the traditions of this
tribe. The book contains a number of interesting photographs of scenes
described in the tales, taken by the United States Indian Service.


               Everyman, The Second Shepherd's Play, and
                     Other Miracles and Folk Plays

    Edited by Clarence Griffin Child, Professor of English in
        the University of Pennsylvania. Riverside Literature
        Series, No. 191. Paper, 30 cents, linen, 40 cents
        _net_. Postpaid.

The editorial equipment contains a general introduction, special
introductions to the different plays, and explanatory and critical
notes.


                        Mrs. Gaskell's Cranford

    Edited, with complete introduction, notes, questions, and
        suggestions, by H. E. Coblentz, head of the English
        Department, South Division High School, Milwaukee.
        Riverside Literature Series, No. 192. Paper, 30 cents,
        linen, 40 cents _net_. Postpaid.

The editor, well known as a teacher and literary critic, has had the
unusual advantage of a recent visit to Knutsford, which is the Cranford
of the story. Photographs of the town of Knutsford add interest.


                  A Translation of the AEneid of Virgil

    By Theodore C. Williams, formerly Head Master of the
        Roxbury Latin School. Riverside Literature Series, No.
        193. Illustrated. Linen, 75 cents _net_. Postpaid.

The editorial equipment includes a synopsis of the story, an
introduction on the "poet and the poem," questions on the text,
suggestions for reading, books for reference, famous lines, and a
pronouncing vocabulary of the proper names in the poem.


               Selections from Irving's Bracebridge Hall

    Edited by Samuel Thurber, head of the English Department,
        Technical High School, Newton, Mass. Riverside
        Literature Series, No. 194. Paper, 15 cents, linen, 25
        cents _net_. Postpaid.

Teachers of English in technical and commercial high schools will find
this edition unusually well adapted to their students. The introduction,
explanatory notes, and questions have been prepared with unusual care.


                            Thoreau's Walden

    Edited by Francis H. Allen, compiler of a Bibliography of
        Henry David Thoreau. With questions by Charles Swain
        Thomas, head of the Department of English, Newton
        (Mass.) High School. Riverside Literature Series, No.
        195. Triple number. Illustrated. Paper, 45 cents,
        linen, 50 cents _net_. Postpaid.

The editorial equipment contains an excellent characterization of
Thoreau, full explanatory notes, and complete questions which will
greatly assist in the interpretation of this nature classic.




                       HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY'S

                      _LIST OF SPRING BOOKS 1910_


                                FICTION

    The Duke's Price. By DEMETRA and KENNETH BROWN. Illustrated
        in color. 12mo, _net_ $1.20

    The Right Stuff. By IAN HAY. With frontispiece. 12mo, _net_
        1.20

    The Twisted Foot. By HENRY MILNER RIDEOUT. Illustrated.
        12mo, _net_ 1.20

    The Godparents. By GRACE SARTWELL MASON. Illustrated. 12mo,
        _net_ 1.10

    An Army Mule. By CHARLES MINER THOMPSON. Illustrated. 16mo,
        _net_ 1.00

    Country Neighbors. By ALICE BROWN. 12mo, _net_ 1.20

    The Royal Americans. By MARY HALLOCK FOOTE. 12mo, _net_ 1.25

    The Professional Aunt. By MARY C. E. WEMYSS. 16mo, _net_
        1.00

    Little Brother o' Dreams. By ELAINE GOODALE EASTMAN. Narrow
        12mo, _net_ 1.00

    John Forsyth's Aunts. By ELIZA ORNE WHITE. _New Edition._
        12mo 1.50


                              FOR CHILDREN

    Flutterfly. By CLARA LOUISE BURNHAM. Illustrated in color.
        12mo .75


                                 DRAMA

    Husband, and the Forbidden Guests. By JOHN CORBIN. 12mo,
        _net_ 1.25


                             OUTDOOR BOOKS

    Sport and Travel in the Far East. By J. C. GREW.
        Illustrated. Small 8vo, _net_ 3.00

    Swimming. By EDWIN T. BREWSTER. With frontispiece and
        diagrams. 16mo, _net_ 1.00

    Notes on New England Birds. By HENRY D. THOREAU.
        Illustrated. 12mo, _net_

    Wilderness Pets. By EDWARD BRECK. Illustrated. Square crown
        8vo, _net_

    Little Gardens for Boys and Girls. By MYRTA M. HIGGINS.
        Illustrated. Square 12mo, _net_ 1.10


                           PRESENT-DAY TOPICS

    Personal Power. By WILLIAM J. TUCKER. Crown 8vo, _net_ 1.50

    The Health of the City. By HOLLIS GODFREY. 12mo, _net_

    The Conquest of Consumption. By DR. WOODS HUTCHINSON.
        Illustrated. 12mo, _net_ 1.00

    Every-Day Business for Women. By MARY A. WILBUR. 12mo, _net_
        1.25

    Wool-Growing and the Tariff. By CHESTER W. WRIGHT. 8vo,
        _net_ 1.50

    Copyright. By R. R. BOWKER. _Net_


                         ESSAYS AND LITERATURE

    Essays on the Spot. By CHARLES D. STEWART. 12mo, _net_

    At the Sign of the Hobby-Horse. By ELIZABETH BISLAND
        WETMORE. _Net_

    An Approach to Walt Whitman. By CARLETON NOYES. With
        portrait. Large crown 8vo, _net_ 1.50

    A Study Of the Drama. By BRANDER MATTHEWS. Illustrated.
        Crown 8vo, _net_ 1.50

    Also a _Students' Edition_, _net_, postpaid 1.25

    English Literature in Account with Religion. By EDWARD M.
        CHAPMAN. Large crown 8vo, _net_ 2.00


                         BIOGRAPHY AND HISTORY

    The Life of Mary Lyon. By BETH BRADFORD GILCHRIST.
        Illustrated. Square crown 8vo, _net_ 1.50

    My Friend the Indian. By JAMES MCLAUGHLIN. Illustrated.
        Large crown 8vo, _net_ 2.50

    Colonial Mobile. By PETER J. HAMILTON. _Revised and Enlarged
        Edition._ Illustrated. 8vo, _net_ 3.50


                                 TRAVEL

    The Russian Road to China. By LINDON BATES, JR.
        Illustrated. Large crown 8vo, _net_

    1910 Satchel Guide to Europe. By W. J. ROLFE. With maps.
        _Net_, postpaid 1.50


                          FOR THE BRIDE-TO-BE

    Her Book. By MABEL M. SWAN. Crown 8vo, _net_ $2.00


                        PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION

    The Principles of Pragmatism. By H. HEATH BAWDEN. Crown
        8vo, _net_ 1.50

    The Earliest Sources for the Life of Jesus. By FRANCIS C.
        BURKITT. 12mo, _net_ .50

    Paul and Paulinism. By JAMES MOFFATT. 12mo, _net_ .50

    The Church and Labor. By CHARLES STELZLE. 12mo, _net_ .50


                                 POETRY

    Complete Poems of R. W. Gilder. With portrait. Crown 8vo
        1.50

    Poems of Belief. By THEODORE C. WILLIAMS. With frontispiece.
        12mo, _net_


                        RIVERSIDE PRESS EDITIONS

    A Poet in Exile. By JOHN HAY. With portrait. 8vo, _net_,
        postpaid

    Pan's Pipes. By ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON. 500 numbered copies
        for sale. Small 16mo, _net_, postpaid


                              EDUCATIONAL

    European Hero Stories. By EVA MARCH TAPPAN. Illustrated.
        Square 12mo, _net_, postpaid .65

    The British Isles. By EVERETT T. TOMLINSON. Illustrated.
        12mo, _net_ postpaid .60

    The First Book of Stories for the Story-Teller. By FANNY E.
        COE. 16mo, _net_, postpaid .80

    American Education. By ANDREW S. DRAPER. 12mo, _net_,
        postpaid 2.00

    The Principles of Education. By WILLIAM C. RUEDIGER. 12mo,
        _net_, postpaid 1.25

    Little-Folk Lyrics. By FRANK DEMPSTER SHERMAN. _School
        Edition._ Illustrated. 16mo, _net_, postpaid .60

    Old Ballads in Prose. By EVA MARCH TAPPAN. _School Edition._
        Illustrated. 12mo, _net_, postpaid .40

    The Basket Woman Stories. By MARY AUSTIN. Illustrated.
        Square 12mo, _net_, postpaid

    Everyman, The Second Shepherd's Play, and Other Miracles and
        Folk Plays. R. L. S. 191. Paper, _net_, .30; linen,
        _net_, postpaid .40

    Mrs. Gaskell's Cranford. R. L. S. 192. Paper, _net_, .30;
        linen, _net_, postpaid .40

    Williams's AEneid. R. L. S. 193. Linen, _net_, postpaid .75

    Selections from Irving's Bracebridge Hall. R. L. S. 194.
        Paper, _net_, .15; linen, _net_, postpaid .25

    Thoreau's Walden. R. L. S. 195. Triple number. Paper, _net_,
        .45; linen, _net_, postpaid .50


                              RECENT BOOKS

    Susanna and Sue. By KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN. Illustrated in
        color. Large crown 8vo, _net_ 1.50

    The Severed Mantle. By WILLIAM LINDSEY. Illustrated in
        color. Square crown 8vo, _net_ 1.35

    Farming It. By HENRY A. SHUTE. Illustrated 12mo, _net_ 1.20

    Old Harbor. By WM. J. HOPKINS. Sq. crown 8vo, _net_ 1.25

    Italian Hours. By HENRY JAMES. Illustrated in color. Demi
        quarto, _net_ 7.50

    The New Golfer's Almanac. By WM. LEAVITT STODDARD.
        Illustrated. Tall 12mo, _net_ .90

    Preventable Diseases. By DR. WOODS HUTCHINSON. 12mo, _net_
        1.50

    Wanderings in the Roman Campagna. By RODOLFO LANCIANI.
        Illustrated. 8vo, _net_ 5.00

    Travels in Spain. By PHILIP S. MARDEN. Illustrated. Large
        crown 8vo, _net_ 3.00

    Greek Lands and Letters. By FRANCIS G. and ANNE C. E.
        ALLINSON. Illustrated. Crown 8vo, _net_ 2.50

    The Autobiography of Henry M. Stanley. Edited by LADY
        STANLEY. Illustrated. 8vo, _net_ 5.00

    Diplomatic Memoirs. By JOHN W. FOSTER. 2 vols. Illustrated.
        8vo, _net_ 6.00

    Recollections. By WASHINGTON GLADDEN. With portrait. Large
        crown 8vo, _net_ 2.00

    The German Element in the United States. By ALBERT BERNHARDT
        FAUST. In 2 vols. Illustrated. 8vo, _net_ 7.50

    The American People. By A. MAURICE LOW. Large crown 8vo,
        _net_ 2.25




                          Transcriber's Notes.

Passages in italics were indicated by _underscores_.

Small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.

On page 2, "When a Man 's Single," was replaced with "When a Man's
Single,".

On page 3, the oe ligature was replaced with "oe".

On page 10, the hyphen after "important subject obtainable" was replaced
with a dash.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Riverside Bulletin, March, 1910, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIVERSIDE BULLETIN, MARCH, 1910 ***

***** This file should be named 35353.txt or 35353.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/3/5/35353/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Ernest Schaal,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
