The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Raid of John Brown at Harper's Ferry as
I Saw It, by Rev. Samuel Vanderlip Leech

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Raid of John Brown at Harper's Ferry as I Saw It

Author: Rev. Samuel Vanderlip Leech

Release Date: February 28, 2011 [EBook #35427]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAID OF JOHN BROWN ***




Produced by David Edwards, Mike Zeug, Lisa Reigel, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Notes: No corrections of typographical or other errors
have been made to this text. Words in italics in the original are
surrounded by _underscores_. Words in bold in the original are
surrounded by =equal signs=. On pages 6 and 7 of the original, a note
was typed vertically in the margin. These notes have been treated as
footnotes and an anchor has been added in the text. The letter that
occurs at the end of the text was not bound into the original book. It
was an insert included with the book and has been reproduced here.




[Illustration: CAPT. JOHN BROWN]




                  The Raid of John Brown at Harper's
                          Ferry As I Saw It.


                                  BY

                  REV. SAMUEL VANDERLIP LEECH, D. D.


_Author of "Ingersoll and The Bible," "The Three Inebriates," "From West
  Virginia to Pompeii," "Seven Elements in Successful Preaching," Etc._


                       PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR.


                              THE DESOTO
                          WASHINGTON, D. C.
                                 1909




                   Copyright by S. V. Leech, 1909.




THE RAID OF JOHN BROWN AT HARPER'S FERRY AS I SAW IT.

_By REV. SAMUEL VANDERLIP LEECH, D. D._


The town of Harper's Ferry is located in Jefferson County, West
Virginia. Lucerne, in Switzerland does not excel it in romantic grandeur
of situation. On its northern front the Potomac sweeps along to pass the
national capital, and the tomb of Washington, in its silent flow towards
the sea. On its eastern side the Shenandoah hurries to empty its waters
into the Potomac, that in perpetual wedlock they may greet the stormy
Atlantic. Across the Potomac the Maryland Heights stand out as the tall
sentinels of Nature. Beyond the Shenandoah are the Blue Ridge mountains,
fringing the westward boundary of Loudon County, Virginia. Between these
rivers, and nestling inside of their very confluence, reposes Harper's
Ferry. Back of its hills lies the famous Shenandoah Valley, celebrated
for its natural scenery, its historic battles and "Sheridan's Ride." At
Harper's Ferry the United States authorities early located an Arsenal
and an Armory.

Before the Civil War, the Baltimore Conference of the Methodist
Episcopal Church was constituted of five extensive districts in
Virginia, stretching from Alexandria to Lewisburg and two great
districts north of the Potomac, including the cities of Washington and
Baltimore. The first three years of my ministerial life I spent on
Shepherdstown, West Loudon and Hillsboro Circuits, being then all in
Virginia. The State of West Virginia, now embracing Harper's Ferry, had
not been organized by Congress as a war measure out of the territory of
the mother State. Our Methodist Episcopal Church was theoretically an
anti-slavery organization; but our Virginia and Maryland members held
thousands of inherited and many purchased slaves. These were generally
well-cared for and contented. Being close to the free soil of
Pennsylvania they could have gotten there in a night had they wished to
escape bondage, and then they could have easily reached Canada by that
Northern aid, called the "Underground Railroad."

On the Sunday night when John Brown and his men invaded Virginia, I
slept within a half mile of Harper's Ferry. That day I inaugurated
revival services at my westward appointment called "Ebenezer," in Loudon
County two miles from Harper's Ferry. I was twenty-two years of age.

Three months before this raid Captain John Brown with two of his sons,
Owen and Oliver, and Jeremiah G. Anderson, calling themselves "Isaac
Smith and Sons" rented a small farm on the Maryland side of the Potomac
four miles from Harper's Ferry. It was known as the "Booth-Kennedy
Place." They also carried on across the mountains at Chambersburg,
Pennsylvania, a small hardware store managed by John H. Kagi. It was a
depot for the munitions of war to be hauled to their Maryland farm.
Another of Brown's men, John E. Cook, sold maps in the vicinity. He was
a relative of Governor Willard of Indiana who secured the services of
Hon. Daniel W. Voorhees, Attorney General of Indiana, to defend Cook at
his after trial in Virginia. It was a time of profound national peace.
Brown and his men represented themselves as geologists, miners and
speculators. They had a mule and wagon with which to haul their boxes
from Chambersburg. A wealthy merchant of Boston, Mr. George Luther
Stearns, Chairman of the Massachusetts Aid Society had financed Brown's
Kansas border warfare work, as well as his approaching Harper's Ferry
raid. Other Northern friends assisted. Brown had completed his
preparations and collected his twenty-one helpers early in October,
1859. He had hidden in an old log cabin on the place 200 Sharpe's
rifles, 13,000 rifle cartridges, 950 long iron pikes, 200 revolving
pistols, 100,000 pistol caps, 40,000 percussion caps, 250 pounds of
powder, 12 reams of cartridge paper and other warlike materials. He
organized his twenty-two men, himself included, into a "=Military
Provisional Government=" to superintend the possible uprising of the
slaves of Virginia. Thirteen of these men had engaged in border warfare
in Kansas, in a successful effort to prevent Kansas from becoming a
slave state. He, sixteen other white men and five negroes, constituted
his entire Virginia army. The white men were Captain John Brown,
Adjutant General John H. Kagi, Captains Owen Brown, Oliver Brown, Watson
Brown, Aaron D. Stephens, John E. Cook, Dauphin Adolphus Thompson,
George P. Tidd, William Thompson and Edwin Coppoc. The Lieutenants were
Jeremiah G. Anderson, Albert Hazlitt and William Henry Leeman. The
privates numbered eight. Three of them were white men and five were
negroes. The whites were Francis J. Merriam, Barclay Coppoc and Steward
Taylor. The negroes were Dangerfield Newby, Osborne P. Anderson, John A.
Copeland, Sherrard Lewis Leary and Shields Green.

On Sunday morning, October 16th, 1859, Brown assembled his men and
informed them that on that night their invasion into Virginia would take
place. They took the oath of allegiance to the "Provisional Government."
Adjutant General Kagi presented to each officer his commission.

The contents of the Armory, Arsenal and Hall's Rifle Works were daily
open to public inspection. Captain John Brown well knew that Daniel
Whelan was the only watchman, during the night time, at the Armory
grounds. He believed that if he could secure the arms and ammunition in
these buildings, carry them into the fastnesses of the adjacent
mountains, and then unfurl the flag of freedom for all slaves who would
flock to his standard, the result would be a general uprising of the
negro population throughout the border states. A more idiotic and
senseless theory never entered an American mind. In the superlative
degree it was unreasonable and ridiculous. I personally know of the
general loyalty of the slaves to their masters in that locality, at that
period in our national history. Federal generals were astonished at the
devotion of the negroes to their masters everywhere in the South after
the war had begun. This was especially true along the border states. But
John Brown--honest, enthusiastic and intensely fanatical on the slavery
question--issued his commands. On this Sunday he assigned to each his
earliest work. Captain Owen Brown, Barclay Coppoc and Francis J. Merriam
were to remain at the farm to guard the arms and ammunition. Hence only
nineteen left the Kennedy farm. They were to walk down the river road on
the Maryland side to the Maryland end of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad
bridge. The Virginia end was close to the depot, hotel, Armory and the
Arsenal. Captain John Brown was to ride in the wagon with the necessary
guns, pistols and tools. Captains Cook and Tidd were to go in advance
and cut the telegraph wires on the Maryland side. Captain Stephens and
Adjutant General Kagi were to capture Mr. Williams, the guard of the
bridge. Captain Watson Brown and Taylor were to hold up the passenger
train due from the west at 1:40 A. M. It would be bound for Washington
and Baltimore. Captain Oliver Brown and Thompson were to hold the
bridges spanning the two rivers. Captain Dauphin Adolphus Thompson and
Lieutenant Anderson were to hold the first building in the Armory[6:1]
grounds popularly known afterwards as "=John Brown's Fort=." It was the
engine house where Brown held his most distinguished prisoners. From the
portholes of it that they made after his entrance, his men did their
final fighting. Captain Coppoc and Lieutenant Hazlitt were to hold the
Arsenal outside and opposite the Armory gates. Adjutant General Kagi and
Copeland were to seize and retain Hall's Rifle Works. They were half of
a mile up the western shore of the Shenandoah. Captain Stephens, and
such men as he might select, were to go out to the home of Colonel Lewis
W. Washington, the grand nephew of General George Washington, and bring
him and some of his adult male slaves, to the engine house. They were
also to secure the swords presented to General George Washington by
Frederick the Great and by General Lafayette. For this object Stephens
selected as his helpers Captains Tidd and Cook and privates Leary, Green
and Anderson. Brown made the raid at 11:30 that night. Mr. Williams the
bridge guard was captured by Stephens and Kagi. The watchman at the
Armory[7:1], Daniel Whelan, refused Brown and his men admission to the
grounds. They broke the locks with tools, captured Whelan, and took
possession of the Armory and also of the Arsenal outside. The following
prisoners were brought in early on Monday and placed in the engine
house: Jesse W. Graham who was master workman, Colonel Lewis W.
Washington, Terance Byrne, John M. Allstadt, John Donohue, who was clerk
of the railroad company; Benjamin F. Mills, the master armorer; Armstead
M. Ball, the master machinist; Archibald M. Kitzmiller, assistant
superintendent; Isaac Russell, a Justice of the Peace; George D. Shope,
of Frederick and J. Bird, Arsenal armorer. The white prisoners were to
be held as hostages and the blacks were to be armed and placed in
Brown's army. Cook and Tidd evidently mistrusted their surroundings.
During the night they made their way back to the farm and hastily
escaped into Pennsylvania. Captain Watson Brown and Taylor held up the
train bound for Baltimore, detaining it for three hours. The colored
porter of the depot, Shepherd Hayward, went out on the bridge to hunt
for Williams. He was brutally shot by one of Brown's bridge guards.
Hayward managed to crawl to the baggage room where he died at noon on
Monday. Dr. John Starry dressed his wounds and ministered to his every
want. The physician was under the impression that a band of train
robbers had captured the depot. He told this to Mr. Kitzmiller before
Kitzmiller's imprisonment. Captain E. P. Dangerfield, clerk to the
paymaster, entered the grounds and was hustled into the engine house
quite early in the morning. Numerous arriving workmen were imprisoned in
an adjoining building. Colonel Washington said that fully sixty men were
imprisoned by eight o'clock on Monday morning. The citizens were hearing
of the situation. Newby and Green, negroes, were stationed at the
junction of High and Shenandoah streets. Newby shot at and killed
Captain George W. Turner, a graduate of West Point. Green shot and
killed Mr. Thomas Boerley, a grocer. Dr. Claggett attended Boerley, who
also soon died. After the mulatto had shot Turner, a man named Bogert
entered the residence of Mrs. Stephenson by a rear door. Having no
bullet he put a large nail into his gun, went up stairs and shot Newby,
the nail cutting his throat from ear to ear. He was also shot in the
stomach by some one else. I saw him die, in great agony, with an
infuriated crowd around him. About ten o'clock in the morning, armed
citizens crossed the Potomac and Shenandoah rivers to prevent the escape
by the bridges, or by water, of any of the raiders. Some walked down the
Maryland river road and wounded Captain Oliver Brown on the bridge. He
reached the engine house but soon died beside his father. Citizens
seized the uninjured prisoner, Captain Thompson, and put him under guard
at the Galt hotel. Captain Stephens tried to reach the hotel to propose,
as he stated, terms of surrender. George Chambers wounded him, and then
assisted him into the Galt hotel, where his wounds were dressed. About
eleven o'clock in the morning the Jefferson Guards from Charlestown
commanded by Captain J. W. Rowen arrived. A half hour passed and the
Hamtramck guards under Captain V. M. Butler came to the Ferry. They were
followed by the Shepherdstown Mounted Troop commanded by Captain Jacob
Reinhart. Then a military company from Martinsburg twenty miles distant
reached the place, under the command of Captain Alburtis. Colonels W. R.
Baylor and John T. Gibson took the general direction of the military
affairs. Some soldiers crossed the Shenandoah along with armed citizens
to intercept the four raiders Kagi, Leary, Leeman and Copeland, when
they should be driven out of Hall's Rifle Works. These raiders also had
in these works one of Colonel Washington's slaves pressed into their
service. All of them ran out into the river to swim across to the Loudon
County shore. All were shot to death in the river with the exception of
Copeland. He threw up his hands and surrendered. During the excitement
Hazlitt and the negro Anderson left the Arsenal and, undetected, escaped
into Pennsylvania. Early in the morning Captain Owen Brown, Barclay
Coppoc and Merriam had deserted the Kennedy farm and gone north. Thus
seven of the twenty-two men fled to the North. Cook and Hazlitt were
captured. They were returned to Virginia, tried and executed.

By 2 o'clock P. M., the town and hills swarmed with militia and
citizens. Brown had barricaded the engine house doors with the engine
and reel. Inside were Captains John Brown and his son Watson; also
Captain Oliver Brown, who was soon dead; Shields Green, Captain Edwin
Coppoc, Lieutenant Jeremiah G. Anderson, Captain Dauphin Adolphus
Thompson and ten white prisoners. The numerous prisoners, mostly
workmen, in the adjoining structure had all escaped from the grounds,
Brown having no port-holes on that side of his fort. The militia were
afraid to fire into the port-holes for fear of killing some of the
prominent prisoners. About 4 o'clock the Mayor, Mr. Fontaine Beckham,
aged sixty years, who was also station agent of the railroad company,
went out on the platform unarmed. He was shot dead by the negro Shields
Green. Captain Watson Brown in the engine house received his death wound
soon afterwards. Mayor Beckham was very much beloved by the people. A
number of citizens hurried into the hotel and brutally seized Captain
Thompson, threw him over the wall into the Potomac and riddled him with
bullets. Mrs. Foulke of the hotel, and her colored porter, went to the
platform and brought in the dead body of the Mayor.

As night was settling on the excited city a military company from
Winchester, Virginia, commanded by Captain B. B. Washington, arrived by
a Shenandoah Valley train. Shortly thereafter a Baltimore and Ohio
railroad train brought several companies of soldiers from Frederick,
Maryland. They were commanded by Colonel Shriver. Soon several
independent companies from Baltimore, accompanied by the Second Light
Brigade, arrived under the general command of General Charles C.
Edgerton. Colonel Robert E. Lee of the United States army, overtook
these troops at Sandy Hook, a mile and a half below the Ferry on the
Maryland side. He had come from Washington with several companies of
marines. He was accompanied by Lieutenant J. E. B. Stuart, afterwards a
famous Confederate Cavalry General; also by Major Russell and by
Lieutenant Israel Green, who died several months ago in the West. All
were regular army officers. Colonel Lee regarded it as unwise to attack
the engine house that night, fearing that Colonel Lewis W. Washington or
other prisoners might be killed. Early in the morning he sent Lieutenant
J. E. B. Stuart, who had once held Brown as a prisoner in Kansas, to
demand an immediate and unconditional surrender. Brown refused to trust
himself and men to the United States officers. About this time Colonel
Robert E. Lee got within range of Captain Coppoc's rifle. Prisoners said
that Mr. Graham knocked the muzzle aside. Lee's life was saved. Had he
been then killed who knows that the battles of Antietam, Gettysburg, and
the final conflicts north of the Appomattox would have ever been fought?
On the Confederate side no abler general or more magnificent man, ever
sat on a saddle than Robert E. Lee. He was the son of "Light Horse Harry
Lee," a brave Major General of the Revolutionary War. He was the father
of William Henry Fitzhugh Lee, who became a Major General of the
Confederate forces of Virginia, at a later date. General Robert E. Lee
made a brilliant record in the Mexican war as Chief Engineer of the
United States army. After surrendering his decimated army to General
Ulysses S. Grant, at Appomattox, he accepted the political situation
with dignity. He became President of the Washington University at
Lexington, Virginia. The South lavished on him every possible honor.
During the late summer the Virginia legislature placed in the National
Hall of Fame, at the United States Capitol, two fine statues of two
representative men of their state. One was the statue of General George
Washington; the other that of General Robert E. Lee.

By the advice of Colonel Lewis W. Washington all of Brown's prisoners
mounted the fire engine and the reel carriage and lifted up their hands
when the attack began. Three marines undertook to batter down the doors
with heavy sledge hammers. They were not successful. Then twelve
marines struck the doors with the end of a strong ladder. They opened.
Lieutenant Green entered first of all amidst a shower of bullets.
Discovering Brown reloading his rifle he sprang on him with his sword
and cut his head and stomach. The raider Captain Anderson rose to shoot
Green. A marine named Luke Quinn ran his bayonet through him. Another
raider shot Luke Quinn who soon died. Two other marines were wounded. I
saw Captains Anderson and Watson Brown as they lay dying on the grass
after their capture. The dead body of Captain Oliver Brown lay beside
them. Captain Watson Brown had been dying for sixteen hours. Captain
John Brown, bleeding profusely, and Captain Stephens from the hotel,
were carried into the paymaster's office. Brown's long grey beard was
stained with wet blood. He was bare headed. His shirt and trousers were
grey in color. His trousers were tucked into the top of his boots.
Captain Coppoc and the negro Green were also taken prisoners. They were
not wounded.

As Brown lay on the floor of the paymaster's office he was very cool and
courageous. Governor Henry A. Wise, United States Senator J. M. Mason of
Virginia and Honorable Clement L. Vallandingham of Ohio plied him with
many questions. To all he gave intelligent and fearless replies. He
refused to involve his Northern financiers and advisers. He took the
entire responsibility on himself. He told Governor Wise that he, Brown,
was simply "An instrument in the hands of Providence." He said to some
newspaper correspondents and others: "I wish to say that you had
better--all you people of the South--prepare for a settlement of this
question. You may dispose of me very easily. I am nearly disposed of
now. But this question is yet to be settled--this negro question I mean.
The end is not yet." Before thirteen months had passed one of the
greatest Americans of any century, Abraham Lincoln, had been elected
President of the United States; the Republican party was for the first
time dominating national affairs and, soon thereafter, the Civil War
was begun which culminated in the physical freedom of every slave in
this Republic.

On Wednesday Captains John Brown, Stephens and Coppoc, along with
Copeland and Green, were removed to the county jail at Charlestown, ten
miles south of Harper's Ferry. Being acquainted with the jailor, Captain
John Avis, I was permitted to visit Brown on one occasion. Captain Aaron
D. Stephens was lying on a cot in the same room. I was told that Brown
had ordered out of his room a Presbyterian minister named Lowrey when he
had proposed to offer prayer. He had also said to my first colleague,
Rev. James H. March, "You do not know the meaning of the word
Christianity. Of course I regard you as a gentleman, but only as a
=heathen= gentleman." I was advised to say nothing to him about prayer. He
had told other visitors that he wanted no minister to pray with him who
would not be willing to die to free a slave. I was not conscious that I
was ready for martyrdom from Brown's standpoint. I have never been
anxious to die to save the life of any body. My life is as valuable to
me and my family as any other man's is to him and his family. But young
as I was I hated American slavery. I was a "boy minister" of a great
anti-slavery denomination of Christians. For more than a century the
Methodist Episcopal Church has carried in its Disciplines its printed
testimony against slavery. It is to-day the largest fully organized
anti-slavery society on earth. I would have gladly offered prayer in
Brown's room at Charlestown if an honorable opportunity had been
afforded.

At his preliminary examination before five justices, Colonel Davenport
presiding, Brown said: "Virginians! I did not ask for quarter at the
time I was taken. I did not ask to have my life spared. Your governor
assured me of a fair trial. If you seek my blood you can have it at any
time without this mockery of a trial. I have no counsel. I have not been
able to advise with any one. I know nothing of the feelings of my fellow
prisoners and am utterly unable to attend to my own defense. If a fair
trial is to be allowed there are mitigating circumstances to be urged.
But, if we are forced with a mere form, a trial for execution, you
might spare yourselves that trouble. I am ready for my fate."

Two very able Virginia attorneys were assigned as a matter of State form
as counsel for Brown. They were Honorable Charles J. Faulkner of
Martinsburg, afterwards United States Envoy Extraordinary to France, and
Judge Green, Ex-Mayor of Charlestown. The county grand jury indicted
Brown on three separate charges: first, conspiracy with slaves for
purposes of insurrection; second, treason against the commonwealth of
Virginia; third, murder in the first degree. Mr. Faulkner withdrew from
the case and Mr. Lawson Botts took his place. Mr. Samuel Chilton a
learned lawyer of Washington, D. C., and Judge Henry Griswold of Ohio,
another distinguished attorney, volunteered their services as counsel
for John Brown and were accepted. Some of Brown's friends sent an
excellent young lawyer named George H. Hoyt from Boston, as additional
counsel. These attorneys made an able defense, whatever may have been
their private opinion as to Brown's guilt or innocence. The prosecuting
attorney for the State of Virginia was Andrew Hunter, an exceptionally
brilliant orator and able lawyer. He was a courtly and commanding
speaker. He was gifted with a rich and powerful voice. After the
indictment of Brown by the court of justices, the prosecuting attorney
of Jefferson county, Mr. Charles B. Harding left the prosecution almost
exclusively to Mr. Andrew Hunter, who represented the State. So too,
after the arrival of Brown's chosen outside counsel, Judge Green and Mr.
Lawson Botts withdrew, in good taste, from his defense.

At the regular trial Brown's counsel requested a postponement on account
of the prisoner's health. But Dr. Mason, his physician, attested the
physical ability of his patient to undergo the strain. The State was
spending almost a thousand dollars a day for military guards and other
items. When Brown's counsel presented telegrams from his relatives
asking for delay until they could forward proofs of his insanity, Brown
said, "I will say, if the court will allow me, that I look on this as a
miserable artifice and trick of those who ought to take a different
course in regard to me if they take any at all. I view it with contempt
more than otherwise. I am perfectly unconscious of insanity and I
reject, so far as I am capable, any attempts to interfere in my behalf
on that score."

On the last day of the trial, October 31st, after six hours of argument
by Hunter, Chilton and Griswold, the jury delivered the following
verdict: "Guilty of treason, and of conspiring and advising with slaves
and others to rebel; and of murder in the first degree." On Wednesday,
November the 2nd, he was brought into court to receive his sentence. The
County Clerk, Robert H. Brown, asked: "Have you anything to say why
sentence should not be passed on you?" Brown, leaning on a cane, slowly
arose from his chair and with plaintive emphasis addressed Judge Parker
as follows:

"I have, may it please the court, a few words to say. In the first place
I deny everything but what I have all along admitted, the design on my
part to free the slaves. I certainly intended to have made a clean thing
of that matter as I did last winter when I went into Missouri and took
slaves without the snapping of a gun on either side, moved them through
the country and finally left them in Canada. I designed to have done the
same thing again on a larger scale. That was all I intended. I never did
intend murder or treason, or the destruction of property, or to excite
or incite slaves to rebellion or to make insurrection. I have another
objection and that is that it is unjust that I should suffer such a
penalty. Had I interfered in the manner which I admit, and which I admit
has been fairly proved, for I admire the truthfulness and candor of the
greater portion of the witnesses who have testified in this case,--had I
so interfered in behalf of the rich, the powerful, the intelligent, the
so-called great; or in behalf of any of their friends, either father,
mother, sister, brother, wife or children, or any of that class, and
suffered and sacrificed what I have in this interference, it would have
been all right and every man in this court would have deemed it an act
worthy of reward rather than punishment. This court acknowledges as I
suppose the validity of the law of God. I see a book kissed here which I
suppose is the Bible, or at least the New Testament. That teaches me
that all things, whatsoever I would that men should do to me I should do
even unto them. It teaches me further to 'Remember them that are in
bonds as bound with them.' I endeavored to act up to that instruction. I
say that I am yet too young to understand that God is any respecter of
persons. I believe that to have interfered as I have done, as I have
always admitted freely I have done, in behalf of His despised poor was
not wrong but right. Now if it is deemed necessary that I should forfeit
my life for the furtherance of the ends of justice, and mingle my blood
further with the blood of my children and with the blood of millions in
this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel and
unjust enactments, I submit. So let it be done.

"Let me say one word further. I feel entirely satisfied with the
treatment I have received on my trial. Considering all the circumstances
it has been more generous than I expected. But I feel no consciousness
of guilt. I never had any design against the life of any person, nor any
disposition to commit treason or excite slaves to rebellion or make any
general insurrection. I never encouraged any man to do so but always
discouraged any idea of the kind.

"Let me say a word in regard to the statements made by some of those
connected with me. I hear it has been stated by some of them that I
induced them to join me. But the contrary is true. I do not say this to
injure them, but as regards their weakness. There is not one of them but
joined me of his own accord and the greater part of them at their own
expense. A number of them I never saw, and never had a word of
conversation with, till the day they came to me and that was for the
purpose I have stated. Now I am done."

Brown's statement was not exactly sustained by the facts. Why had he
collected the Sharpe's rifles, the pikes, the kegs of powder, many
thousands of caps and much warlike material at the Kennedy farm? Why did
he and other armed men, break into the United States Armory and
Arsenal, make portholes in the engine house, shoot and kill citizens and
surround their own imprisoned persons with prominent men as hostages?
But everybody in the court house believed the old man when he said that
he did everything with a solitary motive, the liberation of the slaves.

Judge Parker could, under his oath, do nothing else than to sentence him
to be hung. He fixed the date for Friday, the second of December.
Brown's counsel appealed to the Supreme Court of Virginia. Its five
judges unanimously sustained the action of the Jefferson county court.

Brown was hung on the bright and beautiful morning of December 2nd at
11:15 o'clock. At his request Andrew Hunter wrote his will. He then
visited his fellow prisoners who were all executed at a later date. He
rode to his death between Sheriff Campbell and Captain Avis in a
furniture wagon drawn by two white horses. He did not ride seated on his
coffin as some of his chief eulogists have affirmed. The wagon was
escorted to the scaffold by State military companies. No citizens were
allowed near to the jail. Hence he did not kiss any negro baby as he
emerged from his prison, as Mr. Whittier has described in a poem on the
event and as artists have memorialized in paintings. The utter absurdity
of such an incident occurring under such surroundings any Virginian will
see. Avis, Campbell and Hunter publicly denied it. But the story will
doubtless have immortality. In one of the companies of soldiers walked
the actor John Wilkes Booth, the infamous assassin of Abraham Lincoln.
At the head of the Lexington cadets walked Professor Thomas Jefferson
Jackson, who became an able Confederate General and is best known to the
world as "Stonewall Jackson." As the party neared the gallows Brown
gazed on the glorious panorama of mountain and landscape scenery. Then
he said: "This is a beautiful country." He wore a black slouch hat with
the front tipped up. Reaching the scaffold the numerous State troops
formed into a hollow square. Brown mounted the platform without
trepidation. Standing on the drop he said to the sheriff and his
assistants: "Gentlemen! I thank you for your kindness to me. I am ready
at any time. Do not keep me waiting." The drop fell and in ten minutes
Dr. Mason pronounced him dead. That evening Mrs. Brown and her friends
received the casket at Harper's Ferry and accompanied it to the old home
at North Elba, N. Y. His funeral, as reported by the metropolitan
papers, took place there six days after his execution. An immense
concourse was in attendance. The conspicuous and brilliant orator,
Wendell Phillips, delivered the address. He closed it with these words:
"In this cottage he girded himself and went forth to battle. Fuller
success than his heart ever dreamed of God had granted him. He sleeps in
the blessings of the crushed and the poor. Men believe more firmly in
virtue now that such a man has lived." Personally I remained in
Virginia.

On the day that Brown was hung =Martyr Services=, as they were called,
were held in many Northern localities. At Concord, Dr. Edmund Sears read
a poem in which are these stanzas:

     "Not any spot, six feet by two
        Will hold a man like thee:
      John Brown will tramp the shaking earth
        From Blue Ridge to the sea
      Till the strong angel comes at length
        And opes each dungeon door:
      And God's Great Charter holds and waves
        O'er all the humble poor.

      And then the humble poor may come
        In that far distant day,
      And from the felon's nameless grave
        Will brush the leaves away:
      And gray old men will point the spot
        Beneath the pine tree's shade,
      As children ask with streaming eyes
        Where old John Brown was laid."

Before he was executed many threatening communications were received by
the Virginia State and Jefferson County officers. Large numbers of E. C.
Stedman's poem, entitled "John Brown of Ossawattamie," were scattered
about Charlestown. One stanza reads as follows:

     "But Virginians! Don't do it, for I tell you that the flagon,
     Filled with blood of Old Brown's offspring, was first poured by
         Southern hands;
     And each drop from Old Brown's life veins, like the red gore of the
         dragon,
     May spring up, a vengeful Fury, hissing through your slave-worn
         lands;
     And Old Brown,
     Ossowattamie Brown,
     May trouble you more than ever,
     When you've nailed his coffin down."

Whether they be from the North or the South, fair-minded men, who are
thoroughly conversant with the history of this raid, can hardly cherish
any doubt concerning the turpitude of the invasion, the fairness of
Brown's trial and the justice of his conviction and execution. He fell
under the direction of a misguided conscience. The noble endowment that
philosophers call conscience that gives its verdicts as to the moral
merit or demerit of actions and affections, was strangely warped in
Brown's intense and brave character. The possession of this faculty of
conscience is the massive foundation of all human responsibility.
Illustrations of the moral enormities that a perverted conscience can
perpetrate are manifold along the pages of sacred and secular history.

When Jesus looked down the aisles of the future, He said to His
disciples that the men who would finally transfigure them into martyrs
would murder them in the belief that they were rendering acceptable
service to God.

Paul declared that he regarded himself as meeting the divine approval
when he was persecuting and murdering the primitive Christians.

When the officers of the Spanish Inquisition saw the agonies of the
victims who refused to renounce their religious creeds they joyfully
exclaimed, "Let God be glorified."

Charles the Ninth of France said he was conscientious in ordering the
Saint Bartholomew massacre that resulted in the murder in French cities
of tens of thousands of Christian Hugenots.

The Bloody Queen, Mary Tudor, said she had a pure conscience when she
sent to the scaffold the learned and gentle young Ex-Queen Lady Jane
Grey. Thousands of criminals have sheltered their crimes in the temple
of Conscience.

The trend of Brown's constant defence was that he obeyed his conscience.
His lawless conduct, the death of many of his party and the murder of
Virginia citizens gave him very little apparent intellectual unrest. He
sowed to the wind and reaped the logical harvest, if it is the
appropriate word, the whirlwind.

Brown's high Calvinism bordered on fatalism. Oliver Cromwell never
believed more radically in the foreordination of all human actions than
did he. When questioned concerning the failure of this invasion he
replied: "All of our actions, even all of the follies that led to this
disaster, were decreed to happen ages before the world was made." When
Judge Russell visited him he said: "I know that the very errors by which
my scheme was marred were decreed before the world was made. I had no
more to do with the course I pursued than a shot leaving a cannon has to
do with the spot where it shall fall."

It is when patriotic men read the story of "John Brown's Raid" by the
torches of President Lincoln's early election, the Civil War and the
Emancipation of all American slaves, that they seem to become blind to
the terrible criminal features of the invasion and look only at the
national results and the magnificient courage, benevolent motives and
supreme self-sacrifice of this martyr. Multitudes of visionary men
regard him as a divinely appointed John the Baptist raised up to usher
in the day of physical freedom for every slave on American soil and
their posterity to the end of time. They claim that in this instance
"The End has justified the Means." His raid made the North solid against
the slave system and the South as solid against anti-slavery theories
and agitators. Before the Brown raid the vote for John C. Fremont, the
Republican candidate for President, was 1341000. James Buchanan had
496000 majority. The year after the raid Abraham Lincoln received
1886000 votes for President and had 491000 majority over Stephen A.
Douglas, when the South voted for another Democrat. Fremont had 114
votes in the Electoral College. Lincoln had 180. Under his presidency
the emancipation of every slave on the national soil took place. The
nations of Europe learned for the first time the important lesson that
the United States was able to maintain its national unity. This raid
beyond question hastened in the Civil War. I have seen Federal regiments
marching on to battle enthusiastically singing:

     "John Brown's body lies a mould'ring in the grave,
     But his soul is marching on."

A few weeks after Brown's execution Victor Hugo said, "What the South
slew last December was not John Brown but slavery." His statement
developed into a colossal historical truth. The great statesman, orator
and senator, John J. Ingalls of Kansas, closed an oration with these
remarkable words:

"Carlyle says that when any great change in human society is to be
wrought God raises up men to whom that change is made to appear as the
one thing needful and absolutely indispensable. Scholars, orators,
poets, philanthropists, play their parts, but the crisis comes at last
through some one who is stigmatized as a fanatic by his contemporaries,
and whom the supporters of the systems he assails crucify between
theives or gibbet as a felon. The man who is not afraid to die for an
idea is the most potential and convincing advocate.

"Already the great intellectual leaders of the movement for the
abolition of slavery are dead. The student of the future will exhume
their orations, arguments and state papers, as a part of the
subterranean history of the epoch. The antiquarian will dig up their
remains from the alluvial drift of the period, and construe their
relations to the great events in which they were actors. But the three
men of this era who will loom forever against the remotest horizon of
time, as the pyramids against the voiceless desert, or mountain peaks
over the subordinate plains, are Abraham Lincoln, Ulysses S. Grant and
old John Brown of Ossowattamie."

Senator Ingalls well knew that Brown had no such intellectual
massiveness, or splendid culture, as had Webster, Clay, Jefferson,
Sumner, and many other eminent Americans. He referred to the majesty of
personal achievements. From this standpoint men like Garabaldi, Morse,
Harriman, Edison, Roosevelt and Cook, the Arctic explorer have been
great. Brown's life was a perpetual sacrifice for the annihilation of
American slavery. Very defective as a military leader he was always
ready to do, dare and die to assist in this work. Even today tens of
thousands of educated men regard him as a monomaniac concerning the
abolition of slavery. For many years, in the state of Kansas, he had
permitted his own life, and the life of each of his sons, to be in
continual peril that they might assist in placing Kansas in the
constellation of free States. Men like Gerrit Smith and John L. Stearns
financed his schemes from their wealth. Men like Henry Ward Beecher,
Ralph Waldo Emerson, George B. Cheever, William Lloyd Garrison, Wendell
Phillips and Theodore Parker, delivered eulogies on Brown after he had
been hung. They most eloquently denounced slavery from pulpits and
platforms; but they lived in the limelight of oratorical popularity and
flourished amidst luxurious ease. To Brown's immortal credit be it said
that he gave domestic security, his humble fortune, his perillous work,
the lives of his cherished sons and his own blood and life for the
anti-slavery opinions that were anchored in his soul. His prison letters
to many friends are full of intrepidity, submission to the divine
providence and heroic anticipations of immortal blessedness. Ten minutes
before he left his jail cell for the gallows he handed to a prison
official a sheet of paper on which he had written these words: "I, John
Brown, am quite certain that the crimes of this guilty land will never
be purged away but with blood, I had, as I now think, vainly flattered
myself that without very much bloodshed it might be done."

His surpassing bravery and self-sacrificing candor profoundly impressed
eminent Virginians. Governor Henry A. Wise said: "He is a bundle of the
best nerves I ever saw, cut and thrust; and bleeding and in bonds. He is
a man of clear head, of courage, fortitude and simple ingenuousness. He
is cool, collected, indomitable; and it is but just to him to say that
he was humane to his prisoners. He is a fanatic, but firm, and truthful
and intelligent." Colonel Lewis W. Washington and Captain John E. P.
Dangerfield bore testimony to his courage.

Brown's wonderful moral heroism became resplendent after Judge Richard
Parker had sentenced him to death. Many of his letters to his friends,
collected and published by Mr. F. B. Sanford, would have done honor to
the pen of Paul. He was exultant from the standpoint of a happy
spiritual experience and triumphant as he gazed beyond this mortal life.
In one of his last letters he wrote these words: "I sleep as peacefully
as an infant, or if I am wakeful glorious thoughts come to me
entertaining my mind. I do not believe I shall deny my Lord and Master,
Jesus Christ, in this prison or on the scaffold. But I should do so if I
denied my principles against slavery." Surely he must have been sincere
as he faced eternity.

As early as 1820 John Quincy Adams said of the overthrow of American
slavery, "The object is vast in its compass, awful in its prospects and
sublime and beautiful in its issues. A life devoted to it would be nobly
spent or sacrificed." John Brown, along illegal and criminal lines,
placed before the world such a life and death. He saw clearly what
American statesmen of his period saw but dimly. Beyond all question he
died as emphatically for the overthrow of slavery as Paul died for the
honor of Christianity. Three of his favorite books were the life stories
of men of great achievements:--"The Life of Oliver Cromwell," "The Life
of Marco Bozarris," and "The Life of William Wallace."

Some years ago, in an oration delivered at Harper's Ferry, the
distinguished freedman and orator, the late Frederick Douglass, said:
"If John Brown did not end the war that ended slavery he did at least
begin the war that ended slavery. If we look over the dates, places and
men for which this honor is claimed we shall find that not Carolina, but
Virginia; not Fort Sumter, but Harper's Ferry and the United States
Arsenal; not Major Anderson, but John Brown, began the war that ended
American slavery and made this a free republic. Until this blow was
struck the prospect was dim, shadowy and uncertain. The irrepressible
conflict was one of words, votes and compromises. When John Brown
stretched forth his arm the sky was cleared, the time for compromise was
gone, the armed hosts stood face to face over the chasm of a broken
Union and the clash of arms was at hand."

And let it be remembered that when Brown had told Douglass the details
of his proposed invasion at Harper's Ferry, Douglass begged him to
abandon his plans and assured him that they would end, as they did, in
untold disaster.

The chief authors who have written concerning John Brown and his
invasion were not in Virginia during the forty-four days intervening
between the raid and his execution. They were destitute of any personal
knowledge of the facts. They were bitter enemies of the South and most
intense admirers of the intrepid man executed at Charlestown. Their
narratives are replete with errors and contain much romance. They are,
generally, saturated with misrepresentation of the Virginia people and
are burdened with eulogistic apologies for Brown's conduct in Virginia.
Because I was on the ground and saw things as they occurred; because I
have kept in touch with Brown literature; and because I am in love with
the Truth I believe that my story is worthy of public confidence.

I have known Virginians, personally, for over fifty years. My long
career, as a minister of Christ, was begun among them. They have not
deserved the traduction Brown's eulogists have heaped on them. His
unfortunate execution was the logical result of his criminal and bloody
raid. The Virginia people have been noble in chivalry, bounteous in
hospitality, sublime in kindness of heart and life and models of high
social and moral purity.

Spartacus led the way for the destruction of Roman slavery. John Brown
performed a similar service for the American slaves. He mingled in his
strange character fanaticism and courage--eccentricity and a prophetical
insight into future events--a warped conscience and a sublime martyr
heroism. But whether in safety or peril, at home or in prison, in battle
or on the scaffold, this mysterious man intensely cherished the
conviction that Joanna Baillie imbedded into poetry:

     "The strength of man sinks in the hour of trial,
     But there doth live a power that for the battle
           Girdeth the weak."


FOOTNOTES:

[6:1] For Armory read Arsenal.

[7:1] For Armory read Arsenal.




   +------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |                                                                  |
   |                                                                  |
   |                         THE DE SOTA                              |
   |                                                                  |
   |                           Washington, D. C., November 18, 1909.  |
   |                                                                  |
   |  My Dear Sir:                                                    |
   |                                                                  |
   |  There has just been issued a small volume copyrighted,          |
   |  entitled., "The Raid Of John Brown As I Saw It" from the pen    |
   |  of "Rev. Samuel Vanderlip Leech, D. D., of Washington, D. C.,"  |
   |  who has been a Methodist Episcopal Minister for 52 years. For   |
   |  this book The Maurice Engraving Company furnished the latest    |
   |  portrait of Captain John Brown. The edition is limited to four  |
   |  hundred copies. They are not sold at any store. The object of   |
   |  the publication is to place on the shelves of Libraries,        |
   |  Colleges, Universities and Historical societies, from the       |
   |  southern standpoint, an accurate narrative of the raid, and     |
   |  the events associated with it. I was 22 years of age, was       |
   |  preaching close to Harper's Ferry, saw the fighting and         |
   |  capture and visited Brown in his prison. I was a witness of     |
   |  the events of the forty four days intervening between the raid  |
   |  and his execution.                                              |
   |                                                                  |
   |  His partisan biographers were not in Virginia at that time.     |
   |  Their books contain historical errors and much romance. Their   |
   |  abuse of the Virginians is unfair. I am a Republican, and have  |
   |  steadily voted for Republican Presidents. But I think the time  |
   |  has come when a truthful version of this famous raid should     |
   |  find a place in national literature. I think that you will      |
   |  agree with me. On receipt of a money order for 45 cents I will  |
   |  mail to you a post-paid copy of this small volume.              |
   |                                                                  |
   |                                        With Respect,             |
   |                                                                  |
   |                                            S. V. LEECH.          |
   |                                                                  |
   +------------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Raid of John Brown at Harper's
Ferry as I Saw It, by Rev. Samuel Vanderlip Leech

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAID OF JOHN BROWN ***

***** This file should be named 35427.txt or 35427.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/4/2/35427/

Produced by David Edwards, Mike Zeug, Lisa Reigel, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
