The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Letters of the Duke of Wellington to
Miss J. 1834-1851, by Duke of Wellington

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Letters of the Duke of Wellington to Miss J. 1834-1851
       Edited by Extracts from the Diary of the Latter

Author: Duke of Wellington

Editor: Christine Terhune Herrick

Release Date: March 9, 2011 [EBook #35532]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LETTERS OF DUKE OF WELLINGTON ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






THE LETTERS OF THE

DUKE OF WELLINGTON

TO MISS J.


1834-1851


EDITED, WITH EXTRACTS FROM THE DIARY OF THE LATTER,
BY CHRISTINE TERHUNE HERRICK


LONDON
T. FISHER UNWIN
26 PATERNOSTER SQUARE

University Press:
JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.




Transcriber's Note: In this e-text, superscripted characters are
represented by being preceded by a carat, e.g., D^r and 13^th.




PREFACE.


The effort of the Editor throughout this volume has been to repress
fancy rather than to exercise it. There has not been a word added to or
taken from the letters of the Duke, even the occasional eccentricities
of orthography and punctuation having been preserved.

The editing that was absolutely necessary to render coherent some
of Miss J.'s lucubrations has been restricted to the excision of
superfluous passages of Scripture that added nothing to the sense of
the text, and the correction of the very erratic punctuation both of
her diary and of the copies she has left of her own letters.

Miss J.'s copies of the Duke's epistles have been verified by
comparison with the originals. In every case where the needful books
and journals of reference were attainable, the Duke's statements in the
letters of his comings and goings and occupations have been
corroborated by contemporary data.

The particulars of Miss J.'s personal history have been derived from
private family sources.

CHRISTINE TERHUNE HERRICK.

BROOKLYN, March 18, 1889.




CONTENTS.


CHAP.                                                   PAGE

   I. INTRODUCTION                                         1

  II. FIRST INTERVIEWS                                    10

 III. THE FIRST DISCORD                                   21

  IV. SMOOTH WATERS                                       39

   V. FRESH DIFFICULTIES                                  55

  VI. COMPARATIVE CALM                                    79

 VII. ASPIRATIONS AND REBUFFS                             98

VIII. A PEACEFUL PERIOD                                  120

  IX. MISUNDERSTANDINGS                                  149

   X. A BREATHING SPACE                                  166

  XI. THE FINAL RUPTURE                                  183

 XII. CONCLUSION                                         210

APPENDIX                                                 221




THE LETTERS OF WELLINGTON.




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTION.


These hitherto unpublished Letters from the Duke of Wellington to Miss
J., and the Diary of the latter, have lain for years in a trunk in the
attic of a country-house within thirty miles of New York city. Their
publication is permitted through the kindness of a friend with whose
family Miss J. was remotely connected. The facts with regard to Miss
J.'s life and character have been in part obtained through those who
knew her personally, but mainly through her own Diary,--a worn volume
once handsome, that at the first glance would be taken for a Bible.
This book is supplied with a spring-lock. Its hundreds of pages are
closely covered with a minute handwriting, and the ink with which they
were traced has faded to a yellowish brown, indistinct in places, but
never quite undecipherable. The Duke's letters are written in a
peculiar, irregular hand, very difficult to read, and becoming more
crabbed as he advanced in years. While the spelling is almost
invariably correct, the construction of the sentences is often
involved, and the punctuation follows no known method.

At the time Miss J.'s correspondence with the Duke of Wellington
opened, she was a very beautiful woman about twenty years of age. Her
parents were from among the smaller English gentry, and in her girlhood
she, with her elder sister, attended one of the best schools in
England. Many of her companions were of noble birth, and the
associations then formed were continued in later years. Miss J.'s
father died while she was little more than a child, and not long after
the mother followed. At her death the daughter writes that a vision was
vouchsafed to her of the heaven her mother was entering.

The elder sister married an American physician and came with him to
this country, leaving Miss J. with a companion and in the nominal care
of her guardian, who seems to have confined himself to supplying her
with the funds accruing from the investments made of the property left
by her mother. Miss J. lived now in lodgings, now in a rented house, in
company with a devoted elderly friend to whom she constantly alludes in
her Diary, and made many visits to the country-houses of former
schoolmates. She appears never to have had any taste for general
society. A woman of deeply devotional nature, her fervor in spiritual
matters had been heightened by associations into which she had been
thrown soon after quitting school, and further strengthened by the
example and precepts of her bosom companion, Mrs. L. But while the
latter evidently possessed strong common-sense and a well-balanced
mind, Miss J. was impulsive, enthusiastic, undisciplined. Whatever she
did was done with all her might. In her sight there could be no middle
course, no half-way measures. By much introspection and pondering of
the Scriptures she developed into a religious zealot, fanatically
anxious for the conversion of those about her. And this conversion was
in her mind nothing less than the turning aside from all worldly
pursuits, and the entire dedication of time and self to religious
avocations. She shrank with horror from what she called "The World,"
and interpreted this to mean public offices, wealth, and honors
conferred by the State. All these she considered as snares to draw the
soul from the contemplation of God and eternity, and bind it down to
the things of time and sense.

While little more than a girl, she had had a love-affair with a young
man, of whom she writes as "Henry," or "H." Although attached to him,
he fell short of her standard in matters spiritual, and she therefore
gave him up. She describes with feeling her deep anxiety for his
salvation, the prayers she offered for him, and her trembling hope that
he might become converted and they might yet be happy together. As the
young man still clung to "The World," she nerved herself to break the
bond between them and to crush down her affection for him. For a while
she seemed to succeed; but the victory over herself was not complete.
In her Diary she writes:--

    "A few days ago, while Mary was at the harp, in a moment a feeling
    of tenderness seemed to return towards H.; but I could not
    certainly say it _was_ so until two days after, when Mary returned
    from her visit and alluded to him, adding she had looked at Selby
    and prayed it may become an abode of _righteousness_, or words to
    this effect,--when I was at once overcome, and burst into tears.
    This, indeed, verified my suspicion; and what could I say to such
    things but this: 'Thy will, O God, be done!'"

Resolved that she would not let her mind dwell upon one who had "never
known a new _birth_ unto _righteousness_," she devoted herself to good
works, to instructing the school-children in the village, visiting the
poor and afflicted, teaching two gypsy boys, in whom she was much
interested, to read and to pray, writing letters on religious topics to
her friends, and adapting hymns for the harp. She was an earnest
student of the Bible, and held firm faith in the doctrine that even the
most trivial events in one's life are directed by an overruling
Providence. She carried this belief so far that when in doubt as to
what to do in any matter, she would open her Bible at random, read the
first text that caught her eye, and shape her course by the direction
she found there.

That her friends deprecated such fanaticism--for it really amounted to
that--in so young and beautiful a girl, is apparent from passages in
her Diary, where she states, with evident enjoyment, that she had
undergone "persecution for righteousness' sake," and laments that
certain friends should so evidently be "laboring under the power of
Satan."

During the month of June, 1833, while staying with a friend, of whom
she speaks as "Mary," in the village of S., intelligence was brought to
Miss J. of a hardened criminal who was confined in the county jail. He
had been convicted of murder, and was to be executed shortly. Both
Catholic and Protestant clergymen had been with him, and had endeavored
in vain to make some impression upon him by prayers and exhortation.
Here was Miss J.'s opportunity. She and her friend Mary went to the
prisoner, and by their ministrations produced such an effect that he
made full confession of his guilt and professed repentance and
conversion. In her Diary Miss J. tells how she dreaded her first
expedition to the jail, the prayers she uttered for strength, and the
direct answers she received. Of a later visit to "poor Cook" she
writes:

    "Oh, what a glorious change was there! The stony heart become a
    heart of flesh! Great God, thy mercies are indeed infinite, and thy
    ways past finding out!" A few days later she says: "Went again to
    S.; found poor Cook rapidly ripening for that eternal kingdom into
    which through his Saviour's righteousness he will soon be
    gloriously received."

The two girls kept up their visits, in face of a command to discontinue
them from Mary's parents.

    "Mary received such an angry letter, prohibiting her visiting poor
    Cook,--to whom, notwithstanding, we of _course_ went, saw him, and
    the next day were at chapel with him (being Sunday); after which he
    said he would like _then_ to fall asleep in the Lord, etc. On
    Monday evening we had singing and prayers with him. On Tuesday saw
    his chains taken off, and remained with him until he left the
    prison. On Wednesday were at court, and left S., feeling our work
    was done,--grateful, I trust, for such manifold mercies, and more
    anxious than ever to glorify our heavenly Lord. Today, the 10th,
    poor Cook suffered; and I can now fancy him a glorious spirit,
    hovering near, ministering to those that are to be heirs of
    salvation."

The result of Miss J.'s success with this unfortunate man naturally
strengthened her in her devotion to a religious life; and the effect
was deepened by the commendations of her pious friends. It was not so
common then as now to make pets of condemned criminals; and the success
of this young girl in subduing a man with whom priests and parsons had
hopelessly labored, created a sensation and called forth comment from
the press. It would have been almost phenomenal had the girl's head not
been turned. Her devotion to the advancement of the cause of Christ as
she understood it, was strong and genuine. Surrounded by judicious
advisers, she might have manifested her zeal in a different fashion. As
it was, she now felt she had been especially called of God to do a
great work. Looking around her for an object, her attention was drawn
to the Duke of Wellington. She seemed to have known more of him as the
public man than as the soldier; for she expressly states at a later
period that when she first wrote to him she was not aware that he was
the conqueror of Bonaparte, and did not even know when the Battle of
Waterloo took place,--a statement that leads to the inference that
instruction in the fashionable schools of that day dealt more with
playing on the harp and similar showy accomplishments than with a
knowledge of English history.

Miss J. leaves in her Diary a list of the letters received from the
Duke, prefacing them with the following introduction:--

    "Seeing that I have adverted in the former part of this book to the
    feelings experienced on our return from poor Cook, which induced me
    to look up to the Lord, enquiring what next HE would have me to do,
    receiving this precious reply, 'Greater things than these, that
    they may marvel;' and considering such words must have had a
    reference to his condescending dealings a few months afterwards in
    influencing me to write to the Duke upon the necessity of a new
    _birth_ unto righteousness,--I am solicitous to devote a portion of
    this book to his letters, remarking thereon as the list thereof
    proceeds: May the Lord be with me, inclining my heart and pen to
    perform all his good will and pleasure, be that whatever it may,
    for his holy name' sake. Amen."

The Duke of Wellington was at this time (1834) a man sixty-five years
old. He was in the prime of strength and health, with a capacity for
work which the roughing and the hard service he had undergone in
earlier life had not in the least impaired. In spite of the passing
unpopularity due to his opposition to the Reform Bill, that led to his
being publicly hooted in 1832, he had had many high offices bestowed
upon him. He had now been a widower for three years.




CHAPTER II.

FIRST INTERVIEWS.


Miss J.'s first letter to the duke was written on the 15th of January,
1834, from Devonshire, where she was spending several months. She was
greatly encouraged by receiving an answer from the duke by return post.
This letter is unfortunately missing, nor does Miss J. give extracts
from it, as from many others, but she indulges in a few comments upon
it.

    "It was," she says, "dated from Hartford Bridge, Jan. 18, 1833,
    instead of 1834,--a remarkable circumstance for one so accurate in
    such particulars. It had also a mistake in one place and a blot in
    two,--betraying consequently, I should imagine, feelings which
    overwhelmed him on the receipt of my Epistle; and since it is not
    at all unlikely that the same Lord who worked in me to write may
    ('His eyes being in every place') have allowed him to participate
    in the same in some way known only to Himself, in order to effect
    His purposes."

Stimulated by this reception of her first venture, Miss J. proceeded
further, and on the 24th of April carried a Bible to the town-house of
the Duke, and with her own hand gave it into the charge of the servant.
She writes a minute account of this occurrence:--

    "After earnest prayer the Bible was taken by me, with a fluttering,
    agitated feeling, to the Duke's gates and delivered into the
    porter's hands, after asking him if the Duke were at home. He
    replied, 'Yes, ma'am.' I then asked, 'Is he engaged?' He told me
    Lord--I forget his name--and Sir Thomas Somebody were with him. I
    then inquired, 'Who delivers parcels into His Grace's hands?' He
    respectfully said, 'I do, ma'am.' I rejoined, 'Then you will
    deliver that,'--returning home, marvelling wherefore such things
    were permitted, and what the end thereof would be. Of course a
    suitable note accompanied The Bible."

The Duke was not as prompt in acknowledging "The Bible" as he had been
in replying to the first note, for he did not write until the 27th of
August. Even then the letter was delayed by a mistake he made in the
address, directing the envelope to Mrs., instead of Miss J. She says,
"I presume he was in doubt on the subject whether I was a married or
single lady, as my signature could not decide on that point." In this
note the Duke asks if he may not have the pleasure of meeting her; and
Miss J., acting under the advice of her friend Mrs. L., grants his
request and expresses her own desire to know him,--"considering it may
be The Lord's will to permit personal interviews, proposing under such
circumstances to use my influence with him; accordingly craving the
Divine blessing thereon."

From the Duke's reply, which follows, it is evident that she had
corrected his uncertainty as to whether she was married or single:


      WALMER CASTLE, Oct. 24, 1834.

      The Duke of Wellington presents his compliments to Miss J. The
      Duke has received her Letter in which she expresses a desire to
      see the Duke and that he should call upon her.

      The Duke has certainly received one, if not more, letters from
      Miss J., all written upon the same important subject and with the
      same beneficent object in view, although the desire to see the
      Duke was not expressed in them; and the Duke lately acknowledged
      the receipt of one, and of the book, etc., accompanying it.

      Although the Duke is not in the habit of visiting young unmarried
      ladies with whom he is not acquainted, he will not decline to
      attend Miss J. He is at present at a distance from London, and he
      will be detained at Walmer Castle by business in this part of the
      county for more than a fortnight.

      Miss J. will probably write to the Duke again, and will let him
      know whether she will be in London in a fortnight or three weeks
      from this time.


This was followed by a note, dated November 8, renewing the expressions
of the Duke's desire to meet one who took such an interest in his
welfare, and informing Miss J. of his intention to call upon her the
twelfth of the month. She was then with her friend Mrs. L. in lodgings
in London, and here the Duke presented himself.

The interview was most curious, and is fully described in Miss J.'s
Diary. It seems to furnish the key to this correspondence, that lasted
over seventeen years. Even the pietistic phrases with which Miss J.'s
account is thickly interspersed are of value as demonstrating the
woman's real character, and making plain how completely all that
concerned her was subordinated to her conception of what constituted
the glory of God. The full statement was not written immediately after
the Duke's visit, although the main facts were noted in her Diary. The
following narrative was committed to paper some years after the
occurrence it reports. Her motive in giving particulars is, as she
herself states, to protect herself, lest at her death some question
might arise as to the precise relations that had existed between the
Duke and herself.

She writes:--

    "I was about to enter further into a copy of the list of the Duke's
    letters, in the book with the lock and key, without comment on the
    past; but I am not permitted to do so, considering the Lord is too
    jealous for his holy name to suffer me to be exposed to censure
    which a full knowledge of circumstances would explain and prevent.
    Consequently, however reluctant (_recoiling from the_ TASK _as I
    do_) to enter into such, the honor due to the holy name so justly
    declared to be above every name demands the _effort_; and may _HE_,
    as I have upon my knees especially implored him, be with my pen
    accordingly, influencing it to write only what is agreeable to his
    unerring will, and likely to obtain the end in view above alluded
    to, for his holy _name's_ sake! Since he must have influenced the
    Duke of Wellington to love me above every other lady upon earth
    from the first moment he beheld me, I am not afraid, as in his
    sight, to imply such feelings were permitted to exist towards one,
    through the workings of his power, for the accomplishment of his
    own ends, be they _whatever_ they may,--_which_ ends, _however_
    varying from those I had naturally anticipated, will, I trust,
    redound far more to _His Glory_ than my anticipations, if realized,
    could possibly have done.

    "I say _naturally anticipated!_ And who can presume to think such
    were not _justifiable_ when the individual _thus_ brought into my
    presence by 'the Lord of Lords' for the purpose of receiving
    instruction from his holy word, never spoke, all power of speech
    seeming to be withdrawn, until he was compelled to exclaim: 'Oh,
    _how_ I _love_ you! _how_ I _love_ you!' repeating the same over
    and over and over again with increasing energy.

    "I will proceed to describe this visit, which took place through a
    declaration on _his part_ in a former letter that the desire to see
    me sprang from the consideration evinced _by me_ concerning his
    _everlasting welfare_. This induced me to receive him accordingly,
    praying to God to be with me every moment of the time, directing
    even my dress. This He did, letting me be dressed on the occasion
    as HE pleased, which, as my Diary relates, was in my old _turned_
    dark green merino gown, _daily_ worn,--not permitting me to be
    decorated in any way likely to attract notice, which, as the
    employment in view was of so sacred a nature, was neither required
    nor obtained.

    "Having committed myself on my knees into his gracious hand, 'whose
    I am and whom I serve,' to do with me whatever seemed agreeable to
    His unerring will, I descended the stairs after the Duke was
    announced, with these words from dear Mrs. L. following me: 'Now if
    the Lord should send his arrow into his soul!' (She had fancied
    from the commencement that God intended to exalt me for the purpose
    of showing forth _his_ praise, so that this impression must
    necessarily have been powerfully strengthened by what followed.)

    "I entered the Parlour, where, standing before the fire, I beheld
    anything but the kind of individual personally imagined. I had not
    had the slightest idea that the Duke has such a beautiful, silver
    head, such as I always from my childhood admired, inducing me as I
    approached to offer my hand with additional pleasure, saying, 'This
    is very kind of Your Grace!' He received my hand graciously and
    respectfully,--but spoke not a word. I then requested him to be
    seated, two chairs having been placed for that purpose each side of
    the fire,--and occupied one of them myself; when recollecting the
    purport of his visit, I immediately rose, saying, 'I will show you
    _my Treasure_!' He also rose, standing until I re-seated myself
    with this _large_ beautiful Bible in my arms. I placed it upon the
    table between us, opening it at the Third Chapter of Saint John's
    Gospel, announcing the same. On arriving at the seventh verse
    thereof, containing this MOMENTOUS passage, flowing from the divine
    lips of him who spoke as never man spake, '_Ye_ MUST _be born
    again_,' I, as is usual with me, raised my hand, pointing my finger
    emphatically, with the solemnity so important an occasion demanded,
    being desirous to impress the same on his mind, when to my
    astonishment he eagerly _seized_ my hand, exclaiming, as before
    described: 'Oh, _how_ I _love_ you!' This was his first
    utterance!...

    "Should any one consider strange the expression of _agonizing_
    applied to the Duke's feelings at the time he seized my hand, and
    exclaimed as written, I can only say that such an expression seems
    hardly doing justice thereto in my estimation. Nor can I find _any_
    language adequate to display the same, for God appeared to have
    struck the Duke dumb on beholding me, giving him no power of speech
    until he _betrayed_ the effect such had on him. He seemed
    determined from first to last to overcome or conceal these
    feelings; yet on one occasion, with great solemnity of voice and
    manner, on my questioning him concerning who caused him to feel
    thus towards me, he replied,

    "'GOD ALMIGHTY.'"

One hesitates how to comment upon this singular interview. As has been
said, the Duke was at the time of its occurrence sixty-five years old,
a father and a grandfather. Under no circumstances was he a man likely
to fall in love at first sight, even with so beautiful and interesting
a woman as Miss J. Yet the length of time that the correspondence
endured, as well as the tone he generally observed of interest in her
plans, of solicitude for her health, and the readiness with which he
renewed his letters when some misunderstanding had for a while
interrupted them, all go to prove that he must have had a feeling for
her of more than common interest. Miss J. does not demur at avowing her
affection for him again and again. In later years, when there had been
a decided break between them, she writes of him constantly as "my
still-loved, precious Duke."

That the Duke did not have a general reputation for softness of heart,
even among those who knew him well, may be gathered from Greville's
comments. He styles the Duke:--

    "A man of great energy, decision, and authority. The Duke is a very
    _hard_ man; he takes no notice of any of his family, he never sees
    his mother, has only visited her two or three times in the last few
    years, and has not now been to see Lady Anne, though she has been
    in such affliction for the death of her only son, and he passes her
    door every time he goes to Strathfieldsaye.... He is a very
    extraordinary man certainly, and with many contradictions in his
    character.... He will not endure any one who will not be
    subservient to him."

Several passages in the Duke's letters to Miss J. written when there
had been deaths among his friends or in his family, lead one to modify
the estimate made of him by Greville, who was always too apt to let his
personal prejudices color his statements. M'Carthy declares that while
the Duke was cold and brusque in manner, his affections were warm and
enduring. This softer side of his nature was evidently that shown to
Miss J. The oddest part of the affair was that he should have betrayed
it on such short acquaintance.

On parting from Miss J. the Duke told her he should be absent from town
for several days, but would call upon her on his return. At his request
she promised to write to him. This she afterwards found "the Lord of
Lords" would not permit.

    "I attempted to fulfil my promise repeatedly; but felt so
    restrained that I was obliged at length to relinquish all thought
    of doing so, considering such was not the will of God."

A letter from the Duke dated December 5 inquires the reason of this
silence, and proposes calling again. To this Miss J. sent no answer;
but in spite of her silence she received another note, dated London,
December 22, announcing the Duke's return, and informing her that he
would wait upon her the next day at three o'clock. The following
account of this call is from Miss J.'s Diary:--

    "During the next visit from the Duke he exclaimed, speaking of his
    feeling for me, 'This must be for life!' twice over successively.
    He then asked me if I felt sufficient for him to be with him a
    whole life, to which I replied: '_If it be the will of God_.' I
    observed much excitement about him, and he in a very hurried manner
    told me that he was going on a visit to the King. This led me to
    reply, 'I wish you were going on a visit to _The King_,' which he
    evidently interpreted to mean The King of kings. He left me
    hastily, saying he purposed returning in a short time. In the
    interim I locked my door and knelt down, beseeching God to be with
    me and protect me, showing me what he would have me do under such
    marvellous circumstances. Forgetting that the door was fastened, I
    was obliged on the Duke's return to explain wherefore, stating that
    it is written, 'When thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father
    which is in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret shall
    reward thee openly;' adding, '_Therefore_ I locked the door when
    you were gone, Your Grace, to kneel down and ask God to take care
    of me.' On hearing this his eyes dropped, but he said nothing. On
    his asking me why I had not written to him during his absence from
    town, I replied, 'Because _God_ would not let me;' when his eyes
    again fell, and he was silent."




CHAPTER III.

THE FIRST DISCORD.


The Duke was again summoned out of town before he had the opportunity
to repeat his call. He promised, however, to attend Miss J. upon his
return at the end of a week. He was detained longer than he had
anticipated, and meanwhile reflection appears to have made Miss J.
doubt the propriety of her meeting him again. She writes an account of
her meditations upon this subject in her Diary, and follows it with a
copy of the letter she wrote to the Duke:--

    "It is now this day a fortnight since the Duke paid me the visit
    attended by the circumstances described, which not only occasioned
    suffering immediately after his departure of no common nature, but
    daily brought with it an increasing unwillingness to submit to
    another interview. As this at _length_ approached I was led to
    dread it and consequently to meditate on what The Will of the
    Lord might be. Whilst thus employed and looking up for help and
    guidance, these blessed promises came, 'In Me is the Help.' '_I
    will uphold_ _thee_,' after which I slept in peace. The following
    morning, (yesterday) I rose, much strengthened in spirit and prayed
    that I might be given grace to fulfil all the good pleasure of God
    with regard to one inexpressibly dear to my soul.

    "I then rose from my knees, dressed me, and without the slightest
    idea what I was about to do descended into the parlor, which I had
    no sooner entered than a powerful feeling possessed me to write
    to the Duke, and entreat he would desist visiting me, which
    accordingly I was compelled to do. In order to know whether he was
    in town, I sent for a Newspaper, thereby learning that he arrived
    the day before, consequently that in two hours I could prevent a
    visit. As the time he mentioned as that of his stay from Town had
    doubly elapsed I concluded he would in all probability call that
    day and thus subject me to another trying visit, if immediate
    measures were not taken to prevent it. Therefore, I wrote on the
    letter 'Put in before 4 o'clock,' in which case it is to be hoped
    he would receive it at 6,--or at the furthest 8 o'clock, and I thus
    feel myself delivered from the anticipation of a visit which under
    present circumstances could only have been productive of a
    repetition of feelings I am most anxious to avoid."


      Saturday, Jan. 10, 1835.

      MY LORD DUKE,--Finding my peace, that perfect peace which for so
      many years I have almost uninterruptedly enjoyed interfered with
      by your visits,--visits which under present circumstances I
      cannot feel justified in receiving, as they are of so different a
      nature from those I anticipated when I gave you permission to
      call upon me,--I think it my DUTY to entreat they should cease.

      My agitation on Sunday week during and after your departure
      called forth _reflections_ which actuate my present conduct. I do
      not consider it right personally to place myself so fully and
      confidentially in the power of one, who, however honorable and
      noble, occasionally seems to forget he is confided in by a Being
      who _feels_ herself entitled even in the sight of God, not only
      to the appellation of virtuous, in the strictest acceptation of
      the word,--but RIGHTEOUS. This appellation as far exceeds the
      former in _value_ as the heavens do the earth, as the one is to
      be found, I trust, frequently in the unregenerate, whilst the
      _latter_ springs SOLELY from _above_.

      Pray do not imagine by the step now taken that I am incapable of
      duly appreciating your valued affection!--for I hesitate not to
      declare there breathes not the Being so dear to me as yourself.
      Yet, whilst I make this declaration and consequently admit that
      all the world are as nothing in comparison with you,--I consider
      it equally my duty to _add_ that however dear GOD may have made
      you to me--(and I feel it is His Work, Why or Wherefore time must
      explain) _you_ are as nothing in comparison with CHRIST, Whose
      honor I consider concerned, being, I glory to say His openly
      acknowledged, however unworthy, servant, And for Whose sake
      _consequently_ I have come to the determination of exercising the
      _self denial_ herein required.

      That you could ever think of ME, notwithstanding your occasional
      forgetfulness,--with any other than the _most_ honorable of
      feelings, would of course be as impossible as to imagine you
      could at pleasure bring the heavens down under your feet or turn
      the Sun out of his course, since _both_ would be more likely than
      that I could even for a single moment forget the _high_ END for
      which I was created, namely, to _glorify His Holy Name Who_ HAS
      REDEEMED _me with His precious Blood_, and _rather_ than dishonor
      it I should prefer the sufferings of ETERNAL torments!

      Trusting that the step thus taken may be received by Your Grace
      in the light _duty_ both to God and myself demand, I will not
      intrude upon your time further than to assure you that should any
      _spiritual_ advice from me be considered needful either in
      sickness or health, it will _always_ be at your service.

      With an assurance of remembering you from time to time when I
      approach _His Throne_ (Who is of purer eyes than to behold
      iniquity) and Who looketh into the _deepest_ recesses of the
      _human heart_, I beg to subscribe myself that which in reality I
      trust you believe I am, namely,

      Your Grace's Most faithful friend

      In The Lord.

      A. J.


The Duke's answer was a strong contrast to this effusion.


      LONDON, Jan. 10, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your letter and enclosures. I
      beg to remind you of what I said to you the second day that I saw
      you; and if you recollect it you will not be surprised at my
      telling you that I entirely concur in the intention which you
      have communicated to me.

      I am obliged to you for what you have sent me; and I am

      Ever Yours Most Sincerely,

      WELLINGTON.


This note, although courteous in form and substance, brought forth from
Miss J. a reply that, beginning mildly, ended in scathing terms.


      Monday, Jan. 12, 1835.

      MY LORD DUKE,--I have endeavored in vain to recollect what you
      allude to as having said on the second visit paid me, remembering
      nothing but what appeared honorable. I supposed it impossible
      that there breathed a being who could dare presume to make any
      profession of affection for me under opposite circumstances,
      feeling as I do, that I should confer as high an honor on a
      Prince in bestowing my hand on him as he could on me in receiving
      it--but if it be really possible that I have mistaken Your
      Grace's feelings I should only degrade my own by adding more than
      that I deliver you into His Hands that "judgeth righteously" who
      declares to His children the following words--"Ye are the temples
      of the Holy Ghost," to which is immediately added "Whosoever
      therefore defileth the Temple of God, him will I destroy"
      again,--"Take heed that ye offend not one of these little ones,"
      "Whoso shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me
      it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
      neck and that he were drowned in the depths of the sea."

      Trusting that the Lord will bestow upon you that repentance which
      is not to be repented of I submit the foregoing scriptures to
      your prayerful consideration and subscribe myself that which it
      is the highest honor to be considered, however unworthy of the
      same I may be and am,

      A Servant of Christ,

      A. J.

      Having on further consideration, I fear found out that to which
      you have alluded with such cool, insulting, presuming
      deliberation in your note, as being uttered during your second
      visit, I have at its remembrance risen in the night with all
      those indignant feelings insult demands, to assure you that had I
      understood the motives which actuated you to make such an
      abhorrent, disgraceful enquiry, one I could not degrade my pen or
      self by giving place on paper, however Your Grace may and have
      degraded yourself by utterance of the same, I should at the
      moment such escaped your lips have spurned you from me as a
      serpent whose sting was capable of producing not only
      instantaneous but Eternal death! Such a horror should I have had
      of one who until now has possessed a share of my affection even
      surprising to myself--an affection as pure and sincere as it was
      disinterested, but Alas! under present circumstances with the
      vail withdrawn from my eyes what a change of feeling exists! such
      as would incline me if I did not believe that it was the will of
      God we should have met to mourn deeply at ever having desired it.

      In again however reluctantly alluding to the hateful enquiry
      above noticed--one at the bare utterance of which it is a mercy
      that God "in whose hands your breath is" knowing your despicable
      motives (since all hearts are open in His sight and from whom no
      secrets are hid however ignorant I may have been and was of the
      same) did not in His wrath strike you dead at my feet. I beg to
      remind you of my answer which ought, yea, must in itself have
      convinced you at the time of my misunderstanding your meaning--it
      being in the following words--"_If it be the will of God_;" for
      surely you could never for a moment suppose it to be His will
      whose purity is such that he charges even His angels with folly
      that I, his devoted child and servant, should bring such deep
      dishonor on His holy name as to--but my pen with every feeling
      of my offended nature recoils from even _writing_, much less
      submitting to such abhorrent degradation which none but most
      polluted lips could ever dare to vent.

      The answer was given thus hesitatingly although at the time I was
      laboring under impressions of its being called forth by the
      highest and most honorable intentions on your part. And why thus
      hesitatingly? you would ask. Because I was not and am not quite
      satisfied that under any circumstances the regenerate soul can be
      justified in the sight of God in uniting itself to the
      unregenerate, it being written "Be not unequally yoked with
      unbelievers," also, "How can two walk together unless they be
      agreed?"

      Thus you will perceive that when laboring under the most
      favorable impression of your upright intentions, notwithstanding
      your rank, etc., all of which with me are beheld in the utter
      nothingness such empty things deserve, I should have hesitated
      until I perceived in you that change of heart so necessary to
      salvation, without which "no man can see the Lord," fearing I
      ought not to consent even under the most flattering circumstances
      to partake in any outward honors likely to bring the
      disapprobation of God.

      When I reflect on my view of the case and then in a moment the
      distressing thought of one so sinful on your part darts like a
      dagger into my offended spirit, I feel that I should not be
      surprised (although rest assured, I do not desire it,) at any
      vengeance God saw fit to shower down for such a dreadful
      intention upon Your Grace's head. Oh may His Holy Spirit convince
      you of the heinousness of the sin in question, leading you from
      darkness to light and from "the power of Satan" (under whose
      influence you so evidently at present are,) "unto God" in order
      that your transgressions may be blotted out in the Blood of the
      Lamb--and that consequently the present--and if I mistake not the
      greatest sin as far as thought may be concerned in God's sight,
      it being of so aggravated a nature arising from the consideration
      of the motives which first actuated me to address you and
      afterwards receive Your Grace--namely, your eternal
      happiness--may never be laid to your charge. In order that such
      may not be the case it will be necessary that you should
      experience that "Repentance unto life not to be repented of"
      which, if felt, would bring with it an unhesitating desire to
      apologize with remorse and anguish for the iniquity herein
      noticed and which can never be erased from my memory until you
      do, feeling it a respect due to myself and Religion. I deliver
      you on this second and last occasion,--for of course I here take
      a final leave of one I can never wish to behold again under
      present circumstances,--once more into His Hands who "is no
      respecter of persons," beseeching Him to grant you not only
      repentance but forgiveness. I subscribe myself by a title as far
      exceeding any Your Grace can possess as the Heavens do the earth
      and which I would neither exchange nor resign to become the
      Empress of a thousand worlds,

      A Servant of Christ and a Child of God,

      A. J.


    "After I had written this letter and was meditating, these precious
    words came 'FEAR NOT, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am
    thy God, I will strengthen thee, I will help thee, yea, I will
    uphold thee with the Right Arm of My Righteousness'--and _thus_
    upheld who can faint? _thus_ upheld who can despair? O my Heavenly
    Father, strengthen me in the 'inner man' more and more, I beseech
    Thee, to endure this and any other trial Thou in Thine unerring
    wisdom mayest see fit; anxious for nothing but to fulfil Thy will
    in all things, knowing that the path of duty is the path of peace:
    also that it is through 'much tribulation we must enter the
    Kingdom' that glorious Kingdom where 'the wicked cease from
    troubling and the weary are at rest.' Sharp as this trial is, I
    have to repeat my frequently acknowledged experience of finding my
    strength equal to my day--or in other words the fulfilment of this
    Scripture 'Thy strength is made perfect in weakness.'

    "_Tuesday, Jan. 13, 1835._ Last night after experiencing and
    penning the feelings herein described, I retired to rest and slept
    sweetly and peacefully until about three o'clock--when I awoke with
    a disinclination to sleep again--consequently adverted in thought
    to my late distressing trials and whilst thus occupied felt assured
    what I had suggested must have been _that_ to which the Duke
    alludes with such daring effrontery! I then rose, put on my
    dressing gown and wrote the language of my indignant soul as far as
    such could be painted! but a faint picture at best! Alas! that one
    so esteemed should give such cause to show his unworthiness. But it
    is doubtlessly permitted for some end which poor blind mortals
    cannot penetrate, therefore let me not murmur, but bless God who
    has thought me worthy whilst so _un_worthy to rank among that
    blessed number described by the angel to Saint John as having 'come
    out of much tribulation and washed their robes and made them white
    in the Blood of The Lamb.' This may stand as the greatest trial I
    ever had! Yet I am so wonderfully upheld, agreeably to the gracious
    promise previously given, that I can hardly believe such degrading
    circumstances exist! Oh! What an awful thing that one so high in
    power is afraid to do that which can call forth the gaze and
    disapprobation of a sinful, dying, misjudging world, yet fearless
    of committing the most dreadful crime before Him 'Who is of purer
    eyes than to behold iniquity.' O may the letter just about to be
    sent be permitted to sink deep into his rebellious soul calling it
    from darkness to light and from the power of Satan unto God. Then
    indeed we shall have cause to declare the goodness of God in thus
    permitting (however revolting and distressing,) late occurrences to
    take place! And since He can bring good out of evil, I submit all
    that has transpired to His gracious, condescending and unerring
    governance for this purpose, knowing that He can bring 'light out
    of darkness and make crooked things straight.' O I can never be
    sufficiently grateful for the powerful strength which so powerfully
    upholds me! and trust the same will be a means among His other
    innumerable, unmerited blessings of causing me to glorify His Holy
    Name with the best powers of my soul and body under whatever trials
    or sorrows may be yet in store for me! Oh may each and all tend to
    ripen me 'for an inheritance among the saints in light for Christ's
    sake!'

    "Since the above was written I have indeed in a few hours had
    additional cause for gratitude and love to God, having received a
    letter from the Duke apologizing in every way I could expect,
    considering all circumstances, for occasioning my displeasure. Oh!
    how gracious is the Lord of Heaven and Earth thus to undertake for
    so unworthy a worm! for which I praise Thee, I bless Thee, I
    magnify Thee to Whom all power, majesty and dominion belong!"

The Duke's letter of apology is full of calm dignity, but one regrets
that the accusation was not dismissed with a show, at least, of
righteous indignation.


      LONDON, Jan. 13, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I beg your pardon if I have written a line or
      used an expression which could annoy you. Believe me; it is the
      thing of all others that I would wish to avoid! And that there is
      nobody more strongly impressed than I am with veneration for your
      Virtues, attainments and Sentiments!

      Believe me Ever Yours

      Most sincerely,

      WELLINGTON.


This quarrel is of chief interest as indicating that Miss J.'s anxiety
for the Duke's soul was not altogether disinterested. If it had been,
her resentment at his gallantry would hardly have been expressed in
this manner. It is evident that to her mind, the Duke had been trifling
with her. His kindly reception of her efforts to promote his
"everlasting welfare" had raised hopes that would have seemed absurd to
any one of every-day common-sense. She asserts openly in several places
in her Diary that she believed it was the will of God that she should
become the wife of the Duke.

In this persuasion she was confirmed by her friend Mrs. L.; and to her
and to Miss J. there was nothing unreasonable in the expectation. The
latter considered herself no whit inferior to the Duke in any respect,
as she takes pains to affirm. Instances of this may be given from her
Diary. She says:--

    "I was impressed throughout my correspondence with and knowledge of
    the Duke with a feeling that the end God had in view was my
    exaltation for His Glory, or in other words to show forth His
    power.... I attach so little importance to rank or worldly
    grandeur, that I should have considered I conferred as high an
    honor on the Duke in bestowing my hand as he would in receiving it,
    of which he was well aware!"

Miss J. judged herself to be actuated by no worldly motives in her
desire for such promotion. She cleverly concealed the mundane nature of
her aspirations even from herself. Throughout, her declaration is that
her sole aim in life has invariably been, "Glorify Thyself in Me!" By
her elevation to a position where she will be a centre of observation
she hopes to influence those ungodly souls by whom she will be
surrounded, and to imbue them with true piety. She writes:--

    "I in my turn was permitted to love the Duke, but the honor and
    glory of God were ever my consideration. Consequently such
    affection of mine being of so opposite a nature to his own was
    principally displayed in my watchful solicitude for his everlasting
    welfare, concerning which I was firm and faithful throughout,
    believing God would convert him _eventually_, causing him to shine
    forth gloriously in His adorable service. As in that case the
    erroneous impressions in my mind would in all probability have been
    verified, I looked forward to becoming as 'a city set on a hill
    which cannot be hid,' conceiving such exaltation would admit of
    showing forth _His_ praises _openly_ before men. But I doubt not
    that I am _far_ happier thus situated, enjoying a lively sense of
    His Divine, Adorable presence than I could possibly have had under
    the turmoil attending more exalted circumstances. As the poor Duke
    evidently did everything in his power to overcome the feelings
    referred to, I am aware the _World_ could form no idea of the
    extent or power of the same without this explanation from my pen."

The Duke's affection for Miss J. can hardly have been altogether the
work of her imagination. Besides the interview copied in her Diary,
there is the evidence of the correspondence. True, his epistles are
lacking in open protestations of devotion. Miss J. herself remarks that
the Duke's letters were always cautiously written. He was too much a
man of the world to run the risk of compromising himself in black and
white. But the very existence of this correspondence, extending over a
period of seventeen years, is a strong argument in favor of his having
felt for her a remarkably warm friendship at the least.

It can hardly be supposed that the Duke seriously intended to marry
Miss J. As he himself writes to her,--

    "I should not treat you as I should wish to be treated myself. The
    commands of all others which we ought to obey are those dictated to
    us by our social relations. What would be said, if I, a man of
    seventy years of age, nearly, were to take in marriage a lady young
    enough to be my Granddaughter?"

Upon this Miss J. comments:--

    "_Alas! Alas!_ how deceitful is the human heart! For I am convinced
    that although the Duke _wrote_ thus, there was not a moment during
    our acquaintance when if I had _not_ been _by the Grace of God_
    what I was and am that he would have thought I was too young to bow
    down before me with the most sinful adulation."

What was either a flirtation or a manifestation of fatherly fondness on
the part of the Duke was a grand passion to Miss J. Perhaps her vanity
was as deeply touched as her heart; but those who knew her best
declared that never until the Duke's death did she resign all hope of
becoming the Duchess of Wellington.

In another part of her Diary she writes, with the diffuseness and
reiteration that mark her style:--

    "That I loved the Duke I am not ashamed to say, God knows, and that
    too with the purest affection. Consequently when he asked me if I
    felt sufficient to be with him a whole life, (which was the
    question referred to in that odious letter, for odious indeed it
    still appears in my sight, yea, increasingly so with time, for I
    recoil with unspeakable horror from the thought that I could be
    thus enquired of without being clearly comprehended), I replied to
    the same in the following words, '_If it be the will of God_,' not
    supposing for a moment, as expressed, that such an enquiry could be
    made of one with God's Holy Book before me, to which I had been
    attracting his attention with all the reverence and veneration so
    holy an employment demanded, except under intentions the most
    honorable. This idea many would perhaps say must have arisen from
    my want of knowledge of mankind and the world etc. But in that case
    how was it that dear Mrs. L----, a perfect woman of the world in
    her early life, could think the same and consequently encourage
    such views?"

Long after the Duke had wearied of his passing fancy Miss J. clung to
the idea that she could yet draw him to her. Her secluded life, given
up to good works and pious meditations, and still later her confirmed
ill-health, heightened her unworldliness, and rendered it more than
ever difficult for her to see the impossibility of what in the eyes of
the Duke and his family and friends would have been a misalliance.

It is perhaps uncharitable to suppose that Miss J. intended by her
assumed reluctance to grant the Duke a third interview to force him to
make a formal declaration of his intentions and ask her hand in
marriage. If this, however, was her plan, it met with a signal failure.
Clearly nothing was farther from the Duke's thoughts than to make
himself the butt of popular ridicule by taking a wife forty-five years
younger than himself, and of retired even though perfectly respectable
social position. Besides that, it can hardly be wondered at if the
Duke, a man free from binding domestic ties, were not in a humor to
place permanently at his elbow so strict a mentor as Miss J., no matter
how pretty she might be. The prudishness and piety that were
fascinating in a beautiful woman seldom seen, would wax wearisome in
the most charming creature bound to him by indissoluble ties.




CHAPTER IV.

SMOOTH WATERS.


      LONDON, June 2, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I received your Note. We perfectly understand
      each other; and with your permission I will call upon you
      to-morrow at three o'clock.

      There is only one point that I wish to explain in reference to
      our last meeting. There might have been a difference of Manner.
      There was none of feeling.

      You told me that you had written to me; and I certainly was
      anxious to possess your Letters. You certainly wished to take
      them out of the Paquet; but if I had thought that your reluctance
      to give them was deeply felt, you may rely upon it that I would
      not have pressed to have them.

      At all events my perusal of them has occasioned an explanation
      which can do no Harm.

      Believe me ever Yours most sincerely

      W.


From this it appears that the personal interviews had recommenced. The
letters now follow one another closely.


      LONDON, June 15, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your Letter of this Day, for
      which I return many thanks.

      I was not able to go to see you last week as I intended. I was
      confined to my Home by Indisposition for some days; and I was
      much occupied. I am going out of town to-morrow. But I hope to be
      able to go to see [_sic_] on Saturday at three o'clock if you
      should not at that time have left town for the Seaside?

      I will bring with me the Letters and Books which you lent me. I
      have read that one which you wish that I should return to you.

      If you should go before I shall see you again I hope that you
      will let me know where.

      Believe me Ever Yours most sincerely

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J. states that the book here alluded to was an account of the
conversion of the criminal Cook, and touches upon her instrumentality
in bringing about this result.


      LONDON, June 22nd, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have read all your Letters since I saw you on
      Saturday. Why do you not send each of them to me when you write
      it?

      I think that you will have perceived on Saturday that you was
      mistaken in the Notion under which you wrote some of them.

      We may differ in opinion and I may be in Error. But I assure you
      that I cannot feel otherwise than grateful to you for your
      kindness to me; and respect and veneration for the Motives for
      it.

      Let me know before you go out of town that I may not misdirect a
      Letter to you.

      Believe me Ever Yours most sincerely,

      WELLINGTON.


In the latter part of June Miss J. went to Ramsgate. The Duke's letter
of July 1st is directed there:--


      LONDON, July 1st, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am very sorry if in my Letter of Monday I
      should have said a Word which could have hurt your feelings. I
      think that by this time you ought to be convinced that I could
      not intend to do so.

      I might have done so erroneously. I might have been misled by
      circumstances. But I could not willingly hurt the feelings of any
      body.

      In this particular case you forget that you asked the Question
      whether your letters were not overweight. I told you that they
      were.

      I likewise informed you of a Rule which we are all under the
      necessity of adopting; that is of returning Letters over weight;
      because too many Persons are in the habit of thinking that they
      may inclose their Letters to a well known Person; and the Charge
      becomes enormous. Under these circumstances my Porter has the
      usual order not to take in Letters overweight; which he generally
      returns; unless I should happen to be in the House when he
      enquires. I stated the fact very shortly, as I generally do; in
      answer to a question from yourself; and I pointed out to you that
      if you desired to write to me more than you could put in two
      Sheets, you should put your Letter in two or three or more
      covers.

      You must not be so susceptible. Rely upon it, that many many
      Years will pass over your Head; before I shall intentionally
      offend you.

      Believe me Ever Yours most sincerely

      W.


      July 7, 1835.

      I have received your two Letters My Dear Miss J., and according
      to your desire I write immediately.

      My writing is not very legible by a person not accustomed to it.
      But I never could have intended to apply the word mistrust to
      you.

      You expressed apprehension that your Letters might be seen by a
      third person; as they might have been returned to the Post
      Office.

      I did not write the word _relatives_ but _relations_, and that
      not in the meaning of relatives. I adverted to your ordinary
      relations with other persons, which I said must be attended by
      some observance of their Habits and Customs.

      However, there is an end of this matter. I hope that your writing
      to me will never be disturbed again by any checks or
      difficulties; or expressions which I assure you can never be
      intended to convey any meaning but one of kindness towards you,
      and of admiration of your Talents, your character and your
      Devotion to what is good. Believe me Ever Yours most sincerely

      W.


Of the following letters Miss J. gives extracts in her Diary. There are
few of his epistles in which the Duke fails to express his thanks to
Miss J. for her kindness in writing to him. However gratifying this may
have been to her, the constant repetition becomes monotonous to the
indifferent reader. Miss J. writes:--

    "The next letter from His Grace is dated July 11th, 1835, in which
    he writes--'You are mistaken in thinking that I at all disapprove
    of the independence of character and conduct which I had observed.
    I hope that you may never feel otherwise towards me than in the
    State of Independence to say and write to me whatever your mind may
    suggest.'

    "In his letter of July 18th the Duke writes--'I thank you for your
    Letter received this morning. What I meant by reflection was not to
    call your attention to anything particularly passing in the world,
    but to the impressions made upon your own mind by any circumstance
    you might have observed.----You will tell me that God will direct
    you. So He will. But He has given us a Mind, the power of comparing
    and reflecting, of deciding what is true and what is false and He
    requires us to exercise our judgment in Matters on which He has
    given us the capability of forming judgment. You'll tell me that I
    am acting your part and teaching you instead of attending to you.
    But I beg you observe it is only in explanation of what I wrote to
    you in a former letter upon the subject of your change of opinion
    respecting an individual at Ramsgate.'

    "The Duke here refers to a Preacher who had spoken in the open air
    at Ramsgate of whom I had previously written."

    "The Duke's next letter implies that he understood I was about to
    return to Town, inducing him to express an intention of calling on
    me but such was not the will of The Lord of Lords, therefore I did
    not accede to it, but proceeded expeditiously from Ramsgate to
    Harrowgate. Here His Grace's letters followed me."


      LONDON, July 24th, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I received your Letter by the Post written on
      Wednesday; and have this day received that written in London to
      inform me that you was about to go to Harrowgate. I am much
      obliged to you for both.

      It is true that I am in the habit of writing Answers to all
      Letters. But I feel great satisfaction in writing to some; to
      those in particular from whom I am desirous of receiving Letters;
      and who express a Desire to hear from me.

      I am very glad that you corrected your first Impressions
      respecting your Preacher. I believe that we cannot too frequently
      pass in review our opinions upon what passes before us. We shall
      find ourselves frequently in Error.

      I sincerely hope that the Waters of Harrowgate, may have the
      effect of restoring Your Health entirely. Believe me Ever Yours
      most sincerely

      W.


      LONDON, August 3, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your letter of the 31st and I
      am really much concerned to learn that I have again created a
      feeling of displeasure in your Mind by having omitted to notice
      the Inconvenience which you felt upon your Journey to Harrowgate.

      There is always Inconvenience in travelling in a Stage Coach. It
      cannot be otherwise. Indeed it is wonderful that there should be
      so little; and I must observe that there is less of a physical
      and personal Nature in travelling in this Manner in England than
      elsewhere. The Inconvenience felt in England is of a moral and
      mental description. It is formed of the trash and nonsense which
      a traveller is condemned to hear in these vehicles; because every
      body talks; and says not what he thinks but what the fancy of the
      Moment suggests. For this which was the particular Inconvenience
      which you suffered upon this Journey, there is no remedy, but
      _Patience;_ and I would add _Silence_.

      You would practice neither. You would not sit _patiently_ and
      hear the stupid Irreligion of the Talker; you would reply to Him;
      and this occasioned much of the Annoyance which occurred.

      I find that I am again taking your part, instead of my own. I do
      so in my own satisfaction. If you are not satisfied with my
      observations, you will at least perceive that I had read, nay
      more reflected upon your Letter and the account you gave of
      yourself.

      But why should you torment yourself by thinking that I did not
      read, and did not care for what you represented that you
      suffered. You must be aware that you are mistaken! Believe me
      Ever Yours most sincerely

      W.


    "I presume from the Duke's next letter that I had given him a
    description of my interview and acquaintance with Major and Mrs. P.
    as he therein writes--'I am very happy that you have again seen
    Major and Mrs. P. I don't wonder that they should have been
    desirous of finding you.'

    "In his next, dated the 4th, he writes--'I hope, indeed I am
    certain that you will not cease to write to me what you feel and
    that you will excuse me if I sometimes venture to act your part
    although not exactly in your department. I came down to the house
    of Lords directly after the Post arrived and I am writing to you
    from thence.' Judging by the next letter, dated August 6th, I had
    made some enquiry concerning Major P. as the Duke replies thus, 'I
    don't recollect Major P. But as nearly every officer in the Army
    who has served has served with me I don't doubt that he has. Ask
    him in what regiment he served.'"


      LONDON, August 7, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I beg pardon again for having omitted to notice
      the personal Inconvenience you suffered in your Journey to and
      your arrival in Harrowgate. I should have thought the impertinent
      Blasphemy of the Travellers in the Stage Coach would have annoyed
      you more than any personal inconvenience.

      I see no chance of my quitting London; or of having one moment's
      respite from Business. I passed twelve Hours yesterday; and I am
      going to pass twelve Hours this day in the House of Peers. I hope
      therefore that I shall see you even though your stay in
      Harrowgate should be prolonged more than you expect.

      Believe me Ever Yours most sincerely

      W.


This, with the other letters given entire, is copied from the original
MS. in the Duke's handwriting. Miss J. quotes only a line from the
above, and goes on to one written the next day:--

    "In that dated the 8th of August the Duke writes 'I don't consider
    with you that it is necessary to enter into a disputation with
    every wandering Blasphemer--much must depend upon the
    circumstances. But I must say that the Meekness of the Christian is
    better displayed by silence on such an occasion, and more good is
    done by contempt than by any disputation. However I may be wrong
    and you right and I only suggest my own opinion.'

    "In the Duke's letter dated August 8th he alludes kindly to my
    health, adding 'I am very much flattered by your letters but I hope
    that you will not think it necessary to write when it will produce
    pain or uneasiness to make such an exertion. As long as your
    silence will not be attributed to your being offended at anything I
    may have done or written, or may have omitted I shall regret it as
    it will prove to me that you are indisposed but I shall not feel
    that you are displeased.' By the Duke's next letter, dated August
    12th, I presume I had referred to his time being so much occupied
    as he in reply writes 'It is true that I am very much occupied, and
    cannot tell when I shall be less so. But I am at all times happy to
    hear from you and to write you an answer in return.'

    "In the Duke's little lecturing letter of the 13th of August he
    writes; 'I beg you not to hesitate about writing to me whenever it
    can be agreeable to you. I am not capable of answering you and
    quoting Chapter and verse in support of my answer but I take from
    your own letter a word which I think supports my opinion, "Charity
    beareth all things." You will quote much to show that you ought to
    enter the lists upon every occasion that offers or rather that is
    intruded upon you, etc, etc, etc. You see that I am fast taking
    your part from you.'

    "O that you could! for it was my desire that the Duke should become
    a Paul in his generation, sitting at his feet accordingly.

    "In the Duke's letter of the 14th of August he writes--'My
    attendance in the House of Lords is not at this moment so constant
    as it was some days ago. Yet its business occupies much of my time
    in the morning but I have some for other purposes.'

    "By the Duke's letter of the 17th I must have assured him of my
    intention to return to Town--for he writes--'I shall not have left
    London when you will return and I will certainly call upon you as
    soon as I shall have heard where you will be. I shall still be as I
    am now, much occupied with the Business of Parliament but I don't
    doubt that I shall be able to find a moment to call upon you either
    in the morning or the evening.'

    "In the Duke's letter of the 18th he kindly advises me not to
    travel at night fearing it may prove injurious adding 'I have more
    experience than most persons in travelling.'

    "In the Duke's letter of August 19th he writes as follows--'I write
    to you constantly in return for your letters and I find time to do
    so without inconvenience, but I am afraid that I shall not be able
    to go to see you with so much fidelity. A visit takes time, to
    write a letter is an affair of a few minutes. I am never in Town
    excepting during the sitting of Parliament and then only when there
    is much business to be transacted which occupies my whole time.'

    "By the Duke's of the 20th I must have complained of the
    worldliness, etc. around me for he writes after remarking thereon;
    'But if you should recover your health there you must not mind the
    annoyance of the irregularities of what is called the Company.' The
    Duke kindly says in his next, dated August 21st, 'I hope you are
    not coming away sooner than is good for you.'

    "In the Duke's next letter of the 22nd of August he writes--'I
    shall expect to hear from you when you will arrive and will be
    settled in London and I will pay you a visit as soon afterwards as
    it will be in my power.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated August 26th, implying he
    proposed calling when in his power, but adds 'You arrive at a
    moment in which I am much occupied. You are at some distance from
    hence; and I don't think that from nine in the morning till 12 at
    night I could easily find half an hour which I can call my own and
    at my disposition.'

    "In the Duke's letter of the 27th he writes; 'I will endeavor to
    call upon you this day before three. I cannot afterwards. If I
    should call when you don't expect me I will send up that I am the
    Gentleman to whom you wrote; unless I should previously hear from
    you that I may mention my Name.'

    "Which of course I did not allow, as it was not my desire to be
    noticed in the neighborhood, shrinking from it then, as I do now,
    when it can be avoided. I recollect the Duke's visit well for he
    had to wait until I was dressed by dear Mrs. L. who was in the
    house at the time, as usual, for I think he came earlier than I had
    expected. Consequently in his next of the 29th he writes; 'I don't
    see why you are to take the trouble of dressing to receive me. But
    that is your own affair. If you should do so I can wait with
    Patience.'

    "This was very pretty in His Grace, but as my dress was always very
    simple, it did not require any great exercise of that virtue.

    "By the Duke's next letter of Sept. 1st I fear another letter is
    missing as he writes therein 'Mine of yesterday morning will have
    informed you that I was obliged to attend the King at Windsor on
    Saturday and a part of His family at Kew on Sunday.--I did not say
    that _all_ my time was passed in the House of Lords. Much of it is
    certainly passed out of the House, but a great part of it is passed
    in receiving and talking to the Hundreds, I may say, of the persons
    who have business in the House and come to converse on the business
    with me.'

    "In the Duke's next letter of Sept. 4th he writes; 'I received this
    morning your letter of yesterday, but have not received the Tract
    that you mention. It is possibly too heavy for the 2nd Post.'

    "Perhaps this was the case, as I do not recollect hearing any more
    of it. The next letter from His Grace is dated the same, Sept. 4th,
    Noon, in which he writes; 'I will endeavor to fix and let you know
    the time in which I can wait upon you again.'

    "The Duke's next is dated Sept. 5th, in which he writes; 'I was in
    the House of Lords from 5 in the evening till two this morning. I
    am much obliged to you for the Tract which I will return as soon as
    I shall have perused it.' I presume this must have been a little
    book entitled The Joy of Israel as I only _lent_ that to people,
    its having been a Gift, for it is still in my possession. In the
    Duke's next, dated Sept. 7th, the Duke writes--'I have received
    your letter written on Saturday for which I return you many thanks.
    I am very sorry that I am so much occupied as to be unable to make
    my acknowledgments in person.'

    "The Duke's next letter of Sept. 9th acknowledges one from me
    wherein I presume I have shown submission to the Divine will
    concerning the difficulty attending his visits for he writes;

    "'This could not be otherwise. In the mean time be assured that I
    am anxious to have the pleasure and benefit of conversing with you
    as often as it may be in my power to see you.'"

A few passages taken from Miss J.'s Diary at this time are interesting
as displaying the intimate friendship that at this period existed
between her and the Duke. On the 6th of September she writes:--

    "I have been here (in London,) nearly a fortnight, yet have seen
    the Duke only twice, but receive letters daily,--and last night a
    particularly kind one. I have been expecting him, but he comes not,
    being so occupied with his Parliamentary business. What can I say
    to such things but this,--'Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
    right?' and, 'Has HE not a right to do what HE will with His own?'

    "_September 10th._ I wrote to the Duke to-day and hope the Lord
    will permit him to receive and answer it kindly. The Subject on
    which I addressed him was on Christ becoming sin for us and bearing
    the wrath of the Father. O Lord, I pray Thee, have mercy upon his
    precious soul!

    "_September 14th._ I shall have been here three weeks to morrow,
    during which I have seen the Duke four times, and will just allude
    to the subjects introduced during each visit.

    "The first brought with it remarks on TRUE Nobility, obliging me to
    declare it is to be found only in _Christ_ and _His Righteousness_
    in man. I mentioned what St. Paul said when contrasting the Bereans
    with the Thessalonians, namely, 'These were more NOBLE than those
    _in Thessalonica in that they received the word with all readiness_
    of mind, and _searched the Scriptures_ DAILY, _whether these things
    were so_.'

    "During the second visit, I read to him the 49th Psalm and
    particularly called his attention to the last verse thereof thus
    written--'Man that is in honour and understandeth not, is like the
    beasts that perish,' reminding him they were GOD'S _Words_.

    "During his third visit I told him I should like to be hated of all
    men for Christ's sake! and during his fourth and last that he did
    not believe Christ to be The Son of God! since which I have written
    to him daily and the first reply I receive is one calculated to
    produce another check to my feelings, all of which I give up
    entirely to the Lord, imploring Him to govern and actuate them just
    as HE sees His own honor and glory require, causing me to make
    nothing a consideration in comparison therewith."

One can hardly imagine the Iron Duke, the conqueror of Napoleon, the
representative of the nation in foreign councils, the ex-Prime
Minister, the man upon whom his country delighted to heap honors,
hearkening meekly to these homilies from pretty lips upon what
constituted true nobility. It is impossible to believe that his secret
feelings were not those of amusement, however respectful his outward
semblance. Nor is there much room for question as to whether he would
have listened with as commendable patience had his lecturer been a man
or a plain-faced woman advanced in years.




CHAPTER V.

FRESH DIFFICULTIES.


In spite of the harmonious relations existing between this curious pair
of friends, another storm was brewing. The basis of this was a
ridiculously slight matter. Miss J. was a stickler for all forms of
deference, and carried this weakness to the verge of absurdity. Upon
this was founded the quarrel. On the same day with the last entries
given from her Diary one finds the following:--

    "This morning I received the first letter from the Duke since his
    departure from Town,--and felt surprised at the alteration in the
    Seal,--_being plain!_ and unlike any other before received, which I
    consequently acknowledged with the feeling that a want of apparent
    respect where the _deepest_ is merited ought to call forth ... My
    feelings were I not afraid of offending God would incline me to
    seal up all the Duke's letters and return them, conscious that I
    merit an increase rather than a diminution of respect. Except such
    is bestowed the Duke need not be surprised at any step The Lord may
    incline me to take."

One may be pardoned for the suspicion that the feelings attributed to
the Lord were in fact derived from quite another source. The next day
she continues to harp on the same subject:--

    "_September 15th._ I rose this morning with the determination to
    write to the Duke, and did so before breakfast, when I took it to
    the Post Office myself, leaving the result with Him Who doeth all
    things well and leaveth nothing after Him."

A copy of the letter is appended:--


      Sept. 15th, 1835.

      MY DEAR DUKE,--As you only acknowledge in yours of the 13th, two
      letters, I beg to say there were addressed to you by yesterday,
      three; One, written on Thursday, another on Friday and the last
      on Saturday. And I take this opportunity of making two enquiries
      respecting which my mind is not at all satisfied.

      The first is; Why I am to receive a change of style in the
      appearance of your letters with regard to the Seal thereof? and
      the next, _called forth thereby_; _Why_ you _ever_ ceased to sign
      your _Name_ at the conclusion of your letters? If either of these
      changes sprang from disrespect or want of confidence in my
      integrity, confidence, Christianity and friendship, I shall
      without hesitation or delay return Your Grace every letter I have
      in my possession, as in _that_ case they will cease to have any
      value in _my_ estimation. I will also beg to decline all further
      intercourse, knowing that the sincerity and purity of my
      friendship merits both consideration and respect.

      You will perhaps wonder at my noticing your omission with regard
      to Signature after the receipt of so many letters. I should not
      have done so, however incomprehensible the same may have been and
      _was_ to me, had not _this additional_ circumstance tended to
      _strengthen_ a momentary feeling experienced when your first
      letter signed W. reached me. But this I overcame, fancying you
      were in the _habit_ of doing so to all your correspondents of any
      and every rank, and imagining you superior to the _capability_ of
      taking advantage of circumstances. If I am mistaken with regard
      to this being a _general habit_, I am _justified_ in asking--Why
      such an unwarrantable liberty was taken with me? I assure you
      that however great my affection may be, it is not of a nature to
      submit to ANY feeling that is not accompanied with the _deepest
      respect_ as well as esteem, nor could the latter be either
      durable or _acceptable_ under OTHER circumstances.

      Waiting your reply before I can decide what further line of
      conduct to pursue, praying in the mean time to be directed BY HIM
      Who knows _all_ the _secret_, hidden motives of the human heart
      without exception, I inscribe myself,

      Your sincere Christian friend,

      A. J.

      P.S. Since writing the above, my antipathy to the omission of
      _either_ your NAME OR seal is so _increased_ that I beg to
      decline receiving _any_ letter which does not bring with it
      _these_ marks of DUE respect.


Not satisfied with sending off this letter, Miss J. followed it with
another no less severe. In her Diary she describes the feelings that
swayed her while she awaited a reply to her missives:

    "_September 16th--Morning._ I have risen this morning (my first in
    this place--Hampstead--) strong in The Lord and in the power of His
    might. I am prepared to meet whatever HE may see fit, casting my
    burthen wholly on him and desirous of nothing in comparison with
    His honor and glory. O may He be magnified powerfully both in my
    life and death, and may every period of my remaining days be
    dedicated more devotedly unto Him than any hitherto spent; 'growing
    up in Him as a tree planted by the waterside' bringing forth fruit
    plentifully, knowing that 'it is written' 'He that abideth in ME
    and I in him the same bringeth forth much fruit,'--Be with me
    graciously and mightily when I hear from the Duke today--if I
    do--and especially tomorrow when the reply comes to that sent off
    yesterday, strengthening me 'in the inner man' to treat it as Thou
    wouldst have me do in every respect, having no will of my own and
    loving Thine above all things. Thou knowest, O Gracious God, what
    is in the Duke's heart, and why he has recourse to the ways which
    have occasioned my displeasure. Therefore I give him up into Thy
    Hands to deal with accordingly, beseeching Thee to have mercy on
    his precious Soul, bringing it from darkness to light and from the
    power of Satan unto Thyself for Christ's sake!

    "_September 16th 1835.--Evening._ The whole of this day has been
    marked with such divine strength from Him Who causes me to feel the
    force of this passage of Holy Writ 'When I am weak then am I
    strong,' that it is impossible to be sufficiently thankful. No
    letter has arrived from the Duke. However I suppose tomorrow will
    bring with it the anticipated answer. O may I be strengthened
    additionally to bear it if unkind! and prove myself ready to pluck
    out a right eye or cut off a right arm for Christ's sake! which we
    may be understood to do when we resign those dearest upon earth at
    His command.

    "_Friday September 18th 1835._ It is now between 11 and 12 o'clock
    and I am sitting at my pretty window with it open, waiting to know
    whether the Lord sees fit to allow me to receive a letter today
    from the Duke in reply to my two last which have received no
    answers yet. O may I be strengthened 'in the inner man' to receive
    whatever is agreeable to the will of God, as His Child, dependent
    on Him for all things!

    "The paragraph noticed in the paper of yesterday was marked with
    that presumption which is ever more or less perceivable in 'the
    natural man,' who seems to act without any reference to the will of
    God whatever, declaring 'I will do this and that,' instead of
    remembering that their lives are in His Hands and that He can
    snatch them away at any moment. To see the Duke thus presumptuously
    reckoning on several weeks to come proves how little what I have
    written on that subject is alluded to, showing me still further the
    inefficacy of all man's endeavors until accompanied with the mighty
    power of God to the soul. The time I trust is at hand for this
    rebellious one when he will doubtlessly exclaim 'Thy mercies are
    infinite and Thy ways past finding out,' also 'Lord, what is man
    that Thou art mindful of him? or the son of man that Thou visitest
    him?'"

The Duke's replies to both Miss J.'s effusions followed one another in
rapid succession:--


      STRATHFIELDSAYE, Sept. 17, 1835.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I always understood that the important parts of
      a Letter were its Contents. I never much considered the
      Signature; provided I knew the handwriting; or the Seal provided
      it effectually closed the Letter.

      When I write to a Person with whom I am intimate, who knows my
      handwriting I generally sign my Initials. I don't always seal my
      own Letters; they are sometimes sealed by a Secretary, oftener by
      myself.

      In any Case as there are generally very many to be sealed; and
      the Seal frequently becomes heated, it is necessary to change it;
      and by accident I may have sealed a Letter to you with a blank
      Seal. But it is very extraordinary if it is so, as I don't
      believe I have such a thing! You will find this Letter however
      signed and sealed in what you deem the most respectful manner.
      And if I should write to you any more; I will take care that they
      shall be properly signed and sealed to your Satisfaction.

      I am very glad to learn that you intend to send back all the
      letters I ever wrote to you. I told you heretofore that I thought
      you had better burn them all. But if you think proper to send
      them in a parcel to my House; I will save you the trouble of
      committing them to the Flames.

      Believe me Ever Yours most sincerely

      WELLINGTON.

      I believe that the letter with the blank seal and signed with my
      Initials was sent off last Sunday night from Hartford Bridge and
      was franked by me; I hope that this was not deemed disrespectful.


      STRATHFIELDSAYE, Sept. 18, 1835.

      The Duke of Wellington presents his Compliments to Miss J. The
      Duke wrote an answer to Miss J. as soon as he received her Letter
      complaining of Disrespect in His having been in the habit of
      signing the Initials of His Name to the Letters which he had
      written to her; and in having sealed a letter addressed to her
      and franked by the Duke, with a plain seal.

      If Miss J. had waited till she would receive the answer to a
      letter which she wrote on Tuesday she might have been satisfied
      with the reasons of the Duke for the Marks of Disrespect of which
      Miss J. complained.

      The Duke has to add that since his return here, he has found upon
      His Table, a plain seal which it is probable was used by
      accident. He apologizes for having used it. At the same time he
      assures Miss J. that he could not have intended to be
      disrespectful.

      The Duke requests that Miss J. will be so kind as to have a
      parcel made of the Letters from the Duke; that she will direct it
      to Him in Piccadilly; and have it booked at Hampstead and sent by
      any Coach to London.


Miss J. resolved to lose no time in returning the Duke's letters, and
went so far as to put them up in a parcel preparatory to sending them
off by coach. She thus comments:--

    "In returning the parcel I send away 60 letters, received in less
    than 12 months.

    "_Saturday, Sept. 19, 1835._ I have been to the Post Office with my
    last letter to the Duke and leave the result thereof with the Lord,
    'Whose ways are in the deep waters and whose footsteps are
    unknown'. I have acknowledged myself thankful for the strength
    still imparted--thus fulfilling that gracious promise made to me
    when on my knees before I came to this place 'I will never leave
    thee nor forsake thee.' I have just risen from my knees, after
    spreading the Duke's letters before the Lord, beseeching Him to do
    under present circumstances whatever seemeth good in His sight for
    Christ's sake. And I feel, as a prayer-hearing God He will--causing
    even this unkindness to work together for good, since 'His ways are
    not our ways' but as high above such as the heavens are above the
    earth--That He moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform,
    who can doubt that watches His divine finger in this great work?
    And since His purposes must stand, all I have to say is, Let them
    be whatever they may, I desire His Holy Will alone to be done!

    "My feelings will not allow me to copy this letter of the Duke's;
    it is so unkind; but as those words were powerfully applied at the
    commencement of my correspondence, 'The haughtiness of man shall be
    brought low etc. and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.'"

Apparently it was not the will of "The Lord" that the letters should be
returned, for Providence interposed in the shape of Miss J.'s friend,
Mrs. L. Miss J. writes:--

    "_Saturday Night._ Just as my day had been filled with all the
    duties my God had graciously permitted and I was about to take a
    walk, dear Mrs. L. arrived, and on my telling her all strongly
    advised my _not_ returning the Duke his letters--which struck me
    forcibly, as I had asked the Lord to put it into her heart to
    advise me agreeably to His will.

    "On my return home I found a note from the Duke addressed to me in
    the third person, like the last, but thanking me for the trouble I
    had taken respecting his Men's Book Bill. Thank God my feelings are
    so subdued as to be resigned to His divine Will concerning seeing
    or hearing from him, and I heartily pray to be directed in every
    single particular, knowing if left to myself I cannot stand a
    moment in safety.

    "The Duke seems more indifferent respecting the return of his
    letters--consequently as dearest Mrs. L. so strongly advised my
    retaining them I mean to do so without noticing that formal note
    received to night, leaving everything as it stands in the Lord's
    Hands. Having cast my burthen upon the Lord all I now have to do is
    to dedicate my time more exclusively to my usual daily duties as
    before intended, endeavoring to recall perfectly to memory all my
    hymns--360--and the Gospels of St. Matthew and John, with my
    beautiful Psalms--which latter have been neglected more than either
    of the former, although none have been allowed so much time as if I
    had not been so occupied with the Duke.

    "_Sept. 22nd._ My disinclination to write to the Duke continues. O
    may the Lord bless him by quickening his dead soul and call him
    forth to glorify Him mightily for Christ's sake!

    "_Oct. 1st, 1835._ How wonderful are the dealings of God. Last
    night I came home fully determined to write and send off a letter
    to the Duke and this morning, although it is ready for the Post
    Office, I am restrained from forwarding it. Therefore I keep it
    until I see why my mind is acted upon thus, feeling 'it is the
    Lord.' I knelt upon the bed in the night and implored Him to let
    His honor and glory alone be considered, and before I rose this
    morning, on again calling upon Him to direct me these words seemed
    to follow--'Be still and know that I am God, I will be exalted in
    the heavens, I will be exalted in the earth.' So, as this is the
    case, it is my duty quietly and patiently to submit to the way He
    may condescendingly choose for that glorious purpose. In the mean
    time, in order to satisfy my feelings towards the poor dear Duke I
    can indulge in writing them at all events and thereby proving it is
    no want of feeling or friendship for him that keeps me silent, but
    the consideration due to ONE as far above Himself not only _in
    reality_ but I trust through the Grace of God in _my_ estimation
    also as the heavens are above the earth. Nor would I resign one of
    His gracious glorious smiles to become the Empress of a million
    worlds, even were my loved precious Duke the chosen individual to
    participate in such honors.

    "Perhaps the Duke's conversion is at hand! Lord, if this be the
    case permit me through Thy Power and Grace to become the source of
    deep spiritual consolation to his precious soul, by being unto me a
    mouth and wisdom which all my adversaries shall not be able to
    gainsay or resist 'for without Thee I can do nothing!'"


      MY LORD DUKE,--Judging from your silence to my last that all
      communication between us is about to cease, having written the
      accompanying Hymn for your acceptance, I take this opportunity of
      bidding you Farewell! being enabled through God's Grace which is
      all sufficient! to exclaim in _Scripture_ language, "THE LORD
      GAVE and The Lord hath taken away _and_ BLESSED BE THE NAME OF
      THE LORD!" That HE brought you to me in the _first_ place I feel
      convinced and heartily hope that I have omitted no faithful
      Christian duty towards you consistent with my "high calling in
      Christ Jesus," _consequently_ shall not have cause to reproach
      myself of neglect when _that_ AWFUL period arrives which MUST
      bring us once more together, however separated on _earth_ by His
      ALL WISE _decrees_, "Whose paths are in the deep waters and Whose
      footsteps are not known,"--and Who knoweth FAR _better_ what is
      GOOD for us than we do for _ourselves_. Consequently it is our
      duty, and doubtless for our future and eventual happiness under
      any and all circumstances, however trying and painful such may
      be, to say THY will, O GOD, NOT MINE BE DONE! Trusting that you
      will not suppose any unkind feelings are experienced towards you
      by such DUE resignation to the Divine will or conclude that my
      future silence renders me forgetful of you _when kneeling_ before
      Him "Whose eyes are in EVERY place _beholding_ the evil and the
      good," with Whom the darkness is no darkness at all but the night
      is as clear as the day, I subscribe myself with much serenity as
      in His sight Ever My Lord Duke.

      Your faithful Christian Friend,

      A. J.

    The hymn enclosed is entitled--

      THE SHORTNESS OF TIME AND FRAILTY OF MAN.

      ALMIGHTY _Maker_ of my frame!
      TEACH ME _the number of my days_!
      TEACH ME _to know how_ FRAIL _I am_
      AND SPEND THE REMNANT TO THY PRAISE.

      My days are shorter than a span,
      A little point my life appears;
      How FRAIL at best is DYING MAN;
      HOW VAIN are ALL _his hopes and fears_!

      _VAIN his_ AMBITION, NOISE and SHOW!
      VAIN are the cares Which rack his mind!
      _He heaps up treasures_ MIXED WITH WOE
      And dies, and leaves them all behind!

      Oh be a _NOBLER portion MINE_!
      _MY GOD_ I bow before Thy Throne;
      Earth's _fleeting_ treasures I resign
      And fix my hopes on THEE _ALONE_!

    "I have underlined all just as forwarded to the Duke."

The next letter from the Duke that has been preserved is dated October
5, and contains a reference to a later note from Miss J.:--


      WALMER CASTLE, October 5, 1835.

      The Duke of Wellington presents his Compt^s to Miss J. He has
      only this morning received her letter without date; in which Miss
      J. apprizes the Duke that she is about to quit Hampstead; but she
      does not state where she is about to reside.

      In respect to Miss J.'s wish that the Duke should write to Her,
      the Duke assures her that he will receive Her Letters with
      pleasure; and that he will answer them regularly. But that he
      must be permitted to do so, in a form, which shall not expose him
      to the accusation of treating a Lady with disrespect.

      From the perusal of Miss J.'s Letter the Duke does not exactly
      understand whether Miss J. did or did not send back the Paquet
      containing the Duke's Letters to her. As the Duke stated upon a
      former occasion, it is a matter of Indifference whether Miss J.
      has burnt the Letters; or kept them; or sent them back.

      The Duke begs leave to inform her however that if she sent them
      back he has not yet received them. They may however be in His
      House in London as he has been absent from there since the 19th
      of last Month.


In Miss J.'s next letter she inquires into the truth of a report of the
Duke's indisposition that has appeared in the papers. The reply is
decidedly testy.


      WALMER CASTLE, Nov^r 3, 1835.

      The Duke of Wellington presents his Compliments to Miss J.

      He received only this morning Miss J.'s Letters of the 28^th and
      31^st October.

      The Duke returns his thanks to Miss J. for her kind Enquiries
      about His Health. The Duke was unwell for one day; of which the
      Newspapers obtained Intelligence; and as usual misrepresented and
      exaggerated the facts.

      The Duke is much concerned that Miss J. is not satisfied with the
      formal style of His Notes. She was not satisfied when he wrote to
      her in a form more consistent with familiarity. Such form was
      considered disrespectful.

      The Duke assures Miss J. that he can reply to any letter which
      she may think proper to address the Duke as fully in one form as
      the other.


The poor Duke's life was frequently made a burden to him by the
comments expressed by the papers upon his health and his conduct. His
letters abound in impatient references to the inaccuracies of the daily
journals in all that pertained to himself. These finally irritated him
to such an extent that, against the advice of wise friends, he sued the
"Morning Journal" for libel, and succeeded in obtaining the punishment
of the editor and printer by fines and imprisonment. His course in this
matter was deprecated by those who thought that a man of his
acknowledged character and position could afford to disregard such
attacks.

Apparently after this time matters returned to their former state, in
so far as the frequency of the letters was concerned, although the
formal mode of address was still retained, greatly to Miss J.'s
dissatisfaction. She continues in her Diary the account of the Duke's
letters:

    "In the Duke's next letter of the 6th of November written in the
    third person since I wrote to him concerning that plain seal he
    writes; 'The considerations urged by Miss J. with her usual
    facility and eloquence are for all times and seasons.'

    "Thus graciously did he usually receive my letters on religious
    subjects, which under circumstances of illness were doubtlessly
    additionally earnest.

    "In the next of November 6th His Grace writes thus; 'The Duke
    assures her that he feels the deepest interest in everything that
    Miss J. writes to him.' The next from the Duke is dated November
    10th wherein he writes; 'The Duke will have great pleasure in
    attending Miss J. when he will be in London if she will permit him
    and will let him know where she resides.'

    "In the Duke's next letter of Nov. 11th he writes in allusion to
    me; 'She is so kind to the Duke; and she writes to him with so much
    earnestness and feeling that it is impossible that he should not be
    impressed with a deep sense of His obligation to her for taking so
    much trouble.'

    "In his next of the 12th of November he returns me many thanks for
    my letters.

    "By the next letter I presume some inconvenience attended my
    receiving the Duke as he writes--'It appears that for some reason
    with which Miss J. states it to be her intention at some future
    time to acquaint the Duke--it will not be in Miss J.'s power to
    receive the Duke.'

    "Another letter dated the 16th of November, as was the above,
    refers to my dating my letters on the outside. He writes 'Franks
    are dated on the outside because the Law requires the use of that
    form.'

    "What I had written to call it forth I cannot remember but the Duke
    in his next of the 16th of November says 'he has no pretension to
    superiority,' reminding me of a circumstance which took place at
    the commencement of our acquaintance when I told him that his being
    the Duke of Wellington was nothing to me--leading him to reply 'I
    know it, I know it and I respect you for it.'

    "Judging by the Duke's next letter of the 16th (being the second of
    that date) I had formed the wish to have a letter of mine
    returned--which letter I found with all others had been destroyed.
    The Duke encloses the succeeding one."


      MY LORD DUKE,--I once more take up pen, but in all probability
      for the last time, if I rightly understand you to mean you are
      capable of receiving my letters in _silence_, to which I decline
      subjecting myself. I consider a reply and a very different one to
      those _lately_ received due to me in the sight of _That God_ Who
      _created_ such an interest in your eternal happiness and I am
      very much mistaken if he does not make you feel the power of this
      impression by exercising His ALMIGHTY _power_ in some unforeseen
      manner.

      The information that you have destroyed my letters is _any
      thing_ but gratifying; one and all being more or less marked
      with _Divine_ Truth, calculated if properly and _seriously_
      considered, to benefit your _immortal Soul_. Nor should I imagine
      myself _justified_ in spending my time in _future_ by penning
      such to have them committed to the flames. Therefore I shall
      decline troubling you with a repetition of this kind, until you
      consider them sufficiently valuable to retain instead of destroy.
      In the mean time I shall occupy myself with any other work my
      Heavenly Father may condescendingly point out; it being of very
      little consequence to me how I am employed so that it is under
      _His direction_ and in HIS _Service_....

      I remain, My Lord Duke, so long as God permits.

      Your faithful Christian Friend.

      A. J.


    "The Duke's next letter is dated Dec. the third followed by one of
    the 8th which implies I wrote to the Duke on the death of the
    Countess of S., as he writes 'It is true that a near relation of
    the Duke's has died a terrible death.'

    "By the Duke's letter of the 11th of December I presume I continued
    displeased at his having burnt my letters,--a truth elicited
    through wishing one of them returned, which consequently it was not
    in his power to do--considering as I told him that it was a sin in
    the sight of God to destroy Epistles intended for his everlasting
    good."

The Duke's reply to this is given in full:--


      STRATHFIELDSAYE, Dec^r 15, 1835.

      The Duke of Wellington presents his Comp^ts to Miss J. He has
      only this day received her Letter commenced on Saturday and
      finished on Monday. He is much concerned to learn that Miss J.
      has been indisposed; and he hopes that she will have been
      relieved by attending to the Advice of the Medical Gentleman for
      whom she had sent.

      Nothing will be more satisfactory to the Duke than to put an end
      to all Dissension upon bygone subjects. He has no feeling upon
      any of them excepting a desire to avoid to give occasion
      unknowingly and unwillingly for irritation.

      The Duke is much obliged to Miss J. for her Letter. He does not
      entirely concur in all the opinions contained in that Letter. He
      assures her however that he has perused it as he Does all those
      received from her, with attention. He will state his objections
      at some future time.

      It is quite impossible for the Duke to keep Miss J.'s letters.
      They are in general long; and they succeed each other rapidly. If
      the Duke was to keep them, they might be seen by others. He
      therefore destroys them as soon as he has read, and perfectly
      understands them.


This explanation evidently soothed Miss J.'s ruffled feelings, for she
makes no further reference at this time to the "Dissension." The Diary
continues:--

    "The Duke's next letter expresses concern at my illness, dated Dec.
    21, 1835.

    "The Duke's next letter of the 24th of Dec. implies my account of
    my health was not satisfactory--which I suppose must have been
    justifiable as I was then so seriously ill.

    "Another letter dated the 26th of December kindly expresses anxiety
    concerning my health also one of the 31st of December.

    "Letters received from the Duke during the year 1835,
    SEVENTY-EIGHT."

    "1836.--The first letter of this year is dated Jan. 2nd wherein the
    Duke writes 'The Duke is very sensible of the kindness which
    induces Miss J. to write to him. He would have wished to receive
    from her some account of Her Health as well as her opinion upon
    other matters, however important. The Duke will certainly request
    Miss J.'s permission to pay His Respects to her when he will return
    to Town.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Jan. 19th, in which he writes--'On
    his passage through London he has received her letter of the 11th
    Inst. He sincerely rejoices at and congratulates Miss J. upon the
    progress which she has made in the recovery of her health.'

    "I see this is a mistake as the Duke's next letter is dated Jan.
    7th in which he thanks me for my account of my health and the next
    is dated Jan 13th wherein he writes thus; 'He will wait upon her
    after having notified His intention and received her permission
    when he will be in London. He rejoices at the improved state of
    Miss J.'s health.'

    "'Feb. 3rd he regrets much to learn that she has been again
    indisposed.'

    "In the Duke's letter of Feb. 19th he writes; 'He returns his
    thanks for her note of the 17th received this morning and the
    printed Enclosures.' What these printed enclosures were I do not
    now remember but presume they were a tract and handbills.

    "In his next dated the 25th of February he writes; 'He returns his
    thanks for her letter, and he is very happy to hear that Miss J. is
    sufficiently recovered to be able to quit her room and go down
    stairs.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated March 9th 1836, he writes--'The
    Duke has been out of Town for some time so therefore he did not
    receive her first note till last night, and this day the second
    which Miss J. has written to him, enclosing printed tracts; and the
    latter some Manuscript Lines. The Duke begs leave to return his
    thanks.'

    "Again on the 12th of March the Duke writes 'He has received her
    note and the Tract on one leaf; for which he returns his thanks.'
    Again on the 19th of March the Duke writes--'The Duke of Wellington
    presents his Compliments to Miss J. and returns his thanks for the
    Tract and other papers received from her.'

    "The Duke's next letter likewise acknowledges--'His thanks for her
    letter of the 20th and its Enclosures.' To which he adds--'The Duke
    is happy to learn that Miss J. is sufficiently recovered to be able
    to walk out.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated, March 25th he writes 'The Duke of
    Wellington presents his Compliments to Miss J. and returns thanks
    for her Note and the Tract which she enclosed to him.'

    "Again London, March the 29th, the Duke writes--He 'returns his
    thanks for her letter of Sunday and the enclosures.'

    "The next letter from His Grace is dated April 2nd, 1836, thanking
    me for two letters, one received on Good Friday and the other
    written on Good Friday,--which last, of course, treated on our
    Lord's Sufferings for us sinners, as usual on such occasions.

    "On the 11th of April the Duke again writes 'He has received her
    Note with some Tracts.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated April 12th, 1836, in which
    he returns me, as requested, a letter I had sent for his perusal
    and consideration, addressed to a Minister of the Gospel by my dear
    friend Mrs. L.

    "The Duke's next letter is written on and dated June 18th, 1836.
    'The Duke of Wellington presents his regards to Miss J. and returns
    thanks for her letter and its enclosure. The Duke is happy to learn
    that Miss J. is in good Health. He was apprehensive that she was
    unwell, and had gone out of Town, as so much time had elapsed since
    she had written to the Duke.' I need scarcely remark that this was
    the day on which the Duke gave his yearly Banquet--yet The great
    Lord of Lords compelled him to find time thereon to write to me,
    thus verifying His own Divine declaration, 'Them that honor ME I
    will honor.'"

One wonders where the busy statesman could have found time to read not
only the letters, but the hymns and tracts Miss J. constantly showered
upon him. There seems a tone of resignation, if not actual despair, in
the notes wherein he acknowledges the receipt of this flood of pious
literature.

    "In the Duke's next letter of June 21st he writes--'The Duke of
    Wellington presents his Compliments to Miss J. and he acknowledges
    the receipt of, and thanks her for her letter of the 19th inst. and
    enclosures. Miss J. does not advert to the state of her health, but
    as she says that she walks in the Park, the Duke hopes that she is
    entirely recovered.'

    "His Grace's letter of June 23rd returns his thanks, adding: 'When
    Miss J. mentions her walks in the park The Duke concludes that she
    means in what is called the Regent's Park, in the neighborhood of
    the Street in which she lives.' Which was the case yet of which
    beautiful Park I knew nothing until dearest Mrs. L. took me into it
    for the benefit of the air, after the illness herein alluded to.

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated June 27th, 1836, in which
    he writes--'Miss J. complains of the change of the style of the
    Duke's letters; although she does not express a wish that the
    former style should be renewed.'

    "I certainly had a great objection to the formality attending the
    Duke's letters when written in the third person, feeling restrained
    in replying to such in like manner."




CHAPTER VI.

COMPARATIVE CALM.


The next letter is copied from the original:


      LONDON, June 28, 1836.

      The Duke of Wellington presents his Comp^s to Miss J. The Duke
      has this morning received her very kind Letter of yesterday for
      which he returns His thanks. The Duke begs leave again to assure
      Miss J. that whatever may be the form in which he writes to her;
      the motive in doing so is the same as ever; and that he is ever
      sensible of and grateful for her kindness.

      The Duke will with the greatest pleasure go to see her whenever
      it may suit Miss J. to receive him.

      The Duke did not say anything upon the Letter which Miss J. had
      written to the Gentleman in question because he was unwilling to
      obtrude His opinion upon a matter which Miss J. considers one of
      Duty; in which the Duke is so unfortunate as to differ in opinion
      with her.

      Prudence and Discretion would appear to require that Miss J.
      should not rebuke a Gentleman for words spoken not to Her; not
      even in Her Presence; but to Her Landlady in the relation of a
      Lodger in the House.

      The Duke may be wrong. But he considers the exercise of Prudence
      and discretion virtues; not unbecoming to any Character however
      exalted.


The Diary continues:--

    "Judging by the contents of the Duke's next letter dated June 29th,
    1836, I presume I had felt from circumstances under the necessity
    of putting aside his proposed visit adverted to in his last, as
    follows 'The Duke will with the greatest pleasure go to see her
    whenever it may suit Miss J. to receive him'--for in this of the
    29th he writes--'I cannot but concur in your decision to postpone
    to receive my visit. Nothing would distress me more than to give
    you any pain. I sincerely hope that your journey to the Country
    will reestablish your health and spirits.'

    "I perceive by this that the Duke had again commenced addressing me
    in the first person.

    "It would appear by the Duke's next, dated July 1st, 1836, that I
    had changed my intention concerning receiving him, as he
    wrote--'Since I wrote you this morning I have had a fall by which I
    have bruised my knee so that Leaches have been applied. I am not
    otherwise hurt but it is quite obvious that I shall not be able to
    wait upon you to-morrow. I hope to be able to do so however at the
    same hour on Monday.' That such was not the will of the Lord of
    lords I now perfectly recollect proving to the Duke that 'The way
    of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walketh to direct
    his steps,' a divine lesson which I was so anxious from time to
    time, as circumstances permitted, to impress on his mind."

The Duke probably had a vivid realization of this truth just at this
juncture, although possibly not in the sense intended by Miss J. She
seems to have been devoid of any sense of humor, and saw nothing but
the spiritual application of this one of her favorite quotations.

    "In the Duke's next, of the 4th of July, he writes; 'I am much
    recovered from the accident under which I suffered on Friday--but I
    am afraid that I shall not be allowed to quit my House this day.
    Indeed I am convinced that I could not do so without increasing the
    risk of being confined to my house for weeks or months. I lament
    this particularly as you are going out of Town early to morrow. I
    am very sensible of your Confidence in attending to my opinion in
    sending your letter to Mr. B.'

    "This was a letter written by me to a Minister of the Gospel whose
    worldliness was justifiably condemned. It is still I believe in my
    possession among my papers, the Duke having received it for perusal
    and at my request returned with advice not to forward it.

    "In the letter dated the 5th the Duke acknowledges a packet from me
    to which he adds 'I continue to improve and hope to go out tomorrow
    or next day.'

    "I presume this was a very thick letter. In that of the 9th of
    July, the Duke writes; 'I am better and I am in hopes that on
    tomorrow I shall be able to put my foot to the ground.'

    "The Duke's next letter is I see directed to me at Hastings, in
    which he writes on July 11th, 1836--'I am so much better that I am
    going to the House of Lords and I hope soon to be able to go about
    without inconvenience' to which the Duke again refers in his next
    thus; 'I continue to recover from the effects of the Accident and I
    hope to be able to go out in a day or two. I am happy to find that
    you are settled at Hastings to your satisfaction.'

    "The next of the 13th of July refers to my letters being
    overweight--apparently, but judging by the letter of the 28th I
    must have been mistaken, as the Duke writes;

    "'You did not send me a letter overweight. But I warned you of the
    necessity of taking care not to do so because I was apprehensive
    that if I should be absent my servants would decline to receive the
    letter.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated July 30th wherein he
    writes; 'I am much better and can walk a little. But my Knee is
    bandaged up; and some time will elapse before I shall have the use
    of it as heretofore.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Aug. 3rd 1836 in which he
    writes 'I am much flattered by the anxiety which you express
    respecting the injury which I received in my knee. I am getting the
    better of it and I hope soon to be quite well.'

    "Alas! it grieves me as I thus proceed, running my eye over so many
    references to God's mercies to observe such were not adverted to by
    the Duke--a subject I did not omit expatiating upon occasionally,
    however reluctant to irritate whilst laboring under indisposition,
    as my Diary will doubtlessly imply.

    "On the 5th of August the Duke writes; 'I am very much obliged to
    you for your letter and flattered by your desire to see me. I am so
    far better as to be able to walk and I can go to see you when you
    will come to Town.'

    "By that of the 8th of Aug. I presume I had made enquiries
    concerning his seal as the Duke writes--'I use black wax to seal my
    letters as a Relation of mine died lately.'"

Immediately after the receipt of the last letter quoted, Miss J. left
Hastings for Tunbridge Wells. The Duke's letters followed her here. She
writes:--

    "The Duke's next letter is directed to Tunbridge Wells, thanking me
    for my letter to him dated Aug. 11th, 1836. In the Duke's next he
    again adverts to his knee thus--'My knee continues to improve and I
    hope to walk as well as ever in a few days.'

    "In the Duke's of Aug. 16th he writes--'I entertain some doubt
    whether a letter which I wrote to you yesterday was sent to the
    Post. If not, I laid it by in one of my writing cases and in the
    uncertainty I think it best to write again. I hope that the waters
    will prove beneficial to your Health and that you will remain at
    Tunbridge as long as it may be necessary that you should drink
    thereof.'

    "In the Duke's letter of the 20th of Aug. he writes--'I have found
    in one of my writing cases the letter which I had omitted to send
    on the day before yesterday. I rejoice to learn that your health
    improves so much at Tunbridge Wells.'

    "The Duke's next letter is directed to me at Brighton wherein he
    writes 'My Knee continues to improve but it has not yet all its
    strength and elasticity, but I hope that it will soon. I am much
    obliged to you for enquiring about it.'

    "Judging by the Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 22nd, I must have
    requested him to send me the letter he had placed in one of his
    writing cases, for he replies--'You will have seen that I had
    destroyed the letter not sent.'

    "In the Duke's next, dated Aug. 31st, the Duke writes--'I received
    in due course a letter which you were so kind as to write to me on
    nineteen sides of paper under three covers.'"

One ceases to wonder at the slowness of the poor man's recovery, under
such circumstances as these.

    "Upon the 6th of September a letter arrived from the Duke in which
    he again refers to his accident as follows--'I am getting better
    every day--but slowly, as is the case with recovery from such
    accidents. I hope however to recover entirely and to be quite
    well.'"

Another cause of offence had been found by Miss J. The Duke's letter
explains it:--


      WALMER CASTLE, Sept. 17, 1836.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I was much surprized at not hearing from you;
      and I am still more surprized now that I learn the Cause of your
      Silence.

      Begging Your Pardon you don't repeat accurately what I wrote
      respecting Your Hand writing; and you have consequently
      misrepresented my Meaning; which was however not worth attending
      to.

      I totally forgot that your Mind is occupied with affairs of more
      Importance; the Hand writing in which you convey your thoughts to
      others, is a matter of but little Importance to you; and that at
      all events you are seldom in a disposition to allow any body to
      complain; much less to find fault with you.

      Accordingly I beg your Pardon for having ventured to tell you
      that I experienced great Difficulty in reading your Hand writing.

      I hope that you will not give yourself the trouble of writing to
      me; if it should be at all irksome or inconvenient to you.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


The unmistakable irony of the above seems to have been quite thrown
away upon Miss J., for she placidly remarks:--

    "I am well aware that the poor Duke was justified in finding fault
    with my writing, through finding my pen could not keep pace with my
    feelings, more especially as I generally sent off whatever I wrote
    just as it was _thus_ written.

    "Again I see by the Duke's letter of Sept. 26th that he has
    returned to the third person in addressing me, which may have been
    accidental as his next dated Oct. 1st, 1836, is again in the first
    and on the 11th he writes--'I have received your Note and two
    Covers containing Tracts, for all of which I return my thanks.'

    "In the Duke's letter of Oct. 14th he writes--'I am, I assure you,
    very sensible of the kindness of your motive in writing to me.'

    "The Duke's next letter is as follows 'I did not arrive in London
    in time to be able to wait upon you this evening but I will wait
    upon you to-morrow afternoon as soon after five as it may be in my
    power.'

    "On October 19^th the Duke called, after an absence of about two
    years. So seldom did The Lord of Lords allow personal interviews to
    take place which doubtlessly was wisely ordered for His Glory Who
    knows the end from the beginning and is consequently too jealous of
    His Holy Name to suffer it to be tarnished. Of this holy jealousy I
    was rendered especially sensible on the visit above alluded to. I
    accosted the Duke accordingly on his entering the room. He
    exclaimed 'You shall do this and you shall do that!' without any
    reference to God's holy Will, expatiating accordingly until dear
    Mrs. L. who was only separated from us by folding doors said
    afterwards she pitied the Duke and was glad when I had said
    whatever I considered my duty. Nor was it until then that I even
    asked him concerning his knee, although that was the first visit
    since the Accident. When I did so, he appeared delighted, brushing
    up his chair nearer to me, which of course met with the withdrawal
    on my part _due_ to Christianity. I bless God for the grace and
    strength afforded me on that occasion, causing the Duke to sink
    into the utmost insignificance in comparison with His favor which
    is better than life.

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Nov. 3rd, 1836, wherein he
    writes, 'I am much flattered by your desire to have my opinion
    whether you should send the letter you had written to a gentleman,
    but had refrained from putting it into the Post.'

    "The Duke alludes again to this in his next letter of Nov. 10th.
    The next letter from the Duke is dated Nov. 11th, 1836, entreating
    me to date my letters.

    "In the Duke's next letter dated Nov. 12th he writes--'It is true
    that I burn every letter the preservation of which is not of
    importance, but I do not forget their contents as you will have
    perceived, at least, those that are material.' With this letter I
    see one of mine thus written and which I presume consequently was
    forwarded.--'I had imagined My Lord Duke this day would have
    brought with it an acknowledgement of my two last letters whereas I
    have only received a brief reply to that addressed to you on
    Sunday. However as it is my duty to acknowledge the receipt of that
    this day received--I do so subscribing myself

    "'Your Grace's faithful Christian Friend

    "'A. J.'

    "The above looks very formal but I presume it was all right,
    yielding up my heart to God as I did and do to govern as seemed
    good in His sight.

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Nov. 14th, 1836, wherein he
    writes; 'I shall be in London in the end of this week, that is on
    Friday, and I beg you to write to me if you should wish to see me.'
    How little did the poor Duke think when he wrote thus that the
    great Lord of lords had decreed he should not behold me again for
    nearly eight years, namely until the summer of 1844--O how
    mysterious are His unerring ways!!

    "During the year 1836 I received from the Duke fifty-six Letters.

    "1837.--I do not see any letter from the Duke until Feb. 26th in
    this year when he writes therein as follows from Hartford Bridge;
    'I am very much obliged to you for your letters, and I assure you
    that I always receive with thankfulness whatever you think proper
    to write to me. I do not like to trouble you when you do not write
    to me lest my intrusion should be considered offensive.'

    "The next letter from His Grace is dated March 2nd, wherein he
    writes; 'I have now got such a cold that I cannot quit the house. I
    have no fever however and I shall be quite well, I hope, in a day
    or two.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated March 5th wherein he writes--'I am
    much obliged to you for your enquiries. I came down to the Country
    to get rid of the cold and I am much better, indeed, nearly well. I
    will return the letter enclosed in yours the next time.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated March 12th 1837 in which he again
    notices my letter, as follows; 'I return you the enclosed which I
    ought to have sent you when I wrote last.'"

Still another dispute is now chronicled. Miss J. states that she wrote
the Duke a letter in which she referred to his "brushing up his chair
to me with so much familiarity during his last visit." The Duke's
answer shows his irritation very plainly:--


      LONDON, April 18, 1837.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His Compliments to Miss J. She is
      quite mistaken. He has no Lock of Hair of Her's. He never had
      one.

      The Duke is not aware that he has been guilty of _presumption_,
      of _daring presumption_.

      Miss J. wrote to him a letter in which she expressed displeasure
      at his having omitted to call upon Her as she expected he would.

      The Duke was extremely concerned that Miss J. was displeased. But
      he considered it best not to aggravate the Offence by writing
      again. If he had ventured to approach Miss J., or had written to
      her; he might have been accused of _daring presumption_. But he
      purposely avoided both; in order not to give fresh grounds for
      Irritation.

      The Duke is exceedingly concerned that Miss J. should consider
      that she has reason to complain of Him.

      He thinks that upon reflection she will be opinion [_sic_] that
      she has no reason to be offended.


Miss J. does not mention what ground she had for supposing the Duke to
be in possession of a lock of her hair. He had bestowed one of his upon
her, and it is only natural to surmise that she had given one of hers
in return. The matter was apparently smoothed over, as there is no
cessation of letters.


      LONDON, April 27, 1837.

      The Duke of Wellington presents his Comp^ts to Miss J. and is
      very sensible of the kindness of her expressions on the loss
      which a part of His family has recently sustained.

      The Duke is much concerned to learn that Miss J. still thinks
      that she has cause to be displeased with the Duke.

      The Duke trusts that Reflection and time will convince her; that
      no such cause [_sic_]. The Duke assures her, Miss J., that he is
      not sensible that he has given her such cause; by anything that
      he has said written done or omitted.


      "In a letter dated April 29th the duke writes 'He is very
      grateful for the interest which Miss J. has been pleased to
      express about the health of the Duke's brother. The Newspapers
      were misinformed. The Duke's brother has not been seriously
      indisposed. His niece however has lost her daughter which is the
      misfortune to which the Duke imagined that Miss J. had
      referred.'"


      LONDON, May 1, 1837.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His Comp^ts to Miss J. He returns
      many thanks for Her Note. The Duke will make enquiries respecting
      that of the 22^nd addressed by the Duke to Miss J. which she had
      not received in due course.

      It is wonderful that there should be so little delay and so few
      mistakes in an establishment of this Description. But the few
      that do occur should render letter writers cautious not to write
      in a moment of Irritation; that which would not be written if
      time were taken for reflection.


Some coolness followed this letter. The Duke wrote once again saying,
"He does not know what to do to please her." Miss J. adds, "Which it
was quite impossible he could do while in and of 'the world.'"

A silence of over three months followed this latest tiff. Miss J., as
usual, re-opened the correspondence. The Duke's reply was not
cordial:--


      LONDON, August 14, 1837.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His Comp^ts to Miss J. He returns
      His thanks for her Letter of the 13^th.

      The Duke is going out of town; and he intends to go to Walmer
      Castle in a few days.

      The Duke assures Miss J. that he has not published an Intention
      of giving what is called a grand Dinner at Walmer Castle.

      In general he would recommend to Miss J. not to believe one Word
      that she reads respecting the Duke of Wellington.

      LONDON, August 16, 1837.

      The Duke of Wellington presents his Comp^ts to Miss J. He returns
      His thanks for Her letter of the 15^th.

      The Duke is much concerned that Miss J. should have had the
      trouble of writing a second time upon the subject of
      misrepresentation in the Newspapers. They are really not
      deserving of Notice.


    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Aug. 16th, with which I see
    a copy of a letter referring to a parcel containing Tracts, etc.
    for his acceptance, from which I copy as follows--'Miss J. trusts
    the accompanying Tracts may not be considered an intrusion, but
    received and perused with the prayerful consideration they deserve
    as not from man but from That God Who has put it into her heart to
    send them; relying on His own gracious Word which runs thus, "My
    Word shall not return unto ME void but it shall accomplish that
    which I please and shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent
    it."--Miss J. begs to be excused giving her address, being desirous
    to avoid all observation etc. but if on her return to Town it
    should be the will of God that she should make His Grace acquainted
    with her abode, wherever that may be, (respecting which there is at
    present great uncertainty,) she will then give him an opportunity
    of acknowledging the receipt of the parcel and its consequences,
    hoping they may be of a gratifying nature; that is, beneficial to
    His Great Soul which Miss J. is still desirous to behold robed in
    the only Robe of righteousness that can render it safe for
    Eternity.'

    "The letter written on Aug. 26th is as follows 'He has received and
    returns His thanks for her Note of Friday and the Tract enclosed
    therewith.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated Sept. 1st he writes--'He is happy
    to learn that her health is so far reestablished as that she can go
    to the Country.'

    "The next letter from His Grace dated Oct. 5th, 1837, acknowledges
    the parcel referred to in mine as follows 'He returns thanks to
    Miss J. for Her Note of the 3rd inst. received this morning, with a
    Hymn for which he is very grateful. He received the Parcel
    containing Tracts etc, some time ago.'

    "Finding a copy of the letter which called forth the above enclosed
    with it I am induced to give it a place herein, more especially as
    I perceive one portion is almost defaced, regretting exceedingly
    that I do not recollect the title of the Hymn alluded to and
    forwarded.

    "'Miss J. having promised His Grace the Duke of Wellington the
    accompanying Hymn, takes the present opportunity for sending it,
    however unsuited to the taste of any but the Regenerated Soul,
    which _blessed_ state Miss J. has no good reason for believing His
    Grace the Duke of Wellington has yet experienced. However, as there
    is nothing too hard for The Lord of Lords, it is not impossible
    that the period _may_ arrive when the accompanying Hymn will be
    _experimentally_ understood, _consequently_ admired and valued,
    being one of the most beautiful to be found.

    "'Miss J. is not in the habit at present of seeing _any_ Newspaper,
    and is consequently unacquainted with His Grace's present
    proceedings. She concludes they are as worldly as ever, therefore
    calculated to draw from her pen nothing but a _repetition_ of what
    she has so frequently written, namely; "What is a man profited if
    he shall gain THE WHOLE WORLD and LOSE his own SOUL? or what shall
    a man give in _exchange for_ his _SOUL?_" An important enquiry sent
    by her for a long time almost without interruption in every letter
    to His Grace,--but Alas! with how little effect!! Rest assured, the
    moment will arrive when a fervent desire will be experienced that
    such advice, entreaties, observations, Scriptures, etc, etc, etc,
    had been _practically_ attended to. Yes, there _is_ a period, and
    an _awful_ one which must induce the _trembling soul_ that has been
    swelled up by earthly splendor and earthly adulation, (BOTH
    _equally empty_ and _unsatisfying_) to exclaim in the words of
    Cardinal Wolsey, "Had I but served my GOD with HALF the zeal I
    served my King, etc."

    "'That such may not be His Grace the Duke of Wellington's fearful
    state when the things of Time are giving place to those of
    Eternity, Miss J. continues fervently to hope, however _groundless_
    at present such hopes may appear.

    "'Nor would she hesitate to address him more frequently if she had
    not from long experience proved how little impression anything she
    writes or says is permitted to make either in his life or
    conversation, having no reason to imagine the slightest alteration
    has taken place in his worldly feelings from the moment she first
    beheld him to the present--on which account God seems to think
    proper to restrain her pen, and address--thus preventing her from
    being subject to receiving Notes as formal as they are
    unsatisfactory, the loss of which she cannot,--does not regret,
    being happier, infinitely happier when allowed by her gracious
    Heavenly Father to indulge in, and enjoy her former as well as
    present loved occupations. Yet when HE thinks proper to make her do
    either, she submits, and only then--as the pleasure once enjoyed on
    such occasions has long since fled, giving place to others more
    satisfying.

    "'Miss J. does not for a single moment by the above acknowledgments
    mean to offend or displease His Grace which were she to find him
    labouring under any _serious_ afflictions either of body or mind
    she trusts her conduct would prove, as in the hour of necessity her
    desire would be to afford him comfort and consolation: and since he
    is so public a character as to insure such circumstances being
    _generally_ known Miss J. trusts they will be obliged to meet her
    eye or ear whenever God thinks proper to occasion the one or the
    other--which HE _can_ do at any moment, and to any extent, and WILL
    _if His Holy Name can be magnified thereby_.'

    "I have underlined the above just as forwarded to His Grace.

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Oct. 6th, in which he writes--'He
    returns his thanks for her letter of Saturday just received' also
    the next, dated Oct. 11th contains his thanks.

    "In the Duke's next letter of the 12th of Oct. he writes--'He
    returns many thanks for her letter of the 10th inst.,' and his
    letter of the 14th of Oct. acknowledges another from me.

    "In the Duke's letter of Nov. 1st he writes 'The Duke is unable to
    give any other answer to Miss J.'s letters excepting His thanks for
    taking the trouble of writing them.'

    "The next is dated Nov. 7th also containing his thanks, followed by
    one of the 15th, the last of that year."




CHAPTER VII.

ASPIRATIONS AND REBUFFS.


    "The first letter I find for this year is dated Aug. 21st 1838
    which I see contains an Enclosure of three sheets addressed to Her
    Majesty Queen Adelaide, sent for the Duke's perusal, also to be
    delivered by him into Her Majesty's hands, which he felt under the
    necessity of declining, consequently returned it to me--having
    written therein as follows.

    "'It is impossible for me to be at all instrumental in transmitting
    a letter to the Queen Dowager. Her Majesty has Chamberlains and
    Ladies in attendance upon Her Whose duty it is to receive and lay
    before H. M. the letters addressed to Her. I could not interfere in
    the performance of their Duties. I could not be instrumental in
    forwarding an anonymous Letter however proper, respectful and
    dictated by the Highest Motives. I could not say that I did not
    know that the Letter was sent; or the Writer thereof if enquiry
    should be made; and I should make myself liable to the Imputation
    of being instrumental in the forwarding to the Queen Dowager an
    anonymous letter! I hope therefore that you will excuse me for
    declining to forward this Letter and for returning it to you.

    "'You are mistaken give me leave to observe in respect to the
    Subject to which this Letter relates. The House in which the Queen
    resides is Royal property; if not a Royal Palace! It is Her
    Majesty's Jointure House. The Royal Palaces used as such are not
    liable to the payment of Rates and Taxes. Her Majesty would not
    have been justified in making the payment on demand without
    reservation of the Right to Exemption. But she pays the money as a
    Gift which was improperly and illegally demanded as a Right. You
    will see it is the Parish and not the Queen which has contravened
    the Lord.'

    "Having thus introduced so much of the Duke's letter it will be
    necessary to quote some passages from that referred to by him,
    which as implied still remains in the same position and will
    continue to do so among my papers for further investigation should
    such be resorted to after my decease; with the six cards that
    accompanied it, upon which are written in full: Matt. ii. 28, 29;
    Luke xvi. 15; Romans xii. 2; Isaiah xliii. 21; Acts xiv. 22;
    Hebrews xii. 6; John iii. 3; 2 Cor. v. 17; Rev. iii. 12; 1 John v.
    3, 4; and James iv. 4.

    "After addressing Her Majesty _at length_ on the subject alluded to
    by the Duke with every desire to render 'honour to whom honour,' I
    next refer to the necessity of reverencing the Sabbath, adding; 'I
    recollect on one occasion seeing in a Newspaper that the Duke of
    Wellington quitted Your Majesty at Hastings for Dover on The Lord's
    Day and slept at the Ship Inn, on his way home.

    "'Now such is the character and _loyalty_ of His Grace that had the
    respected Consort of his beloved though deceased King [William IV.]
    only _hinted_ a desire that he should postpone his departure until
    the morrow I believe it would have been sufficient to insure his
    immediate obedience. Consequently I could not help lamenting the
    omission for two reasons, feeling so desirous to behold Your
    Majesty a shining vessel in The Lord's Hands to show forth His
    praise by honouring His Commands, also, that the Duke should be
    restrained from doing that which on a dying bed would pain him to
    remember. That he like too many other men of the world acts
    contrary to His Maker's laws in numerous instances is, Alas! but
    too evident; yet I cannot for a single moment imagine him one of
    Your Majesty's Advisers with regard to resisting the Laws of His
    Country, feeling assured he is too much your real friend to approve
    of the same and too loyal to acquiesce in an evil the consequence
    of which his penetrating eye would in an instant perceive could
    only tend to your dishonor.

    "'Fearing an evil may arise by my thus distinguishing or singling
    out the Duke of Wellington as an adviser, duty forbids my
    conclusion so immediately as intended, in order that I may beseech
    your Majesty to lean to no Adviser or advice in comparison with
    Christ and His Gospel, which if sedulously studied will in itself
    enable you rather to instruct the Duke of Wellington than to be
    instructed by him; for however great and wise he may justly be
    considered in a worldly point of view, he must be brought to
    acknowledge all his wisdom foolishness and all his greatness,
    littleness before he can appear worthy in His sight "in Whose
    presence is Life." Therefore he must be humbled before he can be
    exalted far beyond all that he now is even in this world, believing
    as I do, that his present greatness will bear no comparison with
    that which he will experience when robed in the "Wedding garment of
    Salvation" and rendered meet thereby for "an inheritance among the
    saints in light," considering him in The Lord's Hands a mighty
    vessel intended to show forth His praise in this present generation
    as powerfully as a Daniel, David, or Paul, living more to the glory
    of his Redeeming God during the few short years of his eventful
    life than others who have professed themselves Christians even from
    their infancy, consequently ranking among those of whom it is
    written "The last shall be first." When this great glorious change
    takes place in so faithful and tried a subject,--I should then
    encourage your Majesty to rely on his judgment not only in one case
    but all.'"

This astonishing production--whose impertinence borders upon
sublimity--being thus returned to Miss J., she proceeded to show the
Duke that she could communicate with at least one prominent personage
unaided by him. She sent him the following letter from Sir Robert Peel,
in answer to one she had written to that statesman:--


      WHITE HALL, April 25th.

      MADAM,--I avail myself of the earliest opportunity after my
      return to London, of acknowledging the Receipt of your last
      Letter and of assuring you that the former Communications with
      which you favored me were received by me in the spirit in which
      they were dictated.

      I have the honor to be, Madam,

      Your Obedient Servant,

      ROBERT PEEL.


      WALMER CASTLE, August 25, 1838.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I return the inclosed Letter which I received
      yesterday; and at the same time the Spectacle Wipers which you
      was so kind as to send me. I had already some which you had sent
      me; and I am much flattered and obliged for your thinking of my
      convenience.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.

      I had read the Work which you have sent me.[1] The same author
      has recently published another which I have got; but have not yet
      read.

        [1] Keith on the Prophecies (A. J.).


      WALMER CASTLE, August 27, 1838.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your letter of the 22^nd.

      You do me Justice in believing that I could not allow any
      circumstances to prevent my writing to you when I should think
      that my doing so could be useful or agreeable to you.

      Feeling it to be desirable that I should write to you I should
      have been unpardonable if I had allowed a recollection of bygone
      Dissensions to induce me to address you on topicks which might
      displease, or in a form which would be disagreeable to you.

      There is nothing under Heaven worth quarrelling about. Of all
      disputes and quarrels those in writing are the least pardonable.
      In the Heat of Conversation or of Discussion we may say that
      which is not justifiable. But our communications in writing are
      the Result of Reflection. That very act ought to cool us and
      prevent the use of angry and irritating expressions.

      You are quite right in having determined not to address the Queen
      Dowager about the payment of Rates for Marlborough House. I was
      certain that I should convince you upon the Subject.

      It is very possibly true, that some Notice ought to be taken of
      the above of the Queen upon this subject. But the expediency of
      taking such Notice must not be considered as a Matter of Course;
      because the answer on the part of the Queen would be triumphant.

      In all these Cases particularly those in which High Personages
      are concerned Prudence requires that those who advise should look
      a little farther than the one Case under consideration.

      Believe me, Ever Yours

      Most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "By the Duke's next letter I presume I had dated one to him wrongly
    as he writes: 'I have received and perused with attention your
    letter dated the 29th, I conclude by mistake, for which I return my
    best thanks.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Aug. 31st, below which he
    again addresses me on Sept. 1st thus. 'Since writing the above my
    dear Miss J., I have received your letter of the 31st of Aug. There
    is no post from home today and you will not receive this
    acknowledgment of its receipt and thanks for it until Monday.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Sept. 11th in which he
    writes; 'I am not capable, I am sorry to acknowledge, of entering
    on a discussion on the topics in your letter'--and in his next of
    Sept. the 12th he writes; 'I can read your letters perfectly. I
    wish that I understood the subjects to which they relate
    sufficiently to be able to answer them.'"


      WALMER CASTLE, Sept. 15, 1838.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have just now received two Letters from you,
      both finished on the 12^th for which I return my thanks. One of
      them contained the Pen wipers for which I am much obliged to you.

      The Story in the Newspapers about my having been consulted by the
      Queen about D^r Hook's Sermon is entirely false. There is no
      foundation whatever for it.

      As far as I can Judge from the accounts that I have seen the
      Queen did not notice D^r Hook's Sermon in any of the Modes
      supposed and stated. [Endnote 1]

      I am very much obliged to you for your Enquiries about my
      lameness. I thank God! I have entirely recovered from it.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "I need not say it rejoices _me_ to behold _thanks_ given to _Him_
    from whom all blessings flow.

    "A. J.

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Sept. 16th in which he writes;
    'There is no post from the country on Saturday as there is no
    Delivery in London on Sunday, so you will receive both letters
    therefore tomorrow, possibly at the same time.' The next from the
    Duke is dated Sept. 20th in which he writes 'I hope that you will
    soon recover from your indisposition,' and in that of the 23rd he
    writes; 'I assure you that I was aware that you had reason to
    believe that the story respecting the Queen was true.' The Duke
    means 'was not true' for he had referred to this subject in some
    letter just passed through my hands.

    "On Sept. the 25th 1838 the Duke writes to thank me for my letters
    adding 'But you do not mention your health and I hope that you have
    entirely recovered from your indisposition.'

    "In the Duke's next letter of Sept. 26th he writes 'I am much
    obliged by your continued kindness.'

    "By the Duke's next letter I see he refers to my offering him a
    Bible of larger Print as follows,


      WALMER CASTLE, Sept 29th.

      I am much obliged to you for the offer of a Bible in large Print.
      That which I now have answers perfectly, and I will not deprive
      you of another.


      WALMER CASTLE, October 2, 1838.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received at the Same time your Letters
      of the 30^th Sept^r and 1 October.

      I assure you that I am very sensible of your kindness; and of
      your motives for writing to me; and that nothing could induce me
      to write a Word or to commit an Act which would displease much
      less excite you.

      When I received the expression of your wish to have my Picture I
      felt that the compliance with your wish might be inconvenient to
      you. But I postponed to give you an answer Wishing to avoid to do
      any thing to displease you; and thinking it possible nay probable
      that your own reflections would have induced you to avoid to
      renew the Subject.

      As however you did mention it again I gave you the answer which
      has satisfied you.

      I have not mentioned the Period of my return to London; as it is
      very uncertain.

      Believe me My Dear Miss J.

      Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "The Duke's next letter is dated Oct. 7th. 'I have four letters of
    yours to acknowledge the receipt of, for which I return many
    thanks. In one you mention your indisposition but as you have not
    again adverted thereto I trust that you are better.'

    "The 13th of Oct. the Duke writes 'I read your letters in the order
    in which you wish they should be read,' before closing which letter
    he acknowledges or writes another therein acknowledging mine of the
    12th dating this additional letter Oct. 14th.


      WALMER CASTLE, Oct. 20, 1838.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have again to acknowledge the receipt of
      several Letters from you commencing on Sunday the 14^th. I have
      been absent; and did not receive them till this morning. And as
      the Post for London does not go out till tomorrow, I will keep
      this till then in order that I may add the acknowledgment of the
      receipt of any other letter that you may have written me in the
      end of the Week.

      In answer to the Wish that you have expressed to know when I
      shall be in London I mention that I shall not be there for some
      time.

      You are in the Habit of writing to me freely upon all Subjects;
      and you say that you derive satisfaction from so doing. I assure
      you that I am sensible of the Interest which you feel for my
      Welfare; and of your Motive in writing to me.

      But I confess that I cannot understand as you do, the High
      Authorities which you quote. I wish that I was sufficiently
      informed to be capable of reasoning with you whether verbally or
      in writing.

      I do not pretend therefore to do more than acknowledge the
      receipt of your Letters; and thank you for your kindness.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.

      I am delighted to find that you are so well.


      _October 21._ There is no letter from you this day.


    "In the Duke's next letter of Oct. 21st, 1838, he returns me many
    thanks for a letter 'commenced on the 21st and ended on the 22nd.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Nov. 3rd, referring to impressions
    on my mind which Time has declared to be erroneous with regard to
    the end God had in view, but as His glory was then as now my chief
    consideration I trust to behold this precious portion of Holy Writ
    verified therein. 'As high as the heavens are above the earth so
    are My Ways higher than your ways and My thoughts than your
    thoughts,' and that God will consequently be much more glorified
    and magnified under existing circumstances than HE possibly could
    under any other for His great, glorious, Holy Name Sake!

    "The next letter from His Grace is dated Nov. 10th 1838  thanking
    me for my last and the only remaining one of this year dated Nov.
    19th wherein he returns many thanks for the letters I had sent him.

    "Letters received during this year from the Duke of Wellington
    TWENTY TWO."

    "1839.--The first letter received during this year 1839 is I see
    enclosed in a cover addressed to Her Majesty the Queen of England,
    Buckingham Palace, to whom I must have written, forwarding it to
    the Duke to deliver, but which as with that to Queen Adelaide was
    returned to me in his dated May 14th, 1839.

    "Another letter in Aug. I see in like manner contains an Enclosure
    addressed to Her Majesty, but which was also returned under the
    same impression that he was not entitled to deliver such. In the
    Duke's next dated Nov. 17th 1839 he writes--


      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am much obliged to you for your letter of the
      15th in which you have enquired about my health as you had heard
      or read a report that I was indisposed. I am and have been quite
      well, thank God.

      Ever yours most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


    "The Duke's next letter is dated Dec. 14th 1839 in which he
    writes--'I return a letter which I opened thinking it was addressed
    to me but I now find it was intended for another, as I find the
    Name in a Note to myself.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Dec. 18th in which he writes--'I
    beg you not to make yourself uneasy about the missing letter.' This
    was a letter which miscarried and lost.

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Dec. 24th, 1839, judging by which
    I presume some mistake had been made in a former epistle as he
    writes therein--'I receive so many letters and have so many
    directions to attend to; that you must not be surprised if I
    sometimes make a mistake.'

    "The Duke's next letter is directed Dec. 28th in which he
    writes--'I have received your Note of the 26th. It certainly does
    not appear that both Notes have been opened.'

    "This arose from my enclosing the Duke some covers forwarded to me
    which Mrs. L. thought had been unsealed.

    "Another letter from the Duke on the same subject after making
    enquiries of his servants is dated Dec. 31st 1839.

    "Letters received from the Duke of Wellington during this year
    EIGHT."

    "1840.--The first letter from the Duke of this year is dated Jan.
    the 16th, thanking me for mine of the 15th and on the 18th the Duke
    again writes--'I am much obliged to you for your letter of
    yesterday of which I acknowledge the receipt immediately with many
    thanks.' The Duke's next letter is dated the 20th of Jan. in which
    he writes--'You may rely upon it that I shall not misunderstand
    your communications and I am much obliged to you for the confidence
    reposed in me.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Jan. 30th, 1840, by the contents
    of which I presume that I had expressed a wish concerning my
    letters being confined to his perusal as he writes: 'You may rely
    upon what I tell you. Nobody sees your letters. They reach me as
    regularly as is possible considering the greatness of the
    transactions of the Post Office.'

    "Again in the Duke's next dated Jan. the 31st he writes 'You may
    rely on it your letters reach me in safety.'


      LONDON, February 3, 1840.
      In the Morning.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I received on Saturday night the 1^st Inst.
      Your Letter of the 31--Jan--; of which I acknowledge the receipt
      this Morning according to your Desire.

      I always write as you Desire. But you must not be surprized if a
      letter sealed with a seal bearing the Impression of a Coronet;
      received for you every day at the same place should occasion some
      curiosity.

      Nothing can be more innocent than those Letters or more
      praiseworthy than those, to which they are an answer. But the
      existence of such a correspondence is calculated to excite
      curiosity; and Inquiry.

      Believe me Ever Yours

      Most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


      LONDON, Feb. 5, 1840.
      1/2 past eleven A.M.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I did not return from the House of Lords last
      night till Midnight; and did not receive Your Letter of yesterday
      till this Moment.

      You are quite right not to desire to see me.

      I refer you to what I wrote some time ago upon that Subject; on
      which there can be no alteration.

      Ever Yours Most faithfully.

      WELLINGTON.


    "The Duke's next letter is dated Feb. 20th 1840 wherein he
    writes--'I have only this day received your letter dated Saturday
    afternoon. I was indisposed last week. But thank God! I have been
    quite well for some days. So many letters come here for me; that I
    think it most probable that the Medical Gentlemen desired that none
    should be given me.' [Endnote 2]

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated March 3rd in which he
    writes 'I am very much obliged to you for your letter of the 2nd
    Inst. now received. I thank you for mentioning my health. I was
    unwell about three weeks ago but, thank God! I have been quite well
    ever since.'"

Another quarrel is now brewing, and Miss J. must, as usual, have lodged
the first complaint, since the Duke at once assumes a defensive
attitude.


      LONDON, March 6, 1840. 11 A.M.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am very much concerned that my affairs should
      render it necessary for me frequently to go into the Country; and
      that as you don't receive an answer to your Note you should still
      think it must have been perused by my Servants or someone else.

      If you cannot divest yourself of this suspicion you would act
      more wisely in not writing to me again; if you should care one
      Pin who sees your Letters!

      I received last night on my return to London your Letter of the
      4^th and I acknowledge the receipt thereof this morning.

      Believe me Ever Your

      Most faithful Servant,

      WELLINGTON.


    "The Duke's next letter dated March 9th wherein he writes: 'I am
    really much concerned that you should suppose that my last note to
    you was what you call Cross. But I am not so foolish as ever to be
    cross much less in writing.'"

The Duke seems in his next letter, dated March 11, to return to the
third person again, wherein he writes after presenting his compliments:
"The Duke has received her letter of the 10th, Inst. which does not
appear to him to require any answer."


      LONDON, March 13, 1840.
      1/2 past 11 A.M.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His Compliments to Miss J. Miss
      J. thinks proper to write to the Duke; but complains of the
      inconvenience attending the observations of the Curious among the
      Publick, upon the frequency of the Correspondence.

      She sometimes objects to the Substance; at others to the form of
      the Duke's Letters. The Duke has endeavored invariably to render
      them as respectful as possible to Miss J., in form as well as in
      Substance.

      The Duke is unfortunately for him not sufficiently informed to
      enable Him to write upon some of the Higher and more sacred
      Topicks of Miss J.'s Letters. But he considers it quite useless
      to write to Miss J. at all; if he should omit to state His
      opinion when he sees that she has taken an erroneous view of that
      of which he has a knowledge. He submits these opinions with great
      deference and Respect; and he is much concerned when any of them
      give Offence.


      LONDON, March 14th, 1840.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His Compliments to Miss J. He has
      just received Her Note of Friday evening the 13^th Ins^t.

      The Duke is very sensible of Miss J.'s offer of Service in case
      the Duke should be sick or afflicted. The Duke is much obliged to
      Her. He is quite well. He has no reason to believe that he will
      have occasion to trouble Her upon any object whatever.


Indorsed in Miss J.'s hand. "Let NOT Him that girdeth on his harness
_boast himself_ as he that putteth it off. 1 Kings XX. 11.

    "Alas! I tremble for you."


    "The Duke's next letter is dated March 30th expressive of his
    thanks.

    "The Duke's next letter is dated April 3rd in which he writes 'The
    Duke assures Miss J. that neither the form, manner nor substance
    nor even a Word in any letter of hers has offended him.' The Duke's
    next letter is dated April 4th in which he thanks me for my letter
    of that day. The Duke's next letter is dated the 4th of April in
    which he writes--'The Duke is much concerned to learn that Miss J.
    has been indisposed.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated April 10th in which he writes 'He
    understands that Miss J. wishes him to enclose to Mrs. L. the
    answers addressed to Herself although that is not stated as usual.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated April 18th in which he writes 'The
    Duke has never been better than for the last month and most
    particularly for the last few days. He is aware that reports are
    continually circulated to the contrary but they are entirely
    undeserving of credit.'"

The cause of this coolness between the Duke and Miss J. is not clear.
Her Diary throws no light upon the subject, and the only clew to the
dissension must be found in the Duke's letters. From these it would
seem that Miss J. has again criticised his manner of writing, or
resented some fancied liberty. The quarrel begun so promisingly in
March is still vigorous late in April, and the Duke is making energetic
but futile efforts to break off the correspondence.


      STRATHFIELDSAYE, April 24, 1840.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His Compliments to Miss J. He has
      received her letter of the 21^st Ins^t for which he returns His
      thanks being convinced that Her Letters to the Duke are dictated
      by the best Motives.

      The Duke cannot but acknowledge however that they are written to
      but little purpose; and considering their Tone and Tenor, the
      writing of them can be but little satisfaction to Miss J.; while
      it must be troublesome; the transmission of them embarrassing; as
      well as the Reception of the answers to Herself and Her friends.

      Under these Circumstances the Duke would earnestly recommend to
      Miss J. not to write to Him again.


      LONDON, May 20, 1840.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His Comp^ts to Miss J. He is
      much concerned to learn that His omission to acknowledge the
      receipt of Miss J. [_sic_] has occasioned any inconvenience
      to her. The Duke received all her Letters in due Course.

      The Duke did not acknowledge the receipt of them. He really
      thought and thinks still that Miss J.'s correspondence with the
      Duke is very inconvenient to Her and Her friends; that it exposes
      her to the Effects of the Curiosity of the Idle; and to the
      observations of the Malicious; and that however much he may be
      obliged to the Kindness of Miss J. in writing to him, he ought to
      endeavour to prevail upon her to refrain from doing which
      [_sic_] may be inconvenient to Herself or to Her friends.

      The Duke is thank God! and has been perfectly well, and he
      sincerely hopes that Miss J. is so likewise.


Indorsed by Miss J. "There is _no_ wisdom nor understanding, nor
counsel against THE LORD." "MY Counsel SHALL stand, and I will perform
ALL My pleasure."


      LONDON, June 30, 1840.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His Comp^ts to Miss J. He has
      received several Letters from Her. The last dated the 29^th
      Ins^t.

      He has not thought it necessary to answer these Letters. He
      writes now only because Miss J. expressed an anxiety to know
      before she leaves town whether Her letters had been received.

      The Duke would recommend to save Herself from such anxiety in
      future by omitting to write to Him.


      LONDON, July 29, 1840.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your Note of the 28^th and I
      thank God! that I am and have been quite well for this last week.

      There was some casual Derangement of my Stomach a week ago; and
      the Editors of Newspapers immediately discovered that I was in
      great Danger.

      They forget that their Reporters reported that I appeared in the
      House of Lords quite well.

      I am very much flattered by the anxiety which you express for my
      recovery. I assure you that I am as well as I have been for
      Years.

      Believe me Ever Your most faithful Servant,

      WELLINGTON.


      LONDON, August 3, 1840.

      The Duke of Wellington presents His compliments to Miss J., and
      again returns His thanks for Her Kind Enquiries about His Health.

      The Duke is quite well. He earnestly recommends to Miss J. to be
      satisfied with the Accounts which she gets in the Newspapers.

      It is impossible for the Duke to be certain of receiving a letter
      from Miss J. to a Moment; and that he will be able to send an
      answer forthwith. He has frequently stated this to Her; and in
      order to avoid disappointment he now tells her that he will write
      no more.


WHO is he that saith _and it cometh to pass_, when THE LORD _commandeth
it_ NOT?

    Lam. iii. 37.

Indorsed by Miss J.

Miss J. writes in her Diary at this period:

    "Whether the Duke would write again or not, I told him in my reply,
    must depend upon God rather than himself, adding that I never
    wished to hear from him till God pleased, and defied him
    accordingly,--trusting in 'The Lord of Lords.'"




CHAPTER VIII.

A PEACEFUL PERIOD.


Of the long silence that followed, extending from the third of August,
1840, to the tenth of June, 1844, Miss J. thus speaks:--

    "That Christ is The Lord of Lords unto Whom all power is given in
    Heaven and on earth, nothing can more clearly imply than the
    circumstances connected with this Portion of my Diary. The Duke's
    last letter had decidedly declared he would write no more, and his
    character is too well known by the World for such to conclude he
    would not act up to his word and determination. But since 'IT IS
    WRITTEN' 'The King's Heart is in the Hands of the Lord as the
    rivers of water, He turneth it which way soever he pleaseth,' _so_
    likewise ALL hearts. Consequently when _The Lord's_ time came for
    proving to him the folly of forming such a rash resolution, he
    writes accordingly, and that too at a moment when I least expected
    it, so long a period having elapsed in silence. Nor do I, as he
    therein specifies, recollect requesting him to answer that any more
    than other letters from time to time forwarded as the Lord
    condescendingly influenced me, however solicitous I was for their
    safety. I continued to hope that their contents would eventually be
    permitted to lead him to feel the emptiness and nothingness of all
    earthly grandeur, in comparison with the enjoyment of a Crown of
    Glory."

What induced the Duke to reopen the correspondence is hard to
determine; but the interchange of letters was soon as regular as ever.


      June 10, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received all your letters, including one
      written yesterday, the 9^th Ins^t; and I am very sensible of your
      kindness in giving me so continually such good Counsel.

      I did not write to acknowledge the receipt of your Letters;
      because you did not express a wish that I should do so clearly
      till you wrote this last.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


      LONDON, June 14, 1844.
      At night.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your letter of this day's date;
      and I am very much obliged to you for your kindness in the
      expression of an Interest about my Health. I am thank God! as
      well as I was twenty years ago, and no longer feel any
      Inconvenience from the Injury at that time done to my left Ear:
      excepting that I don't hear by the use of it, as I do by that of
      the other.

      I hope that you are quite well.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


      LONDON, June 18, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have to express to you my Gratitude for two
      very kind letters since I wrote to you last; the one of the
      15^th, the other of the 17^th Ins^t.

      Nothing can be more satisfactory to me than to read the
      statements which you write of the Interest you take in my
      Welfare; and I beg you to believe me

      Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "As this book only admits of my referring to the Duke's letters in
    order to distinguish them and thereby secure their future safety I
    only occasionally introduce one wholly; therefore state that the
    next dated June 20th is an acknowledgment of others received by
    him."


      LONDON, June 21, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am much obliged to you for your Letter of
      yesterday evening. It is true that I made no observations upon
      the Domestick Details which your former Letter contained: nor
      upon your opinion on the Inmates of the Houses in which you had
      been visiting.

      My object in writing to you was to thank you for the kind
      Interest which you had not ceased to feel for my welfare; and
      which you have expressed with so much sincerity. I am very
      grateful to you; and I hope that I do not fail in expressing what
      I feel.

      It is true! You are quite right my Time and attention are much
      occupied by the Publick Duties which I have engaged to perform,
      and I have very Little of the leisure to write upon subjects upon
      which I can have but an imperfect knowledge.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "I presume by a portion of the Duke's next letter dated June 22nd,
    1844, that I had expressed uneasiness concerning some of mine
    reaching him, as he writes--'If you should have any apprehension of
    your letters not reaching me, you have only not to sign them. I
    know your handwriting perfectly and moreover should know from their
    purport that they could come from you alone.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated June 24th, he writes; 'You are
    very kind my dear Miss J. in writing to me so frequently. I have to
    thank you for two letters received, the last on this morning. I
    assure you that I am very sensible of the constant interest which
    you feel in my welfare.'

    "The portion about to be copied in the Duke's next letter dated
    June 26th requires some explanation on my part previously, as it
    refers to a short separation which took place between my dear
    friend Mrs. L. and myself--arising from a circumstance that wounded
    me concerning a letter which interfered with my gratifying a
    request therein made by my dear Father before his death.

    "'I am much concerned likewise to learn that you do not feel
    yourself on the same satisfactory terms as usual with your old
    friend Mrs. L. I regret this, because the Impression on my mind is,
    that she was your friend and that you were much attached to her. I
    hope therefore that before long that confidence in your mind will
    revive and that you will return to your old Habits of friendly
    intercourse with that lady which were heretofore so satisfactory to
    you.'

    "These remarks on the part of the Duke had the desired effect and
    my intimacy with Mrs. L. was speedily renewed.

    "In the Duke's next letter dated June 28th, 1844, he writes--'I am
    happy to learn that you are likely to be reconciled to Mrs. L. It
    is impossible that you should be otherwise than of a forgiving
    temper and disposition, particularly as I hope in this Case no
    voluntary cause for Irritation could have been given.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated July 1st he writes--'I am
    delighted to hear that you have renewed your old relations with
    Mrs. L. which I am convinced will prove satisfactory to you.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated July 3rd he writes--'I beg that
    you will have no scruple about writing to me on any paper, or at
    the moment most agreeable to you. I am aware of your occupations,
    that you write as well as read a great deal, that you write your
    thoughts as they occur to you, and that you do not attend to
    penmanship or Hand writing which however I assure you that I peruse
    with the greatest facility and always with satisfaction on account
    of the great interest which you express for my welfare.'"


      LONDON, July 6, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received regularly and have thanked you
      I believe for all the kind Letters which you have written to me,
      excepting one commenced on Wednesday night, and finished on
      thursday which reached me yesterday afternoon: and another
      commenced thursday afternoon which I received last night. I thank
      you for them all; you are most kind in writing to me: I beg you
      not to scruple about telling me what you think and feel. I can
      read your hand writing with great facility; particularly by day
      light, and I feel your kindness for me; and all that you express.

      The Publick Duties in which I am employed occupy most of my Time:
      but knowing that it is satisfactory to you to receive a Note from
      me, I do not omit to write to you whenever I hear from you; as
      soon as the opportunity of doing so is afforded to me.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "The next letter from the Duke is dated July 10th, 1844, wherein he
    writes--'Your two letters reached me on Monday night. As I was
    occupied all day yesterday by the marriage of my Son [Endnote 3] it
    was not in my power to write to you and thank you for your letters,
    which I do now and for your continued kindness to me.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated July 12th he writes--'It is true
    that my time is much occupied by the various public duties which I
    have to perform and that it frequently occurs that I am under the
    necessity of postponing to thank you for your kindness and
    continued interest for my welfare. But you may rely upon it that
    however I may fail or rather delay to make my acknowledgments I
    feel your kindness and your expressions of it.'"


      LONDON, July 15, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have to thank you for a very kind Letter
      commenced on friday evening and ended on Saturday; which I
      received on that night. I think that I answered in a former
      letter all the queries which you had stated in yours?

      But if I have been mistaken and you will let me know on what
      subject I will write upon it upon the first occasion.

      I beg you not to attend to Interruptions at least so as to annoy
      you. I should not perceive such in your letters: which are
      invariably uniform in the expression of a kind Interest in my
      Welfare of which as well as of your kind expressions I am very
      sensible.

      As I was going into Divine Service yesterday morning; a gentleman
      who met me told me that it had been reported on the previous day
      that I had met with a serious accident.

      As this false report might reach and would annoy you; I avail
      myself of the first opportunity of telling you that I thank God!
      there is not the slightest foundation for it. I have met with no
      accident and have not been better for twenty Years than I am at
      this moment.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "In the Duke's next letter of July 19th he writes; 'I hope that you
    will continue to write to me all that you feel and think. I cannot
    express to you how grateful I am for your anxiety for my welfare.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated July 24th he writes--'I am very
    much obliged to you for your continued anxiety for my welfare and I
    read with pleasure your expressions of kind interest for me.'"


      LONDON, July 27, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--Since I last wrote to you; I have received one
      letter from you of the 24^th and two of the 25^th for all of
      which; and your continued kindness I thank you. I am very
      sensible of the freedom with which you write to me and tell me
      all that occurs to your Mind.

      I do not yet know at what time the parliament will be prorogued:
      I should think in the end of August.

      Notwithstanding the continued attendance; I continue thank God!
      as well as ever.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "In the Duke's next letter dated July 31st he writes doubtlessly in
    reply to some enquiry on my part--'It is impossible for me to say
    at what period Parliament will be prorogued. I thank you for the
    beautiful lines which you have sent me.'"


      LONDON, August 10, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--Many days have elapsed since I have been able
      to write you; but I have been again at Windsor Castle, upon the
      occasion of the Queen's confinement; and have besides been much
      occupied in Parl^t and elsewhere. I have received and thank you
      for your letters, the last received having been commenced on the
      4^th and ended on thursday morning the 8^th. I am very sensible
      of your kindness in writing to me; notwithstanding that you had
      not heard from me.

      I hope you are assured that when I do not write the cause is that
      I am much occupied and not that I am insensible or less sensible
      of your kindness.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "In the Duke's next letter dated Aug. 12th he writes--'I have just
    now received your kind letter written yesterday Morning, the 11th,
    and according to your desire I do not delay to acknowledge the
    receipt thereof as I understand that you are going out of Town to
    morrow.'

    "The next letter of the Duke's of Aug. 14th--'I am sorry to hear
    that you do not feel very well but hope the Indisposition will be
    but short. The weather has been and still continues very bad and is
    but little inviting for a journey.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Aug. 16th 'I am very sorry indeed
    to learn that any of your letters have been returned from the House
    to the Post Office opened and sent back to you. I have frequently
    told you to beware of the weight of your letters and to take care
    that each of them had upon it the proper stamp, etc. You who do not
    trouble yourself with the affairs of this world can form no idea of
    the extent of the occupation of those whose duty it is to attend to
    them.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated Aug. 22nd he writes 'I have been
    out of Town at Portsmouth and at Oxford with the Prince of Prussia
    since I wrote to you.'" [Endnote 4]


      LONDON, Sept. 2, 1844.
      Morning.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I write to you now as I am under the necessity
      of going out of Town to Windsor Castle from whence I shall not be
      permitted to return till late on Wednesday.

      I found a crowd around my horses after I quitted you on Saturday
      and I was followed away by the same persons who had followed me
      to your part of the Town.

      I enclose what I told you that I would send you; it appears to me
      to be a good likeness, judging from the recollection of other
      Busts.

      I will write to you as soon as I am certain at what time I can
      call upon you.

      Ever Yours most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J. writes in her Diary for this date:

    "The Duke told me that a _boy_ from his _own_ door called after
    him, attracting others accordingly all the way. This annoyed him
    particularly on my account, as he was aware of my objection to
    notice, notwithstanding that I was at the time under Mrs. L.'s
    roof, where all the visits referred to took place and under her
    protection."

Of the picture to which the Duke refers, Miss J. thus writes, after his
death:--

    "This was his own Picture in wax, made by himself and was an
    impression conveying a striking resemblance. It is made upon one of
    his own Cards, cut in _half_. On this is engraved 'Field M. The
    Duke of ----.' How this valuable Article is eventually to be
    disposed of, I wait upon The Lord of Lords, who permitted it to be
    bestowed upon me, to point out. He must determine whether it is to
    be sent to the British Museum, as a remembrance of one who in His
    Hands was permitted to become the preserver of our nation, or to be
    disposed of for the propagation of Christianity among the Jews in
    whom I am so deeply interested. Whichever it may be I trust that
    His Holy Name will be magnified, on account of its having been
    bestowed on one so devoted to the poor Duke's everlasting welfare,
    during the last eighteen years of his life,--his _eventful_ life!"


      LONDON, Sept. 6, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I did not return from Windsor Castle till late
      on Wednesday. I was in the field with the Troops yesterday
      Morning; in the House of Lords from one o'clock till the
      Parliament was prorogued and in the Public Offices till between
      six & seven in the evening. Now I am about to return to Windsor
      Castle this afternoon for the Christening of the Infant Prince
      and I shall not return till night or possibly to-morrow. Here
      they are crying out for me in the levee Robes. Under these
      Circumstances I cannot fix a time at which I could go to pay you
      a visit.

      Ever Yours most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


The infant prince here referred to was Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh.


      LONDON, Sept. 7, 1844.
      Morning.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I write you thus early; as I see clearly that
      it will not be possible for me to go to see you this day.

      I did not reach Home from Windsor Castle last night; till after
      half past twelve, and I am now required to go into the Cinque
      Portes.

      Continue to direct to My House in London. I shall be back in a
      few days.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "In a letter of Sept. 9th the Duke writes from Walmer; 'My duty has
    obliged me to come to this part of the Country. I will return to
    London as soon as it will be in my power and with your permission
    will call upon you. It is very true that I am as well known
    everywhere as in my own House and that I am followed everywhere,
    and all that I do observed and commented upon according to the
    inclinations of those who think proper to follow and observe me. I
    am therefore anxious not to expose you or your abode to such
    observations.'

    "The Duke's next letter is from Walmer, dated Sept. 11th, wherein
    he writes, after thanking me for my letter; 'I am as usual very
    much employed but I thank God, quite well.' In the Duke's next
    letter, dated Sept. 12th, he writes; 'I again express my gratitude
    to you for your continued kindness and good wishes. I will go to
    see you as soon as I shall return to Town, of course giving you
    Notice.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Sept. 21st, in which he
    writes--'I am under the necessity of going out at a very early hour
    in the Morning and I do not return till night. But your kindness is
    always welcome to me and I wish that it was in my power at all
    times immediately to acknowledge the receipt of it.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Sept. 24th, he writes--'I am very
    grateful for your constant and continued kindness: you may rely
    upon it that if not immediately responded to it is because my time
    is so much occupied at a distance from my Residence.' In the Duke's
    letter of the 27th of Sept. he thanks me for my letters of the 24th
    and one concluded on Wednesday afternoon, purposing to call if in
    his power.

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Sept. 30th, he writes--'I am very
    happy to learn that you are not separated from Mrs. L. as soon as
    you expected.'

    "The commencement of Oct. brought me a letter from the Duke dated
    Oct. 1st, acknowledging mine previously forwarded.

    "I see there is a letter dated Oct. the 5th in which the Duke
    writes; 'I write one line to apprize you that I am in Town and that
    I will endeavour to go to see you at three this day.'"


      WINDSOR, Saturday Evening,
      Oct. 12, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have been here since the day after I left
      London; having gone to and returned from Portsmouth.

      I have received two letters from you the last commenced on
      Wednesday evening and finished, on Friday morning or rather later
      in the day on Friday after you had taken a Lodging No. 4 Fitz Roy
      Street Fitz Roy Square.

      There is no Post from hence to London this evening and I am going
      this night to my own House in Hampshire, where I shall put this
      letter in the Post tomorrow; and it will reach you on Monday. I
      am going there on my way to Portsmouth for the embarkation of the
      King of the French. I shall go there please God! on Monday
      morning.

      I cannot say when I shall be able to return to London. But I will
      write to you; I am very sensible of your kindness in writing to
      me although I have been so much occupied and so constantly in
      movement that I have not been able to thank you.

      I hope that you will find your new Lodgings quiet; and
      comfortable.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


      WALMER CASTLE, Oct. 17, 1844.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I arrived here yesterday evening having been in
      movement since I quitted my own House in Hants on Monday morning
      to go to Portsmouth to meet the King of the French. I was out
      during the thunder, Lightning and Rain on that day; and travelled
      afterwards: and thank God! after all this movement and exposure I
      am just as well as ever. [Endnote 5]

      I have to thank you for all your Letters; the last in answer to
      mine written before I quitted Windsor Castle; but sent from my
      House in Hampshire in which I enquired how you liked your new
      Residence.

      I am much obliged to you for your continued kindness. I will go
      to see you as soon as I shall return to London. But I cannot yet
      say at what time that will be: as I am called away so frequently
      for other Affairs; and I have still much to occupy my attention
      in this part of the Country.

      Your last letter was commenced on Monday the 14^th and ended on
      Tuesday.

      I am very certain that I have received all your Letters, and I am
      very sensible of your kindness in writing to me; particularly one
      on five sheets of paper commenced on the 7^th of Octo^r.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "The Duke's next letter is dated Oct. 19th, in which he writes;
    'This Note cannot be sent from hence this day, there being no post.
    I will add a line to it when I shall have an opportunity of sending
    it off, concluding at present with thanking you for your continued
    kindness toward me.

    "'P.S. I add a line to tell you that I have received; and am very
    sensible of the kindness of your Letter of the 18th in the middle
    of the day; which was brought down here this evening by a messenger
    from my House in London.

    "'I am happy to find that you had received my Letter; you need not
    be apprehensive of my catching Cold on my Journeys. You may rely
    upon my taking care of myself.

    "'Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully,

    "'WELLINGTON.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Oct. 24th, he writes--'I have to
    acknowledge the receipt of, and to thank you for your continued
    kindness in writing me two long letters.' At the end the Duke
    writes; 'It is possible that I may be under the necessity of going
    to London to attend to the opening of the New Royal Exchange.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Nov. 6th wherein he writes;

    "'Some days have elapsed since I have heard from you and as I
    cannot recollect any reason for your silence I begin to be
    apprehensive that you may have been unwell and have been prevented
    by indisposition from writing to me. I therefore write this line to
    request you to write to me and let me know how you are.'

    "On the same sheet the Duke writes Nov. 7th; 'I have this morning
    received yours of the 6th and am delighted to find that you are not
    indisposed. I was in Town on two different days in last week; in
    one I attended the Ceremony of opening the Royal Exchange by Her
    Majesty the Queen [Endnote 6]--on another to attend the marriage
    and indeed to give away in marriage a young Lady and was under the
    necessity of returning here as Time, Tides and Trains or Railroads
    wait for no Man and I had not time even to write, much less to go
    to see you.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Nov. 10th 1844 wherein he
    writes--'You always express in your letters the same interest for
    my welfare which has always drawn from me the expressions of my
    grateful sense of your kindness.' Again in the Duke's next letter
    dated Nov. the 12th he writes; 'Notwithstanding that I wrote to you
    so lately I will not suffer the Post to go this day without
    expressing my sense of your kindness in writing to me.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Nov. 19th, in which he writes--'I
    intend to go to see you as soon as I shall have a moment's leisure.
    But my time is really so much employed in the service of the Public
    as to leave me none for social purposes and scarcely enough for
    Repose.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Nov. 20th, wherein he writes--'I
    write you one line to tell you that if it should be in my power I
    will call upon you this day after three o'clock.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Dec. 3rd, wherein he writes--'I
    was so much occupied with public business that I could not call
    upon you again. I am quite well. Then I was at Windsor Castle in
    attendance upon Her Majesty the Queen during the five last days of
    last week. I have not got the Parcel to which you referred.'

    "In the Duke's letter dated Dec. 11th, he writes; 'I have been very
    much concerned to hear that you are unwell. You must take care of
    yourself and keep yourself very warm in this bad weather.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Dec. 14th wherein he writes--'I
    returned to London last night having been detained at Windsor
    Castle till late in the afternoon and I went there on Thursday and
    received your Note dated the 13th, for which I am much obliged.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Dec. 20th wherein he writes--'I am
    very sorry, but my time is so much occupied, and while the Almighty
    will deign to permit me to live will be so occupied as that I shall
    not have leisure to pay visits. I have frequently expressed my
    regret that it should be so and repeat them now.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Dec. 21st, he writes; 'I am very
    sensible of the kindness of your letter of yesterday afternoon
    which I received last night.

    "'I am, thank God! in perfect good health but have had the
    misfortune of losing my Sister. But I trust that by the Mercy of
    God! She is Happy.' [Endnote 7]

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Dec. 24th, wherein he writes--'I
    have received several letters from you after my return to Town
    after paying the last Respects to the Memory of my poor Sister--I
    return you my thanks for them all and am very sensible of your
    kindness in writing to me.'

    "In a letter from the Duke dated Dec. 26th, he writes--'I am sorry
    to learn that you have caught cold and are suffering from sore
    throat. I hope that you will take care of yourself and avoid to
    expose yourself to cold in this severe weather. I am very sensible
    of your kindness in writing to me as you have; I hope that I feel
    as I ought upon the occasion of the recent described affliction
    which I have suffered.'

    "1845.--The first letter from the Duke, of this year, is dated Jan.
    3rd, wherein he writes; 'I am very much obliged to you my dear Miss
    J. for several letters received from you in these last days; and
    regret that I was so much occupied when I received each of them as
    to be unable to acknowledge its receipt by return of Post. I am
    very sensible of your kindness in writing to me.'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated Jan. 13th wherein he
    writes--

    "When I wrote to you last My dear Miss J. I omitted to thank you
    for one letter which I had received from you. The one to which I
    refer was dated the 23rd Inst., the day on which I attended the
    funeral of my poor Sister. I was in London for three days but my
    time was so much occupied that I could not even write to you, much
    less fix a time at which I could be able to pay you a visit.'

    "In the next letter from the Duke dated Strathfieldsaye, Jan. 17th,
    he writes; 'You have been correctly informed; Her Majesty the Queen
    does intend to pay me a visit here on Monday the 20th and to remain
    till Thursday the 23rd.' [Endnote 8]

    "In the next letter from the Duke, dated Jan. 23rd, he writes--'I
    am much obliged to you my dear Miss J. for all your letters dated
    the 18th, 19th, 20th and 21st which I have received regularly in
    due course. I wish that it were in my power to peruse them when I
    receive them--still more to acknowledge the receipt of them
    regularly. But that is impossible. My time is so much occupied that
    I have scarcely sufficient for Rest. However my Health continues
    excellent and my strength unimpaired.' The next letter from the
    Duke is dated Feb. 7th 1845, wherein he writes; 'I have received
    many letters from you, dated the 20th, 22nd, 23rd, 24th, 26th and
    Feb. 2nd, which I have not expressed the sense of gratitude I felt
    for your kindness in writing them. But in truth I have been so much
    occupied, not alone by my public business but by the afflicting
    sickness of one of my Family; one of whom,--My Niece, we have lost;
    and another, my brother, is still very unwell that I have really
    scarcely had time to turn about. However I thank God! my brother is
    stronger and better and I hope that he will be able to bear the
    remedies which must be administered to him.'

    "In the Duke's next letter he writes, dating it Feb. 8th--'I fear
    that there was one letter which I did not acknowledge in my note of
    yesterday--that of the 3rd Inst. But I must say that my time and
    attention are so much taken up from morning till I go to bed at
    night that it is not surprising that I should pass over a letter in
    acknowledging the receipt of others, however kind and interesting,
    its contents. I have really more to do than I can find time for,
    notwithstanding my constant attention and diligence.'

    "In the poor Duke's next letter he writes--dating it Feb. 25th; 'My
    omission to write to you etc--is to be attributed to my constant
    occupation in the Public service and since My return to Town in
    these latter days, since the Queen paid me a visit, by the
    continued illness of my poor brother; and by my attendance upon
    Him, his wife and afflicted family. I was very sensible of your
    kind offer of Assistance--But he had everything. We lost him, Alas!
    on Saturday night, I am happy to say without pain or suffering.
    [Endnote 9] His last moments were those of a good Christian in
    peace with all the world and I trust, in the Mercy of the Almighty,
    in favor with Him! You are very kind and I am very sensible of your
    kindness in offering me consolation and in urging me to call upon
    you and I will do so as soon as it will be in my power and will
    write to apprize you of the Time.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated March the 1st, he writes--'It is
    true I have been greatly afflicted. But by the Mercy of God My poor
    Brother suffered but little in his last Moments. Indeed I may
    say--no pain, from the disorder by which he had been afflicted and
    his mind was at ease and full of confidence in the Mercy of the
    Almighty.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated March 6th he writes--'I am
    concerned to learn that you are not well.'

    "In the Duke's next letter he, after dating it March 15th, 1845,
    reports how occupied he is, adding; 'I regret exceedingly to learn
    that you are still unwell. But hope that we shall have moderate
    weather usual at this season, which will soon recruit your health.'"


      LONDON, April 18th, 1845.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I will give you an answer to your Note of the
      17^th just now received because my attention has just now been
      drawn to two paragraphs in the Morning Post, stating that I was
      taken ill in the House of Lords last night. I was last night and
      am at this moment thank God! as well as I ever was.

      The truth is this. A Noble Lord, well known to be blind was
      standing on the floor near the place where I was sitting. I
      arose, gave him the assistance of my Arm and conducted him
      towards the door till I met another person who took charge of
      him.

      That is the whole Story!

      I returned to my place where I sat and took part in the
      discussion going on till the House adjourned.

      A man called at my door to enquire how I was at _eleven_, not at
      _twelve_ o'clock. The answer was. _He is quite well_, not, _He is
      convalescent_.

      Ever Yours most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


    "The next letter from the Duke is dated April 21st, 1845, in which
    he replies to an enquiry I had made in a former Note or letter as
    follows; 'You did not see me in Piccadilly on Saturday the 19th. I
    was not in the Street on that day except to cross it on Horseback
    from my own House to the Park.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated May 8th wherein he writes; 'I have
    received and thank you for all your letters; the truth is that it
    takes me a long time to peruse them and I am obliged to do so by
    daylight, which I have not at command of sufficient duration to
    finish the whole that I have to read at one time.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated May 28th he writes--'The truth is
    that nobody can tell the amount of business which I have to
    transact who should not be a witness of my constant and unremitting
    exertions, and the degree in which my time is occupied. Thank God
    that I have health to perform all that is required.'

    "Again in the Duke's letter dated May 30th he writes--'The truth is
    that my occupation in the service of the Public is incessant from
    one week's end to the other. It is not given to Man to be in two
    places at the same time and I have scarcely time for Rest--none for
    recreation or amusement even social.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated June 5th he writes 'My time is
    really so much employed as to have none for either repose or meals.
    We are now at the 5th of June. I have dined but twice since the
    29th of May, although in perfect Health. I have scarcely time for
    Repose as you will see when I tell you that I returned home this
    morning only at half past four.'

    "I knew that the Duke could find time to go to parties, etc, etc,
    therefore I considered such letters as mine ought not to be laid
    aside in silence, more especially as he was continually implying he
    meant to call upon me, but never did, so thus keeping my mind in
    suspense and expectation. This doubtless The Lord of lords in His
    infinite wisdom did not see fit to gratify, knowing far better what
    is good for us than we do for ourselves. Otherwise HE could and
    would have compelled him to come to me daily, whatever his
    occupations may have been.

    "The Duke's next letter is dated June 7th, wherein he
    writes--'Besides being very good, you must admit that patience
    under disappointment is required from us all. That is all I ask
    from you.'

    "Which I suppose sprang from my expressing disappointment at not
    seeing the Duke, little imagining that the Lord of lords had
    decreed he should never call again, knowing far better what is good
    for us than we do for ourselves. O that His Holy Name may be
    magnified throughout for His blessed Holy Name's Sake!

    "In the Duke's next letter he writes at its conclusion, having
    dated it June 16^th 1845 'I am quite well, thank God!
    notwithstanding the constant fatigue which I endure.'

    "The next letter in due course from the Duke is dated June 27th,
    1845, wherein he writes--'I am very sensible of your kindness in
    writing. I am anxious that you should recollect that if I omit to
    acknowledge the receipt of, and to thank you for the receipt of
    your letters regularly it is because I really have not leisure
    time. I assure you that since last Sunday I have dined only once,
    and that was on Wednesday. I thank God that I preserve my health
    and strength; and am really as strong as I was twenty-two years
    ago, but have not leisure time for social occupations of any
    description.'

    "In the next letter from the Duke, dated July 14th, he writes; 'I
    have received from you letters of the 9th and 13th Inst. since I
    wrote last, for which I return my best thanks. I hope that the
    rainy weather will not prevent you from receiving the benefit which
    you expected to derive from your residence near the Sea.' Again the
    Duke writes in his next letter, dated July 17th; 'The weather still
    continues unpleasant but I hope that your residence by the Sea will
    be beneficial.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated July 23rd, he writes--'I have
    received several letters from you lately, for which I return my
    grateful thanks. I only regret that I have not leisure to answer
    them punctually. I have not been able to dine for the last two days
    but I am quite well, thank God!'

    "The next letter from the Duke is dated July the 26th, wherein he
    writes--'I return thanks for all your letters; I am very sensible
    of your kindness in writing to me and I am very happy to find that
    you think of returning to London.'

    "The next letter from the Duke, dated Aug. 12th, refers to letters
    being rightly stamped, adding--'Your remedy is very simple--take
    care not to send a letter that is overweight. If you write one that
    is upon so much paper as that one Stamp will not be sufficient, put
    half the paper in one cover and half in the second or put two or
    three stamps on the same cover. I have likewise received back some
    letters written to you, notwithstanding that I invariably myself
    direct and stamp the letters addressed to you. I am really ashamed
    of giving you so much trouble.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 13th, he writes--'It is true
    that my public duties render it necessary for me to move to a
    distant part of the Country--I cannot complain. But it is the fact,
    that at a period of life at which other Men are seeking Repose,
    every moment of my time should be as it is, occupied by National
    duties which require my constant attendance and all my attention,
    and render me unfit for social duties and incapable of performing
    them.'

    "In the next letter of the Duke's, dated Aug. 14th, he writes 'I
    write only one line to acknowledge the receipt of and thank you for
    your letter of the 13th which reached me last night. I am really
    very much concerned that my public duties and the attention which I
    am under the necessity of paying to their performance render me
    unfit for social life. I really have not leisure time for visits,
    scarcely to write. I am under the necessity of going out of Town
    this afternoon.'

    "In his next letter, dated Aug. 19th, the Duke writes--'I perceive
    again that I must be very cautious to cross my t's and put dots to
    my i's and not omit an expression which I may ever have used or to
    make use of one which may be unusual lest I should again give
    offence.'

    "Judging by the Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 23rd, I had begun to
    fear I should never see the Duke again, for he writes--'It has
    often occurred to me that you do not read my letters and that at
    all Events you pay but little attention to their Contents--If you
    had perused these letters and had believed what I wrote, you could
    not have asked this question. However I answer it--I do intend to
    go to see you whenever I can find time; that is, when my
    occupations in the Service of the Public will give me leisure for
    the performance of any Social duty or the pursuit of any
    relaxation, amusement or pleasure.'

    "The Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 29th, conveys an impression
    that I had felt hurt at something written, as he writes 'I did not
    think it possible that I should ever write one word that could hurt
    your feelings and I sincerely beg your pardon.' The next letter
    from the Duke is dated Oct. 9th, 1845, wherein he thanks me for my
    letters and adds 'I am much obliged about your enquiries about my
    Health. I am quite well thank God! though much fatigued by hard
    work.'

    "The next and the last letter of this year from the Duke is dated
    Dec. 3rd, wherein he writes; 'I assure you that I am very sensible
    of your continued kindness. I have not written to acknowledge the
    receipt of your letters and to thank you for them, as I really have
    not had time, having been so much occupied in the public Service.
    When I write to you I am sensible that I must not omit a word or a
    letter. The feeling that such omission will give you offence is
    alone an impediment, therefore I hope that you will excuse me.'"




CHAPTER IX.

MISUNDERSTANDINGS.


The correspondence for 1846 begins smoothly, with no warning of the
storm that was to burst before the year was out. From the Duke's first
letter, it is evident that Miss J. had continued her epistles steadily,
undeterred by the tartness of the Duke's last note, of December 3d. His
first billet of the New Year is friendly in tone, while the brusqueness
of the second quoted is explained by her comment thereupon. From the
knowledge gained of her through her letters one can imagine what must
have been the pious querulousness of her "remark."

    "1846.--The first letter from the Duke in this year is dated Jan.
    7th, wherein he writes--'I have received your letter of the 4th
    Inst., having before received many for which I really have not had
    the time to enable me to write and thank you as I ought to have
    done, as my sincere and heartfelt acknowledgments are due to you
    for your continued kindness towards me.'

    "I presume judging by the Duke's next letter that I had made some
    remark concerning his silence, as he writes therein dating it Jan.
    14th--'I have scarcely time for rest or meals. You must excuse me!
    I cannot do it! Surely patience is a Christian virtue enjoined to
    us by the precepts as well as by the example of our Saviour.'"

Biographers of the Duke mention his power of going for hours without
food, and then atoning for his abstinence by a hearty meal. His usual
daily routine was to rise at seven, and go out of doors at once,
returning to breakfast at nine. He ate no lunch, and dined at seven.
When much pressed with work, he was accustomed to have his dinner
served on a small round oaken table in the library, where he ate alone,
surrounded by his papers. His correspondence was enormous, owing to his
practice of answering all his letters himself. He occasionally availed
himself of a lithographed form in reply to some correspondents, and
also sometimes adopted a sharpness of tone in answering irrelevant
communications, in the hope that he might thus hinder their authors
from writing again. As a rule, however, a courteous letter was apt to
receive a courteous reply. The narrowness of Miss J.'s mental horizon
is nowhere more strikingly shown than by her inability to comprehend
the whirl of business that must have made life, to a man of the Duke of
Wellington's conscientiousness, a ceaseless round of fatiguing labor.

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Feb. 4th, he writes--'I have
    received many letters from you and I am really ashamed of being
    under the necessity of repeating over again what I have stated so
    repeatedly, that I have not leisure time to acknowledge the receipt
    of and thank you for each of your letters when it reaches me.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated March 13th, he writes--'I don't
    know whether you ever read the letters which I write to you. I
    doubt it, because I cannot make out how it happens that you do not
    notice or believe what I tell you in every one that I write,
    namely, that my time is so much occupied that I have scarcely time
    for the rest which is necessary.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated March 20th, he writes--'I have
    received all your letters, the last this day, dated Wednesday,
    March 18th. I should have answered the two earlier ones at the time
    I received them if I had had one moment's leisure.'"


      STRATHFIELDSAYE, April 17, 1846.

      MY DEAR MISS J.--I have just now received your Note of the 15^th
      and I am very sorry to observe that I have again offended you by
      quitting London without going to pay you a visit; and because I
      have not acknowledged the receipt of some late letters received
      from you.

      I wish I could induce you to believe that the disposal of my time
      does not depend upon myself; whether to pay visits or to write.

      I have received all your letters, but have not written answers to
      them; or to thank you for them; because I really have not had
      Time.

      I am obliged to you for having informed me that you intend to
      quit your Residence on Saturday that is to-morrow.

      If you will let me know where you will reside in future I will go
      to pay you a visit if I should have one Moment of Leisure.

      I don't recollect to have sent my Servant with a letter to Mr. L.

      If he took one there, I conclude it was because when I gave it to
      put into the Post, the Hour was passed at which it would be
      received at the Post Office and he took it to the Gentleman to
      whom it was directed.

      But this is mere Conjecture. I know nothing about the matter.

      Ever, My Dear Miss J. Yours most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


    "In the Duke's next letter, dated May 30th, he writes--'I am not
    surprised at your vexation in neither receiving an acknowledgment
    of the receipt of your letters nor a visit from me. But I have
    always considered Patience an eminently Christian virtue--I assure
    you again that my time is so much occupied! I have dined but once
    since last Sunday! These are well known facts!--I returned home to
    rest at five o'clock yesterday morning on Horseback! I was employed
    all day yesterday after that Repose and did not return till two in
    the morning!'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated June 24th, he writes, after
    thanking me for my 'continued kindness;'--'I had before received
    several letters from you, for all of which and your continued
    kindness I return you my thanks. In respect to your question
    whether it is probable that I can go to see you before the 1st of
    July I answer that I will if it should be in my power but I cannot
    be certain or now fix the time. Till this night I have not dined
    since last Sunday and I doubt whether I shall again till next
    Sunday. I have scarcely time for Rest--None for Meals and as you
    may suppose none for visits. However I will go to see you if it
    should be in my power and will write to give you Notice.'

    "I think if the Duke were to return to the world he would consider
    no duties before those connected with communion with me, who was so
    solicitous to strengthen him in every good word and work. But it
    was not to be! Therefore however much I may and did suffer, such I
    trust will be permitted to rank among the 'All things that are to
    work together for Good to them that love God, to them that are the
    called according to His purpose,' and since there never was a
    moment when the Duke did not sink into the utmost insignificance in
    comparison with His good will and pleasure, such must necessarily
    follow.

    "The poor Duke's next letter, dated July 13th I will copy
    throughout as it refers to his affliction--in the loss of his Grand
    Son." [Endnote 10]

This letter is interesting as giving a glimpse of that softer side of
the Duke's nature, generally lost sight of in contemplation of his
sterner characteristics.


      LONDON, July 13, 1846.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your letters of the 12^th and
      Friday last on the subject of the loss I recently sustained of my
      Grandson, the eldest Son of my second son. Poor boy! he died on
      Tuesday! By the Mercy of God! the second son, an infant has
      recovered. But at one time I was apprehensive that the grief of
      the Mother who was nursing the youngest child would have affected
      Her Health; and that we should have lost that Child; and
      eventually the Mother. But thank God! Both are now safe! I am
      very sensible of your kindness upon this occasion. I wish that it
      was in my power to tell you that I have any prospect of being
      able to go to see you! But I cannot expect to be able to do so at
      present! Believe me, My Dear Miss J. Ever Yours

      Most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


    "The Duke's next letter, dated July 23rd, 1846, is expressive of
    concern at my having caught cold, adding; 'I am very sorry still to
    be unable to fix a time at which I can go to see you.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 13th, he writes--'I have to
    express my acknowledgments for several letters which I have
    received from you since you left London and I am very happy to
    learn that you like your situation there. I am still very much
    occupied by my duties in London but hope the Parliament will soon
    be prorogued and that I may be enabled to quit London and move to
    other parts of the Country where my presence is required;' and in
    the Duke's next, dated Aug. 17th, he writes; 'My duties will
    require my removal at a distance from London for at least two
    months or more.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 25th, he writes; 'I am under
    the necessity of going out of Town early tomorrow.'"


      Sept. 1st, 1846.

      I am concerned to find that my silence is considered _unkind_ and
      that this unkindness is aggravated by my having travelled up from
      Portsmouth on Sunday! It is true! I did so. I was sorry for it.
      But my services to the Public rendered necessary my being in
      London early Monday morning which I could not have performed if I
      had not travelled on Sunday. However you shall not again have
      reason to complain of disappointment. I announce to you that I
      will write no more. If you could have attended to anything so
      trifling as what you might read in the Newspapers about Me! You
      might have seen that in the last week I was occupied at a
      distance from London during five days out of the seven and that
      in that space of time I have travelled and rode little short of
      800 miles.


Indorsed by Miss J. "Who is he that saith and it cometh to pass when
THE _Lord_ commandeth it not?"

And now came the storm, springing from a misunderstanding pitifully out
of proportion to the _furore_ it excited! Miss J. and her friend Mrs.
L. had engaged a cottage, and were about to move into it. Miss J. wrote
to her guardian, desiring him to advance her funds for the furniture of
her new abode. A day or so later, in writing to the Duke, Miss J. told
him of the transaction, in her usual involved style, and asked his
opinion of the matter. The rest of the note was, as usual, filled with
incoherent reproaches for his lack of promptness in writing. The
unfortunate Duke probably perused the letter hastily, and comprehended
nothing but that Miss J. found fault with him about something, and that
she wished a loan from somebody. His patience had been worn threadbare
by much carping and criticism, and he answered her letter in that given
below. The whole affair is so absurd, as sketched in Miss J.'s Diary,
that the account is given in her own words, only omitting a few of the
superfluous and irrelevant quotations from Scripture.


      LONDON, Sept. 23, 1846.

      In order to prevent Irritation; and to avoid the receipt of
      repeated Letters expressing the same; I determined that I would
      inform Miss J. that I would write no more.

      I had before repeatedly assured her, that I could not answer Her
      Letters regularly; but nothing would do, She continued to be
      angry and to complain with bitterness.

      I have therefore been under the necessity of announcing that she
      is not to expect to hear from me! She has now mentioned to me
      that she had written to me to desire that I would assist Her with
      a Loan of Money. I have not received the Letter containing that
      Desire.

      But I answer at once; that I will give her any reasonable
      assistance she can require from me; when she will let me know in
      clear distinct Terms what is the Sum she requires.

      But I announce again; that I never will write upon any other
      Subject.

      WELLINGTON.


    "_Friday, September 26^th, 1846._ O my God, Wherefore hast Thou
    thought proper to let Satan try and distress me in this
    unanticipated manner?

    "I did not ask Thee to bestow the Duke upon me! I did not think of
    ever writing to him until Thou madest me do so! and therefore I
    marvel at his being allowed to torture me first in one way and then
    in another for the last twelve years of my life, and above all by
    what he has now so insultingly done in pretending to think that I
    have written to him for a _Loan_, which Thou knowest, for Thy honor
    and glory I would not do under existing circumstances, for a
    thousand worlds! And I bless Thee for influencing me to Copy the
    letter addressed to my Guardian, word for word in my Diary,
    commencing my letter to the Duke as follows:

    "'Having just written to my Guardian requesting him to oblige me
    with a Loan to purchase the furniture required for my Cottage I
    resume my pen, My dearest Duke to acquaint you thereof feeling
    still influenced to let you know how things are going forward
    respecting it. Which Loan he will be at liberty to deduct out of my
    Dividends being by no means large as I propose furnishing it so
    simply, being all that is necessary living in such retirement as we
    shall always do,' etc.

    "At which, the more I look, the more unlikely it would appear that
    the Duke would understand it in any light that would for a moment
    lead him to suppose I could so far forget myself or the honour I
    have for His great name Which is above every name as to bow down
    thus, God having declared, 'It is _abomination_ for the righteous
    to bow down before the wicked.' Consequently my indignation at his
    insulting letter led at once to my treating it as it deserves,
    telling him that _nothing upon earth could_ have astonished me more
    than such insult, conveying an idea that I had purposed
    condescending receiving any Loan from his hands, which I would
    rather starve than do! and so I would! Yes, I would if I had no
    other means of subsistence die with starvation sooner than ask any
    favor of that kind from him! knowing as I do that Christ's Great
    Holy Name would be so dishonored thereby. Consequently, since it
    would be for _His Holy Name sake_, as well as knowing what was due
    to my high calling in Him, starvation would be comparatively sweet!
    rejoicing in being considered worthy, whilst so unworthy, so
    utterly unworthy of suffering for His Great Holy Name sake. I have
    called upon the Duke to apologize to me as the unwarrantable insult
    offered to me demands. Having given this over with himself into
    _God's_ Hands to undertake the whole cause for me in whatever way
    is most for His own honor and glory, He will doubtlessly make him
    do as HE pleases,--and if not, HE will deliver me, I hope from him
    for ever. After _such_ a letter as this, displaying more of his
    character than I have ever yet seen, I have too much contempt for
    him to desire any further communication with him, despising him
    accordingly.--

    "Having given a little vent to my feelings by writing the above, I
    will now attempt to describe the circumstances concerning this
    insulting letter.

    "The first thing on awaking I was influenced to get up however
    unwell, in case a letter by the earliest Post should arrive from
    the Duke, little imagining what was in store for me, when God
    thought proper to attract my attention to so remarkable a
    Scripture, namely. 'The preparation of the heart in man and the
    answer of the tongue is from the Lord.' HE permitted me sensibly to
    feel His 'strength made perfect in weakness,' otherwise I should
    have sunk under the blow! But as his letter was put into my hands,
    such an upholding power was exercised over me that however
    astonished at its contents and indignant thereat, The Lord was with
    me....

    "I lost no time in answering the Duke as he deserved, my heart
    glowing with all the holy indignation such an insulting offer so
    _coarsely_ conveyed was calculated to call forth. I then hurried
    off to Mrs. L. with that and the one just before received, which
    she viewed in like manner, considering it disgraceful treatment in
    his daring to write to me thus. She only waits his reply to mine
    (which I read to her and on my return home enclosed and forwarded,
    hastening off myself to a Post Office for that purpose) and the
    Lord's influence in order to take up _her_ powerful pen and address
    him as his offered insult deserves.

    "On my return from the Post Office I opened my loved Bible at the
    words; 'The wicked fleeth when no man pursueth, but _the righteous
    are bold as a lion_,' encouraging me to think increasingly that my
    bold indignant fearless reply to the Duke was justified."

Then follow other "Scriptures," all applied to her credit and the
Duke's disadvantage, and a prayer in which she beseeches the Almighty
to "take this man into Thy Hands and compel him to do me the justice I
deserve."

A tempest in a teapot! That the Commander-in-chief of the British
armies, the greatest soldier of his age, should have been subjected to
the attacks of a peevish woman's tongue, is ridiculous; but there is a
pitiable side to the affair as well. One cannot help feeling compassion
for the poor old man,--seventy-seven years of age now,--even while one
laughs at the absurdity of the situation. Miss J., as usual, could not
let matters rest, but prepared for another attack. Her Diary describes
her sensations of suspense as she awaited a reply from the Duke, and
"the Scriptures" with which she fortified her position. On Sunday she
writes:--

    "I have written another indignant letter to the Duke, in which I
    purpose enclosing his hair and picture, which last being made of
    sealing wax is of course of no value. These being the only things
    ever received or required by me, I am solicitous to relieve myself
    from the burthen they necessarily become under present circumstances.
    Consequently, after considering or reflecting that it may perhaps
    be more for the honor and glory of God to return them in silence, I
    have enclosed them in two blank covers, waiting now only to
    ascertain their weight in order that they may be stamped
    accordingly and reach him in safety."

It may be stated that even after receiving the Duke's letter of apology
Miss J. remained firm in her intention to return these gifts of the
Duke's. Mrs. L., however, who was constantly taking the part of a _deus
ex machina_ in Miss J.'s affairs, succeeded in persuading her to keep
both the hair and the picture.

The fiercely demanded apology arrived on Monday. Miss J. writes:--

    "I have to thank my good and gracious God for his indulgent
    kindness in sending me not only a letter from my Guardian with
    Enclosures, but also one from the Duke, apologizing fully."


      Sept. 27, 1846.

      I am very much concerned to find by a letter which I received
      this Morning from Miss J., that I was so unfortunate as to have
      read incorrectly or to have misunderstood Her letter!

      It appears that it was from Her Guardian and not from me that she
      intended to borrow money! I confess that it frequently happens to
      me to be unable to make out Miss J.'s handwriting! and I
      sometimes do not exactly comprehend what it appears to me that
      she intended to write! This is to be attributed to the Celerity
      with which she writes!

      I beg leave to apologize for my mistake and above all for
      thinking it possible that she might want to borrow money from me!
      I beg her forgiveness for this Error!

      Miss J.'s Most faithful

      Humble Servant

      WELLINGTON.

      P.S. I will never offend again in any manner.


Miss J. delayed acknowledging the Duke's reply for several days, but
finally sent off the following epistle, which she no doubt regarded as
a model of Christian forgiveness.


      Oct. 3rd, 1846.

      MY LORD DUKE,--I am grieved to say that it has taken a much
      longer period to subdue my indignation than as a Christian I
      could wish: consequently as I am incapable of dissimulation I
      have been reluctant to resume my pen since the day on which I
      received your merited apology, when I hastily answered it. But
      that reply was not permitted to be forwarded, therefore I sealed
      it up with the articles intended to accompany it until I could
      further learn what God would have me do, nor is it until this
      moment that He has given me even a capability of addressing you
      again!

      Yet as life is uncertain with all! it would, I doubt not,
      eventually have grieved me if anything had happened in the
      interim to rob me of the power of granting your request
      respecting my forgiveness. This I now do and sincerely hope God
      will forgive also! and far more perfectly and freely than I alas!
      as a Creature am enabled to do! _HE_ condescendingly assures them
      Who offend HIM yet seek forgiveness ... that their sins and
      iniquities are remembered "no more."...

      That you, My Lord Duke, may experimentally feel this, not only as
      regards this offence to one hitherto so devotedly bestowed upon
      you by Himself,--but any and every other transgression that can
      ever become an impediment to your eternal happiness is the
      earnest wish of

      His devoted Child and Servant

      A. J.

      Should it be the will of God to allow this to call forth a reply,
      it becomes my duty to add that I am still in the same lodging, my
      Cottage not yet being ready for our reception, nor will it be
      until Thursday the 8^th Ins^t. if so soon,--having required more
      time than anticipated for our entrance which I hope will be
      blessed.

      P.S. The idea, My Lord Duke, that there may come a moment when
      any spiritual consolation on my part may be sought for by you,
      induces me to place it in your power in that case to obtain such
      by adding that the address with which you are so familiar will
      always find me or my Guardian as follows.... Having said this, I
      hope that I have now done all that God requires from me, leaving
      it with Him accordingly.


Apparently the Duke did not feel the need of any spiritual consolation
from Miss J., for she did not hear from him again for two months. Even
then he only wrote because of her request that he would return a letter
she had sent him, announcing the death of her guardian.


      Dec. 15th, 1846.

      Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington presents his Compliments to
      Miss J. He assures her that whenever she has expressed a Desire
      to have back a paper enclosed to Him, he has invariably complied
      with her desire immediately on his having perused it. Letters
      addressed by the Duke to Miss J. have been returned to him: and
      he has invariably thrown them into the fire, and possibly the
      enclosed Letter!




CHAPTER X.

A BREATHING SPACE.


The first letter from the Duke for 1847 was not written until the year
was nearly two months old.


      LONDON, Feb. 22, 1847.

      Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington presents His Compliments to
      Miss J.; and acknowledges the receipt of two letters from her one
      on Saturday last; the other of the 21^st Ins^t this morning.

      He writes only for this purpose! He declines to anything [_sic_]
      further to Miss J. Being convinced that as usual any
      correspondence will end in his giving Her Offence, However much
      he may desire and endeavour to please her.


    "I remarked to him in reply to this style of addressing me that I
    cared no more for his Field Marshalship than his Generalship,--which
    I dare say amused him. He was well aware of this, knowing it is
    written, 'If any man will be a pleaser of man then is he not the
    servant of Christ,' consequently however solicitous to render
    'honour to whom honour,' my chief concern then as now consisted in
    obedience to this Divine enquiry, 'Lord, what wilt THOU have me to
    do?' delighting in the same accordingly."


      LONDON, May 6, 1847.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am very much obliged to you for the kind
      letter which I have this morning received without date! upon the
      subject of the Misfortune by which I have lately been afflicted
      in the loss of my Brother! [Endnote 11]

      I am very sensible of your kindness in writing to me; for the
      consolation upon which you suggest my reflection and for your
      enquiry about my health! I thank you! I am by the Mercy of the
      Almighty quite well!

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


This letter is, as Miss J. states in her Diary, "clad in deep
mourning," or in other words, with a black seal, and written on
black-edged paper.

    "The Duke's next letter is dated May 11th, in which he writes--'I
    am very much obliged to you for your letter of the 9th. I answered
    the last which you wrote to me on the day I received it.'

    "Having had an objection to the Notice which the Duke's letters,
    seal, etc., attracted I was in the habit generally of receiving
    them through my friend Mrs. L.'s hands however aware that the Duke
    preferred addressing me at my own residence which the following
    paragraph from his letter dated May 14th implies."


      LONDON, May 14, 1847.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your Letter dated Wednesday
      night.

      I have directed all my Letters lately and covers to Mrs. L.
      excepting one to ---- and will direct this under cover to the
      same Gentleman.

      You feel an anxiety respecting my Welfare and write to me
      accordingly! for which I entertain a grateful Sense: and I am in
      the habit of returning My thanks; which Letters you are anxious
      to receive.

      This is all very right and proper; and there can be no reason for
      which you should not send your Letters to me; and for which I
      should not send you answers directed to _yourself_ at your own
      _Residence_!

      But you desire that my Letters should be sealed with my own Seal!
      which having a Coronet; and other usual Marks of Distinction,
      occasion some observation in your Lodgings and your Neighborhood!
      which you do not much like! You therefore desire that the letters
      addressed to you by me should be sent to one of your friends.

      Your friends know nothing about me! and do not like to receive
      Letters for you from an unknown Person! Of this I am quite
      assured and to tell you the truth I don't like to send a letter
      addressed to you to one of your friends, unless I should be able
      to cut off part of your Letter directing me to do so, the name of
      that friend in your hand writing!

      I therefore tell you that I will not write to you unless I am
      enabled to direct to yourself at your own Residence; or I should
      have in your hand writing the name and address of your friend,
      which I can include with your Letter.

      I will not be guilty of the unpardonable act of writing a letter
      to a Lady or Gentleman addressed to another; without showing that
      I have Authority for so doing!

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


      LONDON, May 19th, 1847.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your Letter of the 17^th. I
      have already acknowledged all that I had received from you! at
      least I believe so!

      But you write at great length; with much celerity, in light
      colored Ink, and much time is required to read one of your
      Letters! However I am sensible of your Motives for and your
      kindness in writing them!

      I peruse them with attention as soon as I can! and I answer them
      when in my power.

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 3rd, he writes; 'I have
    received several letters from you the dates of which you will find
    at the bottom of this. I am very sensible of and grateful for the
    interest that you feel and express in my welfare.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 14th, he writes--'I am much
    obliged to you for your letters my dear Miss J., particularly for
    the last of Thursday afternoon in which you inform me that you are
    better which I am rejoiced to hear. I trust that you will keep
    yourself quiet and follow the advice of your Medical Attendant.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Aug. 21st, he writes; 'I write to
    thank you for your letters and to express my congratulations upon
    the improvement of your Health, which I trust in God will soon be
    restored entirely.'

    "The Duke's next letter is dated Sept. 9th wherein he writes; 'I am
    very much concerned to learn that you are again indisposed, but as
    you tell me that the Medical gentleman who attends you thought well
    of you I hope that this relapse is only accidental.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Sept. 11th, he writes--'Since I
    last wrote to you I have received your letters of the 8th & 9th and
    I am much concerned that you are still unwell, suffering from cold.
    I hope that you will soon be quite well.' Again in the Duke's next
    letter he writes, dating it Sept. 22nd; 'I have been very much
    concerned to learn from the perusal of the several letters which I
    have received of different dates up to the 20th Inst. that you are
    still suffering from indisposition, although at times rather
    better. I trust you will avoid to tire yourself by writing. There
    is nothing like Rest for ailing remedies, and the bounty of
    Providence in a recovery from sickness.'

    "In the Duke's next letter he again refers to my indisposition, for
    I had been dangerously ill at that time. It is dated Sept. 28th. 'I
    am very much concerned to hear that you continue to feel
    indisposed.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Oct. 2nd, he writes--'I hope that
    you will continue in good health. You will if you keep yourself
    warm in the severe weather of the Autumn and commencement of the
    winter--and in tranquillity.'

    "In the Duke's next letter dated Oct. 7th he writes--'I have and
    thank you for your letters of the 2nd & 3rd, the last finished on
    the 4th, and I am happy that you are in your new dwelling which I
    hope you will find satisfactory to you, and above all that the Air
    will be salubrious.'

    "Judging by the Duke's next, I think that he must have
    misunderstood my intentions, as he writes in his letter, dated Oct.
    16th; 'I am concerned to learn that you are again about to change
    the place of your Abode. I should think that these constant changes
    must fatigue you.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Oct. 12th, which I now perceive
    ought to have been introduced above that of the 16th, he writes--'I
    am very much pleased that you are not otherwise than comfortable in
    your new residence.'

    "I presume, judging by the Duke's next letter, dated Dec. 18th,
    that I had referred to my poor Jane's illness, as he writes; 'I am
    sorry to hear that your favorite companion disturbs your rest as
    rest is especially necessary after the recovery from any illness.'"

The correspondence had in 1848 dwindled down almost to nothingness, at
least on the Duke's side. It is only doing Miss J. justice to believe
that her zeal and industry continued unabated. There had apparently
been no other dispute. Miss J. herself remarks upon the fact that
during the entire year she received but three letters from the Duke.

    "It may be seen judging by these letters, that there was not any
    other cause for the fewness of such but the full occupation of his
    time alluded to so frequently. Therefore I presume this was
    permitted by The Great Lord of Lords for unerring purposes known
    only to Himself.

    "The first in this year is dated May 8th, wherein the Duke
    writes--'It is perfectly true that much time has elapsed since I
    have written to you and that I have received many letters from you
    for which I ought to have returned my thanks, but the demands upon
    and the employment of my time in the service of the Public has been
    so constant that I really have not had leisure. I hope that you are
    well and that the weather will re-establish your health entirely,
    and by enabling you to go out into the Air fortify against future
    attacks.'"


      LONDON, July 30, 1848.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received many Letters and this morning
      one of yesterday with copies of many others before written! I was
      and am sorry to learn that you are unwell. Your letters are
      extremely difficult to read, and my time is and has been much
      occupied by my Duties!

      Believe me Dear Miss J. ever

      Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.

      P.S. I have frequently entreated to write your Address, your
      place of Abode on each Letter. It is not possible for me to
      recollect every thing!


    "In the next letter from the Duke, dated Dec. 24th, he writes; 'I
    am really much concerned that my time has been so much occupied
    lately and I have been so much in movement as that I have not been
    able to write to you.'"

1849.


      LONDON, Feb. 2, 1849.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am really much concerned that the Newspapers
      should insert statements of my being sick, of which the Editors
      can know nothing. I thank God! I am & have been as well
      throughout the Winter as I have been in my Life.

      Ever Yours Most Faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


      LONDON, Feb. 20, 1849, Morning.

      It is very true My Dear Miss J. that some time has elapsed since
      I have been able to go to see you, and that I have omitted to
      write to you. The reason of this last mentioned omission is, that
      I could not go to see you or fix a time at which I could and as I
      had not heard from you, I thought it best not to write. I beg you
      observe likewise that I have been time [_sic_] at Windsor Castle;
      and also at my own House in Hants since I saw you.

      I am very sorry; but my Time is so much occupied; and while the
      Almighty will Deign to permit me to live, will be so occupied; as
      that I shall not have leisure to pay visits. I have frequently
      expressed my regrets; that it shd be so; and repeat them now. I
      received a letter on Saturday night last; commenced that morning;
      and ended in the afternoon. I wrote an answer; and just as I was
      about to close it and send it off on Monday; I received the
      Report of the occurrence of a severe Family misfortune; which
      prevented the execution of my purpose.

      I received a second note from you last night dated yesterday
      afternoon, and I am delighted to learn that your Eyes are better.
      I wish to thank you for these Letters. But I cannot hold out any
      prospect of being able to go to see you. I will not deceive you.
      I am employed every day at this time by Candle Light from six in
      the Morning till twelve at night! After all! God Almighty has so
      framed all His Creatures, that even that noble, Animal Man!
      requires refreshment food & Rest as well as others.

      At my Age I feel that I require it: and I asked you not to press
      me to do that which I cannot do; without neglecting Duties which
      I have engaged to perform. I will go to see you; notwithstanding
      that I tell you fairly that nothing can be more disagreeable to
      me than to be followed by a Mob; as I invariably am; when I go to
      the part of the Town in which you reside.

      But I don't care: I will go to see you when I find that I can do
      so; and I will give you previous notice as usual.

      Ever My Dear Miss J.

      Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


In spite of this sudden resumption of cordiality, Miss J. did not hear
from the Duke again for over five months. But the letter then is
kindly, bearing no trace of the harshness that marked his epistles
written a couple of years earlier.


      LONDON, July 31, 1849.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have been at Windsor Castle since Monday from
      whence I have only now returned. I have to acknowledge the
      receipt of several letters from you written with your usual
      kindness, of motive as well as of sentiment and expression.

      I congratulate you upon your success upon Mrs. L.'s Nephew!

      I hope that you may go to the Seaside during the period of the
      fine season. Whether you are to derive benefit from the air or
      Bathing; it will be more beneficial during fine weather than
      after or even during the Storm of the Equinox.

      It is impossible for me to say at what period Parliament will be
      prorogued.

      I thank you for the beautiful Lines which you have sent me.

      One of your Letters was written on Sunday the 28^th, another on
      Monday the 29^th, and a third on Tuesday the 30^th.

      I hope that this may reach you this evening. But it is late, and
      I am afraid it may not.

      Ever yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


      WALMER CASTLE, Sept. 7th, 1849.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have this day received your letter dated
      Wednesday; as you did not know the day of the month. I am writing
      to you on Friday the 7^th You ought to receive this on Saturday
      the 8^th inst.

      I had not heard of the Indisposition, still less of the death of
      your Guardian! But I have been for some time absent from London
      and it is possible that letters may have been missent. But they
      will reach me at last.

      I sincerely condole with you upon the loss which you have
      sustained! I hope that this loss will not be an inconvenience to
      you in the management of your pecuniary affairs.

      I am concerned to read in this same letter received this Morning
      the report of the illness of your friend Mrs. L.; and that of
      your young and protected companion Jane! and even that you had
      not yourself been well! I trust that the Almighty will restore
      them to Health as well as by His favor your Health may likewise
      be reestablished and secured.

      I have been quite well! and am as strong and hearty as ever.

      Believe me ever yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J. appends a word of explanation to this letter:--

    "The Lady here referred to by the Duke is older than myself,
    therefore the Duke is in _that_ respect mistaken, never having seen
    her."


      WALMER CASTLE, Sept. 13, 1849.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I received your Letter dated Saturday 8^th and
      this morning that of the 11^th in which you communicate to me the
      sad Intelligence of the loss which you had sustained in your
      friend Mrs. L.! I sincerely condole with you! She was a good and
      sincere friend of yours and I felt sincere respect and esteem for
      Her Character! You do not mention your young friend Jane; who was
      suffering also when you wrote before. I sincerely hope that she
      is better and progressing towards recovery as you could wish!

      Believe me My Dear Miss J.

      Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "I presume by the Duke's next letter, dated Sept. 26th, that I made
    previous enquiries concerning some letters previously forwarded as
    he writes; 'I cannot now lay my hands on that letter but I must
    have received it. I think that you need not make yourself uneasy
    about any letter which you may address me.'"

The caustic tone common in the Duke's letters now reappears. Miss J.'s
habit of enclosing to him letters she had written to others, with the
request that he would read and return them, had long been a source of
annoyance to him; and now his irritation breaks bonds.


      WALMER CASTLE, October 22, 1849.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received this evening your Letter dated
      September 30^th which was Sunday, Inclosing in a colored cover,
      two Letters addressed to Miss Coutts which I return in the same
      cover according to your desire without loss of time.

      I have not received a book, and considering the uncertainty of
      receiving a letter from you; which you have only to direct,
      stamp; and put into the Box at the Post Office; which it is not
      certain that you can do with precision! I don't recommend you to
      endeavour to send me a Book. I am happy to learn that you will
      see your sister!

      Believe me Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "In the Duke's next letter, dated Nov. 15th, he writes--'I have no
    recollection of having failed to write an answer to any letter of
    which you desired to receive an acknowledgment.

    "'I receive thousands of letters, a vast proportion of which I am
    under the necessity of answering, and I am of course desirous of
    avoiding to write more than is necessary; particularly to a person
    so particular as you are in respect to the forms and contents of
    the letter addressed to you.'

    "The Duke's next letter is evidently an angry one. It is dated Nov.
    21st, wherein he writes--'I have received your letter of the 17th
    Inst. in which you have enclosed certain letters which you have
    written to Sir Robert Peel which I return! I am not the Post Man!
    nor the Secretary of Sir Robert Peel nor your Secretary!'"

Miss J. retained a copy of her answer to the last.


      November 25th, 1849.

      MY LORD DUKE,--Your unmerited angry letter astonished me
      inexpressibly, being a reply to one as kind and affectionate as
      my heart could dictate. Nor had I the most remote intention of
      taking the unwarrantable liberty of considering you in either of
      the characters you mention, but simply in that of a valued and
      beloved friend whose kind advice I was desirous to receive before
      taking a step which I had feared may otherwise vex you. This
      feeling my Letter to Your Grace plainly expressed, nor could I
      have believed after such affectionate disinterested devotedness
      to you for the last sixteen years such a simple confidential
      request would meet with the answer received. That letter, as is
      my custom in the time of perplexity, distress and trouble, I
      prayerfully spread before The Great "Lord of lords," beseeching
      Him to undertake for me, showing me how I ought to act under such
      circumstances, relying upon Him accordingly. Since then I made an
      attempt to address you not wishing you to remain ignorant of the
      safe arrival of those enclosures, but had I been given worlds I
      could not proceed. Consequently I laid aside my pen, fancying The
      Lord did not mean me to write at all. However, finding myself
      this morning thus influenced, I purpose, if HE permit forwarding
      what I write, promising should it be His good will and pleasure
      ever to allow me to intrude on Your Grace again, to procure such
      paper, etc., etc., as you require, apologizing for any _apparent_
      want of respect on such points, which, loving you as I have done,
      I did not consider was expected. But as "it is written," "Honour
      to whom honour," I shall sedulously avoid every repetition of the
      kind, such being the command of Him "with Whom is no
      variableness, neither shadow of turning," "Who is the same
      yesterday, to-day and forever," consequently One I must ever love
      _above all_ remaining to the latest moment of my existence,

      His devoted Child and Servant

      A. J.


This note did not call forth a reply of equal amiability from the Duke.

    "I have felt no displeasure nor anger and was not even surprised by
    your letter complaining of my answer in which I returned the
    volumes of letters which you had sent for my perusal. Considering
    the Numberless occasions which you have quarrelled with me because
    of some omission of Seal or Signature or even of a word or a
    letter. I thank God that I am never angry with anybody; upon any
    subject.

    "Many would think on reading the above that I had treated the Duke
    unkindly, but as I can appeal to Him Who seeth not as man seeth, I
    have nothing to fear from any erroneous impressions, having
    depended upon The Great Lord of lords throughout my acquaintance
    with him to direct and influence my heart and pen to fulfil all His
    good will and pleasure by working in me for that purpose, for His
    Holy Name sake! which I trust will be glorified and Magnified
    accordingly!"

The Duke's last letter for this year is not marked by increased
suavity:--


      STRATHFIELDSAYE, Dec. 14, 1849.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have nothing to add to what I stated in my
      former Letters regarding your sending me your Letters addressed
      to others!

      I beg that you will not do so.

      To read one letter from you is as much as I can do.

      Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J. adds:--

    "This in all probability was the case, as he advanced in years,
    consequently I never intruded any others upon him afterwards."




CHAPTER XI.

THE FINAL RUPTURE.


Early in 1850 Miss J. accidentally received a painful blow in the
breast. A tumor soon developed, that caused her great suffering.
Frequent references to her "affliction" are found in her Diary for this
year and the next. She wrote an account of the occurrence to the Duke,
and received the following reply, quoted from the Diary:--

    "'I was much concerned on receiving this intelligence, but I hope
    that the consequences will not be so serious as I had apprehended.
    I hope that you will take care of yourself and not move at this
    severe season from your comfortable dwelling till you will be
    well.'

    "Anyone would perhaps conclude by the Duke's remark that he had
    seen my house but as such was never the case I presume my
    description thereof had made this impression, alluding to it
    accordingly, for however much I may and did wish it to be honored
    with his presence, I found such was not apparently His will Who
    declares the Way of man is not in himself.

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated March 18th, he refers to my dear
    Sister being with me as follows--'I am very sensible of this last
    circumstance and of the kindness and necessity of her attention to
    you during your illness.'

    "A parcel from me having been left at the Duke's house he writes
    referring to the same."


      STRATHFIELDSAYE, April 3, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I received a letter from you yesterday evening;
      another this morning dated the 2^nd Ins^t, both about a Parcel
      left at my House by your Sister!

      I am very much concerned that the regulations which I have been
      under the necessity of making and enforcing in respect to the
      Reception of Parcels at my House should have been inconvenient to
      you or your sister.

      But I have been under the necessity of ordering my Servants not
      to receive parcels; without previous orders from me! in order to
      prevent my private dwelling being made the Deposit of all the
      Trash that is written, invented, or in any manner made up! You
      find that I am frequently out of town. You wrote me that you
      would send a parcel but I received the notification only last
      night, and this morning one later; complaining that the Porter
      refused to take the Parcel. I am very sorry for any thing that
      can annoy you!

      But I cannot prevent this now that my Duties and avocations call
      me to a distance from London! But I have not yet acquired the
      practice of being in two places at the same time: that is to say
      in London to receive your letters and Parcels or those of your
      sister; and in the Country, about my Duties and avocations.

      If you will only reflect upon this! You will relieve yourself
      from great anxiety, and me from the vexation of annoying you.

      Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.

      I will review the contents of the Parcel as soon as I shall
      return to London in some days hence.


      LONDON, April 5, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I returned to London this day and immediately
      enquired for the Parcel. I will peruse the Books which you have
      sent as soon as I shall have leisure.

      Ever yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


    "This largest book was a book of my brother-in-law's on Prison
    discipline. What other books accompanied it I have forgotten.

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated April 26th, he writes--'I
    anxiously hope that you will soon be quite well.' Again, in his
    next letter, dated April 29th, he writes--'I hope that this fine
    weather which may be expected at this season of the year will
    altogether reestablish your health.'

    "By the Duke's next letter, dated May 21st, I must have referred to
    some thoughts of leaving England--as he writes--'I can understand
    your desire to avoid separating from your sister. I hope that you
    will let me know of your safe arrival in the United States and
    State your correct address in legible Hand writing if you should
    wish that I should write to you.'"


      LONDON, June 5, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have this morning received your Note directed
      to me, in which you ask to know whether I had before received a
      letter to inform me that your Voyage to the United States had
      been set aside.

      I had answered every letter I had received. I do not recollect to
      have received a letter containing this information!

      I am very glad to learn that you had set aside this Intention.

      Ever Yours most faithfully.

      WELLINGTON.


    "In the Duke's next letter, dated June 15th, he writes 'I have just
    now received your letter of the 15th. As I receive thousands of
    letters in a week it is impossible for me to say whether I received
    one from you put into the Post Office Friday Week.'

    "'I answer invariably, as I do this night at midnight, as soon as I
    receive your letter if due. I am much concerned but hope that you
    may recover entirely.'

    "It is very evident that from this period Satan was permitted to
    work in the Duke's mind, weakening consequently the power I had
    been permitted to exercise, by rendering my communications tedious,
    for in his next letter, dated May 14th 1850 he writes, 'Knowing
    your extreme sensitiveness about letters, their contents, the
    manner in which signed, sealed and folded up, I have always been
    most cautious about any letters sent you! Indeed, such Caution is
    quite laborious!'"


      LONDON, July 4, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am very sensible of your kindness in
      recollecting that I should feel exceedingly the loss of Sir
      Robert Peel!

      I assure you that I write to you whenever there is occasion and
      that I can have a moment's leisure! But a person who does not see
      it can have no notion of the Numbers of letters which I receive
      at all times of the day and night. Every body who hears of this
      applies to me; the least that I can do is to read and take care
      of and return the required acknowledgment. I am not surprised
      that you should be disappointed and complain! But I really write
      when I can!

      Your most faithful Servant,

      WELLINGTON.


    "In the Duke's next letter, dated July 9th, he writes--'I am much
    concerned to learn by the perusal of your Note of the 8th that you
    are still suffering. I am very sorry to hear that you are likely to
    lose the society of your Sister.'

    "In the Duke's next letter, dated July 12th, he writes--'I entreat
    you to write legibly and to avoid fatiguing yourself by writing too
    much.'

    "Part of the Copy of a letter written to the Duke, July 8th, 1850,
    in reference to my dear Sister's leaving me.'

    "'I dare not on this occasion indulge the hope of my dear Sister's
    continuation in England, she having this morning received a letter
    which renders it necessary that she should return home and I must
    pray to God to give me grace and strength to bear such a
    separation, Who alone can prevent my sinking under these various
    surrounding perplexities, for when she is gone I shall not have
    anyone but Himself to look to, with the exception of yourself to
    whom I have much to say if I could but consider it His Will that I
    should repose in you accordingly. O that HE may direct me and
    influence you to receive all I have to communicate in whatever way
    to His unerring Will prays yours devotedly.'"

The final quarrel was now approaching. The account of it is best given
in Miss J.'s own words, omitting, as heretofore, a large proportion of
the Biblical quotations.

    "May The Lord enable me to proceed as HE would have me do for His
    great holy name sake! for when, or how, to commence a description
    of the circumstances in which I was placed with regard to pecuniary
    matters, I know not. However, having besought the Lord to aid me I
    will at once state that my own Income, limited at best, had become
    still more so through a fire which took place on the property
    mortgaged, rendering it so small that it was impossible to live
    upon it without further help added! Meanwhile, the landed property
    we had expected to possess appeared, through a Will drawn out at a
    later date to belong to the younger branches of our family, which
    was a dreadful disappointment to my beloved Sister. She had buoyed
    up her hopes that _her_ portion thereof, united to mine would
    compensate for hopes which could now no longer be anticipated. This
    rendered her grief on my account additionally distressing, causing
    her to reason with and beseech me to spread the whole affair before
    the Duke. From the very thought of this I recoiled unutterably,
    thus inducing her to reproach me with a want of due affection and
    consideration for herself, as my death would be insupportable and
    must necessarily take place if she left me in England so situated.
    At length, considering as she had justly remarked that the Duke's
    abundant riches were bestowed upon him by God to do good with when
    in his power and that any aid afforded me could never be
    sufficiently great to admit of his feeling the loss thereof; also
    considering the gold and silver are _The Lord's_ Who could
    consequently dispose of it accordingly, ... therefore it appeared a
    _duty_ due to God and man to appeal to the Duke Who in _God's_
    sight may _justifiably_ have been expected to become a father unto
    me under _such_ circumstances. That, too, as above observed,
    without feeling the consequences thereof any more than the Ocean
    would miss a bubble that had appeared on its surface and then
    vanished forever.

    "O that I could pass over this part of my life in silence! But such
    does not appear to me consistent with the will of God. Therefore I
    must proceed and prepare to introduce the letter first addressed to
    His Grace on this subject.

    "July 11, 1850.

    "After waiting all day yesterday, desirous to resume my pen, yet
    unable to do so through conflicting feelings, I deferred it until
    to day, hoping to make a commencement to the details and complete
    it by degrees as my strength may admit. First of all, I thank you
    for your prompt reply to my last, which becomes my encouragement
    for thus intruding upon you particulars to which nothing but the
    most absolute necessity could ever have reconciled me....

    "I resume my pen after a brief interval to tell you that a remark
    made in one of your letters after my dear Mrs. L.'s death,--namely,
    'I do not know your circumstances,' combined with the remembrance
    of your never to be forgotten kindness in once affectionately
    exclaiming 'My Child!'--unite in encouraging me to think that you
    have but to know them (the circumstances,) in order to take such
    into due consideration and act thereon accordingly. O that God may
    enable me to relate and you, My dearest Duke, to receive the
    relation in whatever way is most agreeable to His unerring will!
    And may any and every valued attention extended to me be regarded
    by Him in the light which is calculated to call down upon your
    precious head eventually the consequences springing from those
    blessed words. 'Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these
    My children, ye have done it unto ME.' '_Enter thou into the joy of
    thy Lord!_'

    "When I had arrived thus far I was too much affected to proceed and
    was relieved by a burst of tears,--for who among all your earthly
    friends will feel half so rejoiced at your being so distinguished
    by the Great 'Lord of Lords' as one who has loved you so
    disinterestedly and devotedly? But since my own feelings as well as
    your wishes require brevity I must proceed.

    "At my beloved Mother's death, a Deed of Gift entitled me to a
    small Income which afterwards for my advantage was placed on a
    Mortgage by my Trustees, but which through a dreadful fire proved
    the reverse eventually, as I have found since my poor Guardian's
    death that the expenses or losses deriving therefrom were deducted
    from the principal of the Property. This leaves me, consequently,
    when again sold into the Funds, entitled to an Income quite
    inadequate to my support, although hoping that some landed Property
    would sell advantageously and become compensation for the same. My
    Sister felt most anxious that at such a time as this I should have
    every advantage, my _life_ depending upon nourishment and support.
    She therefore wrote to make enquiries concerning the sale of the
    Property, when to our disappointment a letter arrived showing that
    neither my sister or self were entitled to any portion thereof, it
    having been at a later period made over to the younger branches of
    the family. Consequently all her fondest wishes to render me
    through such means all that aid which her affectionate heart could
    desire have been hereby frustrated, leaving her in the greatest
    distress of mind at the thought of being obliged to quit me thus
    situated, namely, with two wounds arising from the blow and another
    about to break. These occasion a drain on my constitution which
    threatens to take away all my strength, reducing my frame
    accordingly.

    "The Medical Gentlemen impress upon my dear Sister the idea that I
    must die if I do not receive sufficient nourishment to supply the
    loss such occasion. These produce the most violent and continued
    perspirations, requiring the most strengthening things, namely,
    jellies, wines, soups, etc., etc., as they say it is a complete
    battle between the disease and the constitution. Which will conquer
    remains for Time to prove. Dr. P. further tells her that I may go
    on thus for three years and yet recover if great care is taken of
    me, as the lump since it has broken is considerably smaller. It is
    hoped that the linseed poultices will eventually draw it entirely
    away if my strength can only cope therewith. He also says that I
    ought to have a Nurse with me by night as well as by day,
    continually, as I am much too exhausted and debilitated to be left
    alone. This expense would in itself be more than the whole of my
    Income is adequate to defray. Consequently, it would appear that it
    is the will of God to place my life humanly speaking, in your
    hands, as the friend, next to Himself most dear to the heart of--

    "Yours Devotedly,

    "A. J."

The Duke's reply was energetic and to the point:--


      LONDON, July 12th, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have just now received from you a letter
      dated July 11^th written upon four sides of letter paper, and I
      am concerned to learn, after a most difficult Perusal thereof
      that your Health is still in a bad and precarious state! and your
      pecuniary affairs very much deranged! You had never before
      mentioned this last to me! You frequently named to me in your
      letters Your Guardian and your receipt through his hands of your
      Dividends, and I therefore concluded that your worldly affairs
      were well managed, while your Mind was occupied by reflecting on
      the future! But I have seldom read of such a state of pecuniary
      affairs as that you give in the letter which I have at last been
      able to read and to which I am endeavoring to write an answer!

      I beg you to let me know what sum it is you wish, at what time or
      times to be paid? Whether an order at a Banker would suit you? If
      Payable at a Banker usually employed by you, will you be so kind
      as to let me know his Name? All this _legibly written!_

      Ever yours most faithfully.

      WELLINGTON.

      I entreat you to write _legibly!_ and to avoid fatiguing yourself
      by writing too much!


This letter of the Duke's, if hardly gracious, is at least not unkind.
The answer he received was of a nature to drive a man of his
practicality to the verge of distraction:--


      MY DEAR DUKE,--As "for me to live is Christ, but to die is gain,"
      you may rest assured however surrounded by pecuniary
      difficulties, I should have preferred the latter to making known
      my circumstances to you. Had I not been so continually urged by
      my dear Sister telling me that it would kill her, that she could
      never bear to leave me in England thus situated and that she
      hoped for her sake that I should use the only means in my power
      for prolonging my life I never could have told you such truths. I
      am not surprised that they drew forth the remark that you had
      never read of such a state of pecuniary affairs. Nor would I
      offer so great an insult to my Christianity as to do more than
      add that the same God Who has thought proper thus to situate me
      knows that I would never dishonor His great Name by the slightest
      misrepresentation. Therefore, My dear Duke, if you read that
      letter carefully you will be much better able to calculate what I
      require than I am to tell you. I would not do so, nor am I able
      to tell you by what means I am to receive it as I never did such
      a thing and know nothing of money arrangements. Consequently I
      must leave all to God and yourself, beseeching Him to guide,
      influence and direct you to treat me in whatever way is most
      agreeable to His unerring will and to bless you accordingly.

      Your kind wish that I should not fatigue myself with writing too
      much is, rest assured, appreciated as it deserves, as every other
      mark of kindness and consideration shown to

      Yours devotedly,

      A. J.


A Harold Skimpole in petticoats! The ineffable condescension to the
worldly-mindedness of the Duke, the tone of spiritual pride that
pervades the letters, would be exasperating if they were not absurd.
That the humorous side of the affair was not apparent to the Duke is
shown by his reply:--


      LONDON, July 16, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am very sorry indeed if I should have
      offended you. But when you wrote to me a description of the State
      of your affairs, I concluded that you intended that I should form
      an opinion upon them and communicate the same to you!

      It is very true that you and I are of a different opinion. I
      think that God having endowed Men with reason, and the Power of
      judging Right from wrong! Has made Him responsible for the care
      of _Himself_ and for good will to all!

      You think that Man is responsible only for His Duty towards the
      Almighty! who charges Himself with the Rest! I dare say that I am
      mistaken! notwithstanding my Studies. You know more of this
      matter than I do!

      Ever Yours most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J. does not give a copy of her next letter to the Duke, but she
remarks that it consisted principally of observations upon complete
reliance on God, and disregard of earthly means; taking as her text,
"Seek FIRST the Kingdom of God and HIS righteousness and all these
things shall be added unto you."

The Duke's answer does not savor of things spiritual:--


      LONDON, July 23, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I am very much concerned to observe from your
      last letter that notwithstanding that you feel that you require
      my Worldly assistance; and are willing to accept and receive the
      same, you will not state to me the mode in which I am to render
      the Assistance required! I know that you have a Banker in London!
      Why don't you then let me know His Name? or state in whatever
      mode of those stated by me you would wish to receive what I
      should send. You may rely upon it that unless precautions are
      taken you will not receive the money sent! It will fall into the
      hands of thieves!

      Ever Yours most faithfully

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J. writes:--

    "In my reply to the Duke I assured him that I had no Banker in
    London to my knowledge, never having had to do more than
    occasionally receive my _Dividends_, when my Guardian transacted
    business, which generally speaking he forwarded by letter. But in
    order to give the Duke a clear idea how things stood, I promised to
    enclose two letters for his perusal, one from my Guardian _before_
    his death and the other from his wife _after_ it! Alas! by doing
    this I brought upon myself more trouble and sorrow than can ever be
    forgotten, through the untoward, unlooked for circumstances that
    attended them. These I would willingly omit if faithfulness to God
    and the world did not call upon me to proceed regularly as
    occurrences took place, however torn and wounded my mind may be!...
    I feel even now as I write that I wonder at myself for ever
    addressing the Duke again. However, I was then laid upon a bed of
    sickness and apparently approaching death, therefore it is probable
    that the eternal welfare of one to whom I had dedicated myself for
    so many years increased in importance in my estimation, if this
    were possible. Nor can I ever account for such devoted feelings to
    any individual beyond concluding that God had so decreed it.

    "Of course I lost no time in sending the letters promised and
    required, but they miscarried."

Hearing nothing from the Duke, Miss J. wrote again:--

    "July 23, 1850.

    "As I cannot think it possible, My Dear Duke, that you _could_
    treat me with so much cruelty in my present state as to have
    received two such letters as my last without noticing them, I write
    to enquire whether you have heard from me twice since I heard from
    you. I entreated you not to keep my mind in suspense, as I was not
    in a State to bear it.

    "I have a Physician twice a week, and yesterday, on finding my
    pulse in such a State he seemed very dissatisfied, saying if my
    mind were not kept free from all anxiety it will kill me.
    Therefore, My Dear Duke, you surely cannot hear this without using
    every means in your power to relieve it.

    "You ask me in your Letter of the 12^th Inst. in what way I should
    like you to acquiesce with my wishes? or through what Bank? I
    answered that I should be guided entirely by your advice, yet not a
    word did I receive in your next on the subject, nor from that time
    to this have you referred to it. This to me is quite
    incomprehensible, as you in the same letter imply it is your
    intention that I shall have all that is necessary. I cannot help
    adding I consider this the least _God_ would have me expect from
    _Your_ hands, My dearest Duke, under present trying circumstances,
    feeling towards you as HE knows I have done so many years such
    disinterestedness dedication and affection."

The Duke's next letters show his irritation.


      LONDON, July 25, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your Letter of the 24^th that
      is yesterday, but not the one which you state in that letter that
      you had written to me yesterday--it is on Tuesday--containing
      _two enclosures_ being a letter from your Guardian and another
      from his Wife.

      These letters when forwarded will enable me to judge of what it
      is you require! and the mode in which I am to send you what you
      require!

      It is indeed very difficult to supply the daily wants of those
      who will not state what they are; or adopt any means of receiving
      what she requires!

      However I shall be able to form a judgment when I shall receive
      the letters you received from Mr. & Mrs. ----

      Ever Yours most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


      LONDON, July 26, 1850.

      MY DEAR MISS J.,--I have received your Note of the 25th and the
      number inclosed of the Shop at which the Post Office is kept, ...
      and I wish you to make Enquiries after your own Letter! If I am
      to make enquiries they will be forwarded as a letter from
      yourself which I must send to the Post Office; and I beg you to
      write accordingly in plain simple Terms reciting the fact! and as
      your letter must be sent to the general Post Office I beg leave
      without intending any Offence to request that all endearing
      expressions which do not suit the Relations in which we stand
      towards each other should be omitted! as they might lead to false
      conclusions injurious to you! I must observe to you that the
      General Post Office will probably answer that if the last letter
      contained papers of consequence; it ought to have been marked and
      paid for as a registered letter; when put into the Post! The cost
      is sixpence!

      This is the mode in which I proposed to send you Money! You would
      have to do no more than sign the printed receipt for the letter
      which would be sent to you with it.

      The Post Office would know nothing of the Contents of the Letter!

      Living in the World and with the Wants and necessities incident
      to Human Nature! it is necessary that _even you_ should comply
      with its simple Rules and Customs.

      Yours most faithfully,

      WELLINGTON.


The missing packet was at last found and forwarded. The enclosures
stated about the same explanation of Miss J.'s affairs that she had
herself given in her letter to the Duke. They also stated that the
amount of her income from this time would be only _L_12 10_s._ 1_d._
every half year. At the same time these came to hand, the Duke received
Miss J.'s letter of July 23rd, given above.


      LONDON, July 30, 1850.

      _Miss J._,--Since I addressed you last your letter of the 23rd of
      July which had been refused or missing reached me with the
      enclosed letters returned. I confess that I cannot admit of the
      Christian Justice of your _Reproaches_.

      I told you that I was ready and willing to give you pecuniary
      assistance if you would say what you required, and would adopt
      one of several Modes in which I offered to send it to you! But
      you have given no answer either as to warrant, a means of sending
      you this; and yet you reproach me! This is not just or fair!

      In truth according to the statement in these letters there is no
      absolute _necessity_ for any Assistance at present!

      Your most obedient Humble Servant

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J. writes,--

    "To describe how I recoiled from this letter received from His
    Grace would be impossible. My feeling was both on his account and
    my own. On his, to think that while possessed of thousands yearly
    he could thus have reconciled himself to imply that the utterly
    insufficient sum alluded to in those enclosed letters was enough
    for me in that truly distressing helpless state. On my own part, I
    lamented deeply that I should ever have been _influenced_ under ANY
    circumstances to ask a favor at his hands. This I would rather have
    died than do, had not the affection of so fond a Sister, who judged
    of others by her own generous heart overcome every selfish feeling
    and at length prevailed!"

Miss J. immediately prepared and sent off the following letter to the
Duke.


      July 30, 1850.

      MY LORD DUKE,--Having placed my cause in His Hands "Who judgeth
      righteously and Whose Countenance beholdeth the thing that is
      right," consequently Who will not, I am assured, suffer you with
      impunity to treat me with greater coarseness and want of due
      consideration than I under similar circumstances should have
      extended to a common menial that I had known or who had served me
      for the same number of years, I leave you in His Hands
      accordingly. I resume my pen merely to inform you that as you
      thought proper after reading my Guardian's letter written several
      years ago and his wife's of later date, _yet_ can at the
      conclusion of your most unwelcome letter write as follows, "In
      truth, according to the contents of these letters there is no
      absolute necessity for any assistance at present,"--I desire to
      remark that if it were not necessary _then_ it will _never_ be
      necessary from _Your_ hands. Consequently, should you at _your_
      good will and pleasure think proper to take the liberty of
      sending me a _Registered_ letter with an _Enclosure_, I shall not
      only decline receiving it but likewise refuse to sign the paper
      that accompanies it in the Post Man's charge, let the
      consequences be whatever they may. It is to prevent such an
      Intrusion on your part and such a due mortification on mine
      towards Your Grace that I have now resumed my pen--for ill as I
      still feel I would rather beg my bread from door to door than
      receive a favor at _such_ hands! preferring to trust myself
      wholly in _His_ Hands Who declares "The silver is Mine and the
      gold is Mine."...

      May God in His infinite mercy, My Lord Duke, give you Grace to
      understand this Divine assertion, "Whoso shall offend one of
      these little ones which believe in ME, it were better for him
      that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
      drowned in the depth of the Sea."

      May HE before it is too late incline you to draw near unto Him
      accordingly prays,

      His devoted Child and Servant,

      A. J.


      LONDON, August 7, 1850.

      Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington presents His Compliments to
      Miss J. He is much concerned at her answer and that he has given
      her Offence, however unintentionally! The Duke may have been
      mistaken! But it certainly appeared to him that the Money lent
      upon Mortgage; of which the Interest was in arrears of a year,
      and paid very irregularly might with advantage have been called
      in and the rest of the Sum might with advantage have been applied
      to defray the expenses attending Miss J.'s illness! More
      particularly as Miss J. was unwilling to adopt any of the modes
      suggested by which pecuniary assistance might have been sent her!

      The Duke assures her that he is not disposed to expose her to any
      thing inconvenient by desiring that she should sign any papers!

      He was anxious that she should receive the pecuniary assistance
      which might be useful or necessary to Her in the manner least
      tiresome to Herself and least likely to occasion the inquiries of
      busy and impertinent curiosity!

      However Miss J. may rely upon it that he will not interrupt her
      repose excepting in consequence of her own expressed desire!


One fancies a mocking tone in the last sentence of the Duke's letter,
as though he surmised Miss J.'s silence would not be of long duration.
He did not reckon without his host. Miss J. held her peace for three
weeks. Then, seeing by the "Times" that the Right Hon. Charles
Arbuthnot had died suddenly at the house of the Duke of Wellington, she
wrote a letter of condolence which in its expressions of deep sympathy
and its religious consolations would not have been out of place if
indited upon the death of the Duke's nearest of kin. [Endnote 12] To
this effusion the Duke sent no answer. Nothing daunted, Miss J. only
waited for an excuse to write again. This she soon found in a newspaper
paragraph stating that the Duke had been thrown from his carriage. Her
letter and the Duke's reply follow:


      Sept. 16, 1850.

      MY LORD DUKE,--Notwithstanding my changed feelings I am deeply
      concerned to hear of your late accident, and still more deeply
      grateful to Almighty God for your preservation. I sincerely hope
      that such gracious interposition of Providence in your favor may
      eventually lead you to glorify Him in your life and conversation
      accordingly, 'seeking Him while HE may be found, and calling upon
      Him while HE is near," ever bearing in mind that _HE_ is "no
      respecter of persons." Consequently none but those who through
      His Grace have undergone "a new birth unto righteousness," can
      justifiably expect to enter into His Kingdom. That HE may enable
      you to understand this experimentally is the earnest wish of

      His devoted Child and Servant,

      A. J.

      P.S. I do not give you my address, My Lord Duke, in order to
      elicit an answer, but merely to imply that should my Christian
      advice be required you may know where to find me.


By the Duke's answer, he apparently feels no need nor desire for
Christian advice.


      WALMER CASTLE, Sept. 17, 1850.

      Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington begs leave to acknowledge
      the receipt of Miss J.'s Note of the 10^th Ins^t.

      He is thankful that he received no injury by the overturn of his
      carriage a week ago! He returns his thanks to Miss J. for
      noticing the accident!


Miss J. was so delighted at the receipt of this note that she
immediately replied to it in four sheets of closely written note-paper.
She began by explaining elaborately that she had seen the notice of his
accident only a few days before, although by his letter she learned it
had occurred a week ago. After ringing the changes on this, she
proceeded to bestow Christian admonition in her usual liberal fashion.
The Duke's reply was little more effusive than the note he had sent
last.


      WALMER CASTLE, Sept. 20, 1850.

      Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington presents his Comp^ts to Miss
      J. He is very sensible of her kindness in writing to him. He
      merely mentioned as a fact that the accident to which she
      referred had occurred in the preceding week!

      He is happy to learn that Miss J. is improved in Health!


In Miss J.'s next she reprimands the Duke for having misdirected the
envelope of his last note to her, and inquires if he ever received her
letter on the death of _Charles_ Arbuthnot, as she now calls him.


      WALMER CASTLE, Sept. 24, 1850.

      F. M. the Duke of Wellington presents His comp^ts to Miss J.! He
      has received Her note without Date in which she encloses the
      Cover which the Duke returns!

      He regrets much that he made a mistake; which has given her the
      trouble of writing again!

      The Duke does not recollect to have received a letter from her
      upon the Subject of the Death of Mr. Arbuthnot!

      But he thanks [_sic_] for having thought of writing to him upon
      the melancholy occurrence.


There were no letters exchanged after this for many weeks. Miss J.'s
health improved slowly, and through her sister funds were supplied for
her maintenance. The next entry of any interest in the Diary is dated
November 9th:--

    "I have felt _dreadfully shocked_ to day at reading a report of the
    Duke's death which thank God, is false! [Endnote 13] O that I may
    be enabled to write to him expressions of my feelings, if such be
    The Lord's will! I find I feel more than I had imagined was
    possible! having suffered exceedingly at this report and at length
    have addressed him as follows: 'O My dear Duke, for I cannot use
    formality under my present excited, distressed feelings, having
    been so shocked by that dreadful Advertisement in the Times of this
    day, saying you were gone forever! This God in His infinite mercy
    has proved to be false, having spared you, I trust, for a far more
    glorious end than the one therein described. For this I can never
    thank him sufficiently, subscribing myself consequently with
    additional gratitude

    "'His devoted Child and Servant

    "A. J.

    "'P.S. I have been six weeks confined to my room, inflammation
    having taken place on the day after I wrote you last. O that God in
    these troublous threatening times may guide and counsel you to act
    as He would have you do to Whom I beseech you to look for the same
    most prayerfully.'"

As Miss J. received no reply to the above, she wrote again. This time
her epistle was in sharp contrast with her preceding semi-affectionate
note. She arraigned the Duke for his silence, and succeeded in
provoking a response:--


      STRATHFIELDSAYE, Dec. 21, 1850.

      Field Marshal the Duke of Wellington presents His Compliments to
      Miss J.! He understood from a former letter; that it was Miss
      J.'s desire never to hear from the Duke again!

      Therefore he did not write! nor should he write now! excepting a
      mere matter of Courtesy! He thus finally takes His leave!

      WELLINGTON.




CHAPTER XII.

CONCLUSION.


Miss J. was in nowise dismayed by the crushing reply she received from
the Duke.

She wrote again and again, and yet again. These letters, of which she
has left copies, are made up in about equal parts of accounts of her
health, verses of Scripture, and reproaches to the Duke for his
silence. She at last extorted an answer:--


      LONDON, January 17, 1851.

      It is very satisfactory to me to learn from the receipt of this
      Day of a Letter of the 16^th that Miss J. is better! And I write
      to thank her for giving me the satisfactory Information!

      I hope to hear of her continued convalescence and perfect
      Recovery of her Health!

      Most faithfully Her Obedient Humble Servant

      WELLINGTON.


The Duke's next note was less amicable:--


      LONDON, January 21, 1851.

      In order to avoid to create irritation in the Mind of Miss J. and
      the receipt of a Note expressing such irritation in strong terms!

      I write to acknowledge the receipt of Miss J.'s letter! written
      on four sides of letter paper; in the Night of the 19^th of
      January! I entreat her to avoid the Irritation of writing again!

      Most faithfully Her Obedient Humble Servant

      WELLINGTON.


All the entreaties of the Duke proved futile, however, when Miss J. had
convinced herself that it was her duty to write. The occasion she
desired soon came. She says in her Diary for February 6th:--

    "I have been pondering over the account given in the Times paper of
    this day wherein the Queen's visit to the House of Peers is noticed
    and among other things the following remark in reference to the
    Duke--'His Grace appeared to shrink from the attention and respect
    of which he was the object.'--This induced me to marvel whether The
    Great Lord of lords has not at length begun to exercise His Godly
    Power over his precious soul, making him consequently feel the
    nothingness of all things in comparison therewith!"

Upon the strength of this impression Miss J. wrote to the Duke, asking
him if he recollected where he was and how he was occupied at the time
she mentions. His answer came promptly, although Miss J. did not find
it at all satisfactory.


      LONDON, Feb. 8, 1851.

      I have received Miss J.'s Letter! And I hope that Her Health
      continues to improve! But she does not mention it! I thank her; I
      am quite well!

      I was employed on Tuesday in the usual Manner in giving
      attendance upon the Sovereign when she opened Parliament! I
      perform all my worldly Duties to the best of my ability! Miss J.
      despises things of this world, but I fear that if all followed
      her good example strictly they would suffer.

      Her Humble Servant.

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J.'s reply begins as follows:--

    "Alas! My Lord Duke! it is grievous to me to find that the
    remarkable expression in the Newspaper on Wednesday referred to in
    my last, namely; 'His Grace appeared to _shrink_ from the attention
    and respect of which he was the object' did not come from the
    impression I had hoped of Regeneration--or Divine Grace having
    begun its work in your precious Soul, to which at present you are
    so evidently a stranger. Judging by the latter portion of your
    reply you never desire or expect to be otherwise, as you seem to
    imply if all were to follow my example you fear you should not be
    improved. This assertion is but too true except the Great Lord of
    lords put forth His Almighty Power for that purpose."

And so on through pages of pious abuse.

The Duke's answer to this is characterized by a calm dignity in
noticeable contrast to the petulance of most of his notes of this
period.


      LONDON, Feb. 12, 1851.

      I beg Miss J.'s pardon if I misunderstood Her Letter; in which
      she understood what passed on the day on which Parliament met! I
      understood that she had adverted to my attendance upon the
      honorary Service of the Queen!

      In my Answer I observed that unless such services as well as
      other worldly Offices were attended to; the Affairs of the World
      would not go on so quietly as might be wished by those who like
      Miss J. thought more of Spirituals and of the next World! I hope
      that I do not fail in feeling due Humility upon all occasions!
      And most anxious to merit approval where alone such can be of any
      avail! I have thought it proper to explain this to Miss J.; as I
      wish not to be misunderstood!

      Her Most faithful Servant

      WELLINGTON.


      LONDON, Feb. 20, 1851.

      F. M. the Duke of Wellington presents His Comp^ts to Miss J.! He
      has received Her Letter of the 17^th of which he acknowledges the
      receipt; in order to save her the trouble of making farther
      enquiries about it!

      But he really entreats Her not to give herself the trouble of
      writing to him again!

      It is obvious that the act of doing so irritates Miss J.! which
      cannot be beneficial to Her Health! He hopes that she will not
      write again!


Miss J. in her Diary for February 21st gives a copy of a note she wrote
the Duke at this time:--


      MY LORD DUKE,--I wrote to you on the 13th Inst. Whether you
      received it I know not, therefore acquaint you that such was the
      case. Feeling assured that there was nothing in that letter which
      in the sight of God ought to have displeased your Grace, I leave
      the consequences with Him accordingly, remaining Ever

      His devoted Child and Servant

      A. J.


The Duke's reply is as follows:--


      LONDON, Feb. 22, 1851.

      I received in due course Miss J.'s letter, but as I did not
      consider that its contents required any observation on my part;
      or tended to manifest Miss J.'s desire or wish to hear from me
      again, I did not think it really expected I acknowledge the
      receipt.

      She did not in that letter and has not in this last mentioned Her
      Health, which I therefore hope continues to improve!

      Her obedient Humble Servant

      WELLINGTON.


Miss J. gives a copy of the letter she wrote the Duke after receiving
the above, but, as she tells us, postponed sending it until she had
laid the matter before the Lord:--

    "Having written a long letter of four sides to the Duke, referring
    so unexpectedly and unintentionally to his neglect from time to
    time of one bestowed upon him by God Himself for his Spiritual aid,
    I now commit the same into His gracious Hands, beseeching Him to
    deal with it in whatever way is most calculated to promote His own
    honor and glory, preparing me accordingly for His great holy Name
    sake."

This letter was never sent, but in its place Miss J. despatched a
shorter one, given below:


      March 4th, 1851.

      MY LORD DUKE,--As it is written, Yea, declared by Him "Who spake
      as never men spake" "By Me kings reign and princes decree
      justice" may that "Holy One" in this time of especial need
      incline Your Grace to look to and honor Him accordingly, for His
      great holy Name sake, and may HE graciously and condescendingly
      enable you to advise, direct, influence and comfort our beloved
      Sovereign bestowed upon us by Himself, as the first portion of
      Scripture quoted implies, (who appears at the present moment in
      so additionally interesting a light), in the way that is most
      agreeable to His unerring will, and in that most calculated to
      promote His honor and glory as "The Governor among the Nations;"
      prays

      His devoted Child and Servant

      A. J.


      LONDON, March 4, 1851.
      At Night.

      I have this night received Miss. J.'s letter written this day!

      I had received in due course the Note written on the Monday in
      the previous week! I did not send an acknowledgment of the
      Receipt as I wished to avoid to give Miss J. the trouble of
      writing again!

      However little Miss J. cares for the Affairs of this world, I
      entertain that she is satisfied with any arrangement calculated
      to be satisfactory to Her Majesty the Queen!

      Her obedient Humble Servant

      WELLINGTON.


      MY LORD DUKE,--As you say that your silence arose from a desire
      to prevent my having the trouble of writing to you again, I
      presume such is not agreeable to Your Grace. Consequently until
      it pleases The Great "Lord of lords" to influence you to request
      me to do so I purpose, if HE permit, intruding on you no more,
      knowing that I have never given you any cause to make such a
      remark, considering nothing a trouble which God pleases me to do.

      In reply to Your Grace's observation concerning my interest in
      Her Majesty I have only to observe that I consider it the duty of
      every real Christian to stand by the Sovereign God has thought
      proper to bestow upon us, in every time of necessity and danger,
      for His sake.

      I remain, Ever His devoted Child and Servant,

      A. J.


      LONDON, March 10th, 1851.

      It has so frequently occurred that I have unintentionally
      offended Miss J. that whenever I write it is with Caution! I
      confess likewise; that I don't much like to send letters through
      the hands of a third Person; of whom I know nothing! It is a
      liberty in my mind which I ought not to take!

      I therefore wished that the correspondence should cease of
      itself; and that all friendly feeling should be continued! I know
      well that Miss J.'s Mind is occupied by Reflections on Spiritual
      things; and that she must despise the occupation of one who
      considers it His duty to serve the Public to the best of His
      Ability!

      With due respect for Her Higher occupations, I hope she will
      excuse my adhering to my own Course of duty!

      Ever Miss J.'s most faithfully obedient

      Humble Servant,

      WELLINGTON.


The above is the Duke's last letter to Miss J. Although he lived until
September of the following year, he never wrote to her again. Miss J.'s
efforts did not cease, however. She sent letter after letter to the
Duke, without being discouraged by his utter silence. Indeed, a note
directed to him was lying on her table ready to be sent to the post the
morning that she received the news of his death. She gives an account
of her reception of the tidings:--

    "_November 28th, 1852._ I dare not trust my pen to refer to the
    unanticipated dreaded end which has caused me so much deep sorrow
    although nearly three long months have rolled over my head since
    that awful blow was given and which, had it not been for divine
    support would I fear have deprived me of my reason, for it was so
    unexpected that when my Physician called to acquaint me thereof, I
    said, pointing to a letter on the table: 'That is for the Duke,'
    intending to ask him to put it into a Post Office, being sealed and
    ready.

    "On perceiving my doctor silent, instead of offering with his usual
    kindness to post the letter, I enquired wherefore? he replied that
    he thought it had better be postponed. This made me still more
    anxious, eagerly asking, if he were ill? when Dr. P. said he had
    not been well, and thus by degrees unfolded the awful truth that he
    was indeed No more.

    "O I can never forget my feelings! continuing after his departure
    as if riveted to my seat and speechless."

Miss J. then laments that the Duke had never given any marked proof of
his conversion, and recapitulates her efforts to lead him into the way
of righteousness. She dwells upon the longing she had felt to be
assured that he had known a "new birth," but adds:--

    "Alas! this satisfaction was not afforded me. Nevertheless as
    before expressed, I build my hopes on the last five hours of His
    Grace's life, however insensible to all around, knowing nothing to
    be impossible with God, consequently that even at this the eleventh
    hour his precious soul may through a Saviour's righteousness have
    been permitted to wing its flight to Mansions of eternal glory."

The remainder of Miss J.'s life was of little interest. She became more
bigoted as she advanced in years; and although not long after the
Duke's death she joined her sister in the United States, her
peculiarities had developed so unpleasantly that the two could not live
peacefully in the same house. Miss J. resided in New York until her
death in 1862.

A list of the Duke's letters is appended, copied from Miss J.'s Diary.




  _List of Letters received from the Duke._


  In 1834                      6
     1835                     78
     1836                     56
     1837                     25
     1838 (one being double)  23
     1839                      8
     1840                     25
     1844 (and Picture)       55
     1845                     32
     1846                     18
     1847                     19
     1848                      3
     1849                     10
     1850                     24
     1851                      8
                             ---
               Total Number  390




APPENDIX.


NOTE 1, page 105.

In a sermon preached at the Chapel Royal, Hook (afterwards Dean of
Chichester) told the Queen that the Church would endure, let what would
happen to the Throne. On her return to Buckingham House, Normanby, who
had been at the chapel, said to her, "Did not your Majesty find it very
hot?" She said, "Yes; and the sermon was very hot too."--GREVILLE,
_Memoirs_ (1837-1852), vol. i. p. 116.


NOTE 2, page 112.

The Duke of Wellington had an attack the other night in the House of
Lords, and was taken home speechless, but not senseless. It was severe,
but short; and after the stomach was relieved, he rapidly recovered,
and in a day or two _pronounced_ himself as well as ever. Of course the
alarm was very great.--GREVILLE, _Memoirs_ (1837-1852), vol. i. p. 267.


NOTE 3, page 126.

Charles, the second son of the Duke of Wellington, married, July 9,
1844, Augusta Sophia-Anne, daughter of the Right Hon. Henry
Manvers-Pierrepont. The marriage took place at St. George's Church,
Hanover Square, and was followed by a grand wedding-breakfast, given at
Apsley House by the Duke of Wellington.


NOTE 4, page 129.

Prince William of Prussia, afterwards the great Kaiser Wilhelm, arrived
in England from Ostend, Aug. 13, 1844. Among the many honors paid him
were entertainments given him at Apsley House and at Strathfieldsaye
by the Duke of Wellington. The Prince was an honored guest at the
christening of the Queen's fourth child, Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, who
was born Aug. 6, 1844. Prince William left England on Saturday,
September 7.


NOTE 5, page 134.

Louis Philippe and his Queen visited England Oct. 8, 1844. Their stay
lasted until October 15. The "Times" of the date, describing the
embarkation of the royal party, says:--

    "The Duke of Wellington was in the yard on horseback in his
    regimentals, but wrapped in a brown great-coat (like a sentry's
    coat), buttoned to the chin to keep off the rain....

    "Even before the arrival of the royal party in the Victualling
    yard, the rain had already begun to fall heavily; and the
    circumstance of a vivid flash of lightning, accompanied by a long
    roll of thunder, occurring just before their entry, was the cause
    of some curious observations among the superstitious."


NOTE 6, page 136.

The Duke of Wellington on entering the room was received with the most
lively demonstrations of respect. The band at the entrance of the room
played the air, "See, the Conquering Hero Comes!" and the appearance of
his Grace was the signal for a general clapping of hands, and even some
cheering from the gentlemen, and waving of handkerchiefs from the
ladies.--_Account of the opening of the Royal Exchange, from the London
"Times" of Oct. 29, 1844._


NOTE 7, page 138.

This sister, Anne, married first the Hon. Henry Fitzroy, and secondly
Charles Culling-Smith, Esq., of Hampton, Co. Middlesex.--BURKE,
_Peerage_.


NOTE 8, page 139.

A detailed report of the Queen's progress to Strathfieldsaye is given
in the "Times" of Jan. 21, 1845; but the account of her visit there is
less full. The "Times" says:--

    "The visit to Strathfieldsaye is intended to be of a more private
    nature than either of those with which her Majesty has lately
    honored any of her subjects....

    "The following characteristic reply from the Duke of Wellington to
    an application for admission will show that his Grace at least will
    not allow the royal party to be disturbed:--

    "'Field-Marshal the Duke of Wellington presents his compliments
    to Mr. ----, and begs to say he does not see what his house at
    Strathfieldsaye has to do with the public Press.'"


NOTE 9, page 141.

This was the brother next older than the Duke of Wellington,--William,
Lord Maryborough.


NOTE 10, page 154.

Arthur, the child of Charles (the son of the Duke of Wellington) and of
Augusta Sophia-Anne, daughter of the Right Hon. Henry Manvers-Pierrepont,
was born May 5, 1845, and died July 7, 1846.


NOTE 11, page 167.

Lord Cowley, the youngest brother of the Duke of Wellington, died April
27, 1847.


NOTE 12, page 205.

On Sunday last the death of Arbuthnot took place at Apsley House, where
he had been gradually sinking for some time. He is a great and
irreparable loss to the Duke of Wellington, who is now left alone in
the world. The Duke told him and talked to him about everything. He
will feel it as keenly as at his age and with his character he can feel
anything.--GREVILLE, _Memoirs_ (1837-1852), vol. iii. p. 362.


NOTE 13, page 207.

This report stated that the Duke had had a fatal fall while hunting in
Lincolnshire. The whole story was a hoax.


THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Letters of the Duke of Wellington
to Miss J. 1834-1851, by Duke of Wellington

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LETTERS OF DUKE OF WELLINGTON ***

***** This file should be named 35532.txt or 35532.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/3/35532/

Produced by Steven Gibbs and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
