The Project Gutenberg EBook of Do the Dead Return?, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Do the Dead Return?
       A True Story of Startling Seances in San Francisco

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: March 10, 2011 [EBook #35537]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DO THE DEAD RETURN? ***




Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









  _Price, 50 cents_


  Do the Dead Return?

  A Startling Story from Life


  Crown Publishing Company
  San Francisco
  1900




[Illustration: DR. LOUIS SCHLESINGER.]




  DO THE DEAD RETURN?


  A TRUE STORY
  OF STARTLING SEANCES
  IN SAN FRANCISCO


  _NOTICE_

  _This work is copyrighted. Editors are warned
  not to make unlawful abridgments._

  CROWN PUBLISHING COMPANY
  SAN FRANCISCO
  1900




  COPYRIGHT, 1900
  BY CROWN PUBLISHING CO.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                    PAGE

  INTRODUCTION                         5

  THE AUTHOR'S STORY                   7

  THE "EXAMINER" SEANCE               14

  SOME STARTLING DAYLIGHT SEANCES     19

  CHARACTER OF THE NARRATORS          55




INTRODUCTION.


Before this little volume is read a few words of explanation should be
carefully weighed, for otherwise the reader might go away with many false
impressions.

The author desires to say that every word here printed is absolutely and
literally true. Nothing has been added or suppressed, but the entire truth
has been expressed, usually in the exact language of the distinguished
gentlemen whose narratives make the bulk of the book. In most instances
the witnesses summoned wrote their accounts with their own hands, and the
original manuscripts are still preserved.

Though many years have passed since the events recorded herein
transpired, all who witnessed the phenomena are still alive, and all are
well-known and reputable citizens of San Francisco. It was only a few days
ago that the author met Captain W. S. Barnes, who was District Attorney of
the City and County of San Francisco in 1893 (the date of the occurrences
with which the book deals), and he said: "What I saw in the presence of
the medium has puzzled me all these years. I can truthfully say that the
things that took place at Mayor Ellert's office are the most wonderful
events that I have ever come upon. They are absolutely beyond my
understanding."

The circumstances with which the narrative deals are an important
contribution to the history of psychic research, and they are presented
for what they are worth while the witnesses and actors in the story are
alive.

THE AUTHOR.

_San Francisco, September, 1900._




CHAPTER I.

THE AUTHOR'S STORY.


In the autumn of 1891, the author of this narrative was business manager
of the Modesto (California) _Daily News_. One afternoon while he was
engaged in an important consultation with the late Senator J. D. Spencer,
one of the owners of the _News_, there was a knock at the door of the
editorial rooms. In a twinkling an old gentleman entered; he was a
venerable-looking, long-bearded man, with Hebraic features.

Before Senator Spencer and I could say, "Good day, sir!" the old man said
something like this: "Gentlemen, I am Dr. Louis Schlesinger, the famous
Spiritualist medium. It is well known that I can talk with the good
angels, and I desire to have a series of seances here in Modesto."

"Our advertising columns are open," I said, "and we shall be pleased to
announce your meetings at the regular rates."

"I have no money to spare," he replied; "but I think you will say
something about me when I show you that man lives after death."

The Senator whispered to me (on discovering that the old gentleman was
quite deaf), "I guess he's escaped from the Stockton Lunatic Asylum."

Stockton was but twenty miles away, and I assented, but said, "Suppose we
sound him before we send for an officer."

So we agreed to give Dr. Schlesinger an opportunity to convince us that he
was a man of rare endowments, as he pretended to be.

Coming to the point, it was arranged that the Senator should retire to
the press-room while I remained with the aged suspect.

"Take eight or ten slips of paper," said Dr. Schlesinger, "and write one
name on each--some of living, some of dead persons; and don't tell me or
anybody on earth what names you have written on the slips. Roll them into
little pellets--and come back here with your mind at rest, for I am not
insane, as you think."

We were somewhat surprised, for both were certain that the old gentleman
could not have heard Senator Spencer's whispered doubt concerning our
visitor's sanity.

In a few minutes Senator Spencer returned, bearing a number of paper
pellets which he held in his clenched right hand.

Doors were closed and a table was rolled to the center of the room. Dr.
Schlesinger closed his eyes and appeared to fall into a light slumber. At
once there were many distinct raps on the table, as if some one had
thumped upon it with a finger. This was rather singular, as we could see
that our visitor's hands in no manner touched the table.

Suddenly the old man opened his eyes and said: "Gentlemen, are you
satisfied that I do not know any of the names on those papers?"

As Senator Spencer was as truthful and honorable a man as ever lived, one
whose word was better than most men's bonds, I replied: "I am sure you
have not seen the names and that you do not know one of them."

"And some of the names are not known to anybody in California," added the
Senator.

"Then I'll have to show you that I can talk with the spirits of the
departed," said Dr. Schlesinger.

Without further delay he said: "I see the spirit of your mother standing
over you. She calls you Dillard, which is your middle name, and she says
she died in Kansas City, and was buried in the old cemetery at Westport.
Am I right?"

Senator Spencer turned pale and said: "That is absolutely correct. Which
one of the pellets bears her name?"

He then held the bits of paper between his right finger and thumb, and
when he had picked up three or four of them, the medium said, "That is the
one which contains your mother's maiden name."

I have now forgotten the maiden name of the Senator's mother, though I
think it was Dillard. The answer, however, was correct.

Next, without asking me to write anything down, the medium thus addressed
me: "I see the spirit of your mother's mother. Her name was Eliza Johnson,
and she calls you 'my son,' and says, 'Tell Anne that immortality is the
glorious truth of human life.' Anne was the name of her eldest child--your
mother."

If Senator Spencer was convinced that Dr. Schlesinger had told him the
truth, I had the same kind of conviction in my case; for every word
uttered was correct. I have never understood how this old man came to the
results announced, nor have I ever seen any one who was able to explain
his power.

With the memory of my Modesto experiences fresh in mind, I decided, when I
came upon Dr. Schlesinger in San Francisco, in 1893, to institute a series
of daylight seances in the presence of some of the most distinguished
citizens of San Francisco. As I was then a writer of the San Francisco
_Daily Examiner_ staff I found rare opportunities for enlisting the men
desired in the experiments. I was not then, nor am I now, in any manner
affiliated with Spiritualists, nor do I set forth the facts of this
narrative for the purpose of making converts to any theory of mind or
matter.

The manuscript from which this work is printed was written at the time of
the matters recorded, on an order from the _Examiner_. Owing to the fact
that Mayor Ellert afterwards regretted that he had allowed a seance to be
held in his office, the _Examiner_ was induced to suppress the story,
which now appears in detail for the first time. It should be borne in mind
that all that follows was written at the time of the events described.




CHAPTER II.

THE "EXAMINER" SEANCE.


That the reader may fully understand the origin of the experiments
recorded in the narrative that follows, it is necessary to state again
that I was a writer for the _Examiner_ in the autumn of 1893, and that I
was on the alert for what newspaper men call "stories," or special
articles--things a little outside of the ordinary run of news.

Ambitious to arrange something of unusual interest, I approached Mr.
Hearst and S. S. Chamberlain, who were in charge of the news department of
the paper. I told them what I had seen Dr. Schlesinger do in Modesto, and
outlined the plans that were afterwards carried out--seances at the
office of Mayor Ellert and the Chief of Police, in the presence of
prominent citizens. First, however, it was necessary for the editors to
see the medium at their offices; for they feared there would be some
failure, and that the citizens invited would be disgusted because of their
loss of time in useless experiments.

For these reasons, therefore, the first sittings were at the editorial
offices of the _Examiner_, where the editors were as much puzzled as
anybody else. They were at once convinced that, however he performed his
feats, Dr. Schlesinger was at least not a bungling master of the black
art. Several intelligent observers were present, among them one or two of
the brightest newspaper men in the city. The experiments were not only
carefully noted, but they were viewed with grave suspicion. They were,
however, wholly informal and merely preliminary to the more important and
prolonged seances that followed at the office of the Mayor of the city,
and later at the office of and in the presence of the city's Chief of
Police. A few facts concerning the occurrences at the _Examiner_ office
are given that the reader may have the full benefit of the story.

One of the investigators (Managing Editor A. B. Henderson) wrote a number
of names on slips of paper, before Dr. Schlesinger arrived. They were not
seen or known to any one save the person that prepared them, and the slips
on which they were written were carefully folded and clasped in a bundle,
by a rubber band or elastic. Great pains was taken by Mr. Henderson to
prevent the medium from handling or seeing the slips. Without seeing the
writing, Dr. Schlesinger at once gave the names correctly. One of them was
that of Thaddeus Stevens, the eminent Pennsylvanian; and when the folded
slip on which his name was written was touched by Mr. Henderson, the
medium said: "That is the name of Thaddeus Stevens, who knew you well. He
calls you Alexander, and sends you his love."

Then the name of the sitter's deceased uncle was properly announced,
though it had not been written on any of the slips. Correct information
was also given concerning the uncle's religion while "in the flesh."

S. S. Chamberlain, now Managing Editor of the Philadelphia _North
American_, (then News Editor of the _Examiner_) was one of the
investigators. He wrote down, on separate slips of paper, the names of
many living and dead persons, but, contrary to the medium's request, he
did not write the names of persons he had ever known. In a few moments Dr.
Schlesinger read the names correctly while the slips were beyond his
reach, and firmly clasped in Chamberlain's hand. They were of such
persons as John Ruskin, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Shakespeare, Longfellow, etc.

A faithful report of all that occurred was submitted to the managing
editor of the paper, who at once decided that a series of similar
experiments, conducted at the office of the Mayor of the city and others,
in broad daylight, would make the basis for some interesting Sunday
specials. Under his instructions I arranged the seances, and was present
at all of them. I subsequently wrote a faithful account of what occurred,
but the articles were rejected by the editor of the Sunday _Examiner_ for
personal reasons. This volume embraces the substance of what was then
prepared.




CHAPTER III.

SOME STARTLING DAYLIGHT SEANCES.


It was on September 4, 1893, that a number of the most prominent citizens
of San Francisco held a daylight seance (at high noon) at the office of
Mayor Ellert. The company had assembled in response to the _Examiner's_
invitation, and all of the witnesses had agreed in advance to observe
everything closely and write an absolutely fair account of what they saw,
adding any theory or explanation that seemed sufficient to account for the
phenomena.

It is as well to say that is was a mirthful assembly at the outset, and
the newspaper man who had arranged for the experiments was the butt of
many little jokes. The idea that the medium could do anything more than a
little clever juggling seemed farthest from anybody's thoughts.

Dr. Louis Schlesinger, then a man about sixty-one years of age, was the
spiritualist medium who said he could convince all present that the dead
return, and that he could hold communion with the living. The following
spectators were present, and the written reports of some of them are given
in full in the subjoined narrative: Mayor Levi R. Ellert, District
Attorney W. S. Barnes, President Theodore F. Bonnet, of the San Francisco
Press Club, Ex-President Grant Carpenter, of the same club, H. H.
McCloskey, then a State Central Committeeman of the Republican party, and
many other casual observers.

At another seance Chief of Police Crowley, Judge Robert Ferral, Dr. R. E.
Bunker, and Attorney Charles L. Patton were the principal investigators,
though Captain Wright and many others saw all that was done. At this
seance the observations were conducted under the test conditions arranged
by Chief Crowley, Dr. Bunker, and Attorney Patton.

The reader should satisfy himself concerning the mental and moral
qualifications of all the witnesses named by glancing at the biographical
sketches elsewhere in this volume.

At the Mayor's office Dr. Schlesinger was announced as a resident of No. 1
Polk Street. He said he knew none of the committee, and nobody present
except the _Examiner's_ representative knew the Doctor.[1]

     [1] He now lives in Boston.--Editor.

"I can converse with the spirits of your deceased friends," said the
medium, "and I am giving my life to this work. I gave up a great tea
business to teach my fellow men that life does not end at the grave. My
home is constantly filled with bands of angels from the celestial depths,
but I am able to call a few spirits around any box, table, or desk. I want
you to satisfy yourself that all that is done here is absolutely honest."

Before proceeding further the Doctor produced a testimonial from Editor
Will S. Green, of the Colusa _Sun_ (afterwards State Treasurer), which
explained that Dr. Schlesinger's performances could not be explained on
the theory of trickery. A clipping from the _Sun_ of September 5, 1890,
gave an account of matters that had puzzled the people of Colusa. The
investigations began, therefore, with a great deal of interest, and before
their conclusion the old Doctor had greatly puzzled all present. They
could not tell whether it was some psychic power by which he operated, or
whether they had been basely deceived.

At his own request, Dr. Schlesinger was not introduced to any of the
persons present. He soon called their names, however, and said they were
given to him by the spirits in the raps that all could hear on the desk.

The Doctor's favorite method of communicating startling information was to
have the sitters write, before they came into his presence, fifteen or
twenty names of living and dead friends. Each name being on a separate
piece of paper, the visitors were requested to fold each slip tightly, so
as to preclude any possibility of its being read by the medium. This done,
the slips, all of equal size, were put into a hat and thoroughly shuffled.
The Doctor would then say: "Pick out any slip yourself, and I will read it
without looking and before you yourself know what the name is." There
would then be raps, and in a few seconds the Doctor would give the name
correctly. These names were written and folded in a room apart from the
Doctor.

"Granting that there is such a thing as mind-reading," said Chief Crowley,
"I do not think mind-reading would account for what was done for me,
because he read things that were not in my mind, telling me my mother's
maiden name and where she died."

Dr. Schlesinger calls his gift clairaudient mediumship, and says his right
ear is deaf to all terrestrial sounds, but quickened, as with a sixth
sense, for communications from the other world. He says he can both see
and hear spirits, and that bands of them encircle him, and at times, in
the presence of some peculiarly "fit" visitors, manifest themselves with
great clearness and power. To prove that the sounds he hears are celestial
voices, he does many things which baffle those who witness the strange
phenomena which abound in his presence wherever he goes.

It was with much difficulty that those who participated in these seances
and whose accounts of what they saw are subjoined, were induced to give
the medium a hearing. Chief Crowley was particularly opposed to giving
serious attention to what he denounced as "trickery and sleight of hand,"
and afterwards called "marvelous and beyond power of explanation." Finally
he wrote down a number of names on separate slips, as explained in the
foregoing, and among those names appeared that of his mother--her maiden
name. The medium at once told the Chief which pellet contained his
mother's name, then read it, and in a few moments told where she died and
where she was buried.

A few minutes later the aged Doctor said: "The spirit of Detective Hutton,
who died a violent death, hovers near you."

The medium then spoke of matters that were known to nobody but Chief
Crowley and the dead detective. This greatly puzzled the Chief, who was
later deeply affected over purported messages from a son and others who
had been dear to him in life.

Speaking of the purported message from his dead mother the Chief said: "I
cannot explain this, which is marvelous, for I do not believe a human
being in San Francisco knew that my mother's maiden name was Elizabeth
McCarthy, that she died in New Jersey and was buried in New York."

Chief Crowley then wrote down a list of years, among them the year of his
mother's death. Dr. Schlesinger pointed to the year 1833 as that of her
death.

"Correct!" replied Chief Crowley; whereupon the medium said, "and the name
of your father, Patrick J. Crowley, is also here, and he comes with your
son Lewis, who has not been dead long."

The Chief thought it the most wonderful performance he had ever seen. "He
does marvelous and inexplicable things," said the Chief, "and I'll admit
I cannot tell how it is done. While I cannot believe he converses with
spirits, I am puzzled. I want to see him again and look into the matter
further."


[Illustration: EX-CHIEF OF POLICE P. CROWLEY.]


The experiments with Mayor L. R. Ellert, who sprang from his chair and
positively declined to be thrown into a trance condition when the doctor
requested him thus to visit the spirit world, were fully as startling as
those with Chief Crowley.

Mayor Ellert took a chair in front of his official table, which had thus
been dedicated to spiritual uses, and asked if any spirits desired to
communicate with him, whereupon the medium grasped his Honor's hands and
the line of communication with the spirits was declared fully established.
Quite distinct raps were then heard on the table, and Dr. Schlesinger
looked at the Mayor and said: "You are a medium yourself, sir! My, what a
power!"

The Mayor was urged "to sit alone often and be patient," and was told that
he could develop much power by such a course.


[Illustration: HON. L. R. ELLERT.]


Mayor Ellert then wrote down ten of fifteen names of living and dead
friends, on separate slips of paper. He refused to use the paper handed
him by Dr. Schlesinger, but cut up an official letter head which lay on
his own desk. As he began to write the names, the medium stepped away and
engaged in conversation with District Attorney Barnes and Mr. Bonnet at
the other side of the room, so that he could not see what Mayor Ellert
wrote. The Mayor carefully folded the slips, put them in a hat, and
shuffled them. He then brought one forth from the hatful.

"That's a dead one," said Dr. Schlesinger. "Open it and see whether I am
correct; but don't let me see it."

The Mayor obeyed the request, and answered, "Yes, this is a dead person's
name!"

"Don't let me see it," said the mysterious visitor, "and I'll tell you
what it is," whereupon he at once correctly pronounced the name of the
Mayor's sister, which was not Ellert.

The Mayor then announced that he was unable to explain the phenomena. He
watched the medium's movements and convinced himself that there had been
no juggling in the shuffle, and said that his visitor out-Hermanned
Hermann. He would leave the solution of the phenomena to others learned in
the arts of divination.


[Illustration: CHARLES L. PATTON.]


The outcome of the seances and the story of what occurred may best be
told by those who were present, and the subjoined versions are given:--


ATTORNEY PATTON'S STORY.

"I desire to preface what I have to say by remarking that while I have
never been nor am I now a spiritualist, nor have I ever before been
present at the performance of a medium, yet what I saw of Dr.
Schlesinger's so-called manifestations from the spirit world is entirely
inexplicable to me upon any scientific hypothesis with which I am
familiar; yet at the same time I must admit that I cannot explain the
phenomena exhibited upon any theory of legerdemain or sleight of hand
within my knowledge. Therefore, I merely state that I have seen, or
seemingly seen, and heard the following remarkable things, during the
sitting or seance with Dr. Schlesinger, leaving it to others more
competent than I to determine whether they are the manifestations of some
psychic force at present unadmitted by scientists or the legerdemain of a
sleight-of-hand performer.

"The facts are as follows: At the request of the Doctor, I wrote eight or
ten names of different persons on as many slips of paper, two of the
number being dead, and folded the slips in such a manner that the Doctor
could not read them; and so far as I can judge, the Doctor could not have
had any method of knowing what names I wrote. I then placed the folded
papers in a hat, and one of the other gentlemen present drew them out one
by one. The Doctor, as each paper was drawn out, asked some question, such
as 'Guide, is this the one dead?' Finally, after all the papers had been
held up and the questions asked, some raps on the table, seeming to have
indicated according to the Doctor that the persons whose names were on two
of the slips were dead, I, on examination, found that he was correct in
his judgment. He then without (so far as I could see) having had any
opportunity to have seen the names, desired me to place the slips with the
names on in my pocket. Presently he said: 'I see two faces over your
shoulder; the name of one is J. B. The other says: "I am glad you have
commemorated my name by writing it here," the name is V. C.;' the Doctor
being correct in naming the deceased person in each instance, and the
message being appropriate to the character of the deceased person. I will
add, that, so far as I know, Dr. Schlesinger had no possible means of
knowing the name or anything about either person. One of the names, I feel
confident, was not known to any person in California outside of myself.

        "CHAS. L. PATTON."


BARNES WAS PUZZLED.

District Attorney Barnes gives the following account of the seance:--

"I was completely surprised at the performance in the Mayor's office. It
was the first seance I had ever attended, and I must confess that I had
not the slightest respect for such manifestations other than a natural
admiration for the quickness of the operator. I had always supposed that
batteries, wires, a tolerable acquaintance with the sitter, all aided by
darkness, were the causes of the effects produced by the medium. In this
case, however, the seance took place in broad daylight, and no attempt was
made, so far as I could see, to use any mechanical means. The medium sat
two or three feet from the Mayor's desk, and only touched the desk
occasionally with his hand, yet from that desk came the spirit rappings
that were clearly audible to all of us in the room. I watched the others
write lists of names containing each the name of some dead person, and saw
the quickness with which Dr. Schlesinger picked out the persons who had
passed away, and gave messages from them. When it came my turn I wrote a
number of names on small slips of paper, folded them and held them in my
hand. Among these names was that of a classmate of mine at Harvard, who
died long ago at Philadelphia, who had never been in California, and whose
name I have not mentioned for years. Hardly had I sat down when Dr.
Schlesinger called his full name and gave me a message from him, recalling
an occurrence, so far as I am aware, known only to the dead man and
myself. To say that I was amazed but feebly expresses it; and when I asked
the Doctor whence he got his information, he replied, 'It is borne to me
on angels' wings.'


[Illustration: ATTORNEY W. S. BARNES.]


"Whether it was or not, it was a most remarkable thing, and deeply
impressed upon me that 'There are more things in heaven and earth than are
dreamt of in our philosophy.'

        "WILLIAM S. BARNES."

Seven years after the foregoing was written, Mr. Barnes expressed himself
as still deeply puzzled. "I cannot think of any experience in life so
marvelous," he said, "so beyond my power to explain."


JUDGE FERRAL'S TESTIMONY.

Ex-Judge Robert Ferral's narrative largely corroborates what the others
said. He presents the case in his own way.

"Having taken a deep interest from early boyhood in exhibitions of a
marvelous nature, such as magic, legerdemain, mesmerism, hypnotism,
mind-reading, and spiritualism, it was with pleasure that I accepted the
kind invitation to visit Dr. Schlesinger and personally witness his
experiments and manifestations.

"I found the Doctor an aged, venerable man, in a large room, surrounded by
a company of ladies and gentlemen, bright, cheerful, and intelligent, all
apparently bent upon the rational enjoyment of this life, and happy in the
belief of companionable intercourse with the realm of spirits.

"Retiring to more quiet quarters, consisting of an ordinary bedroom and
parlor, the business began without waste of words or loss of time. Having
written the names of half a dozen persons, living and dead, each name on a
separate slip, carefully folded and looking precisely alike, which were
tossed into a hat and well shaken up, the doctor proceeded to name the
contents of each paper as it was drawn out. Occasionally he made a
mistake, but in nearly every instance succeeded at the first or second
trial. He first separated the living from the dead, without opening the
slips, and sometimes not even touching them; then proceeded to give the
names. Afterward, upon writing place and cause of death, age, occupation,
etc., upon other slips, the same result followed. Some of the names
submitted by me were peculiar, and I believe known to no one else in this
city, yet they were announced--read off, as it were--with but little
hesitation and generally exactly as written. The same thing occurred as to
the diseases and places of death.


[Illustration: JUDGE ROBERT FERRAL.]


"During this manifestation of his power Dr. Schlesinger simply formed a
circle or chain of hands, connecting with himself, frequently tapped the
table, and appealed to an unseen 'guide' for his information. Raps were
said to have been heard also, but of this I cannot bear testimony.

"How was this done? By mesmerism? No; for there was nothing in the nature
of sleep or putting to sleep. Mind-reading? Possibly; although some of the
slips of paper were read correctly when the contents were for the time
forgotten and unknown to myself. Hypnotism? Don't know, having but a faint
idea how far these phenomena extend. By sharpness of sight, trickery,
sleight of hand? I cannot answer, at least for the present, remaining, as
before, an agnostic on these matters; unable to give an intelligent
explanation, but at the same time not disposed to jeer or scoff at what I
do not understand. Respectfully,

        "ROBERT FERRAL."
            September 5, 1893.


DR. BUNKER'S NARRATIVE.

The following is Dr. R. E. Bunker's account, written at his old office,
No. 802 Kearny Street, just after the seances and while he was still in
charge of the City Receiving Hospital:--

"I saw Dr. Schlesinger in company with the other gentlemen named, and I
saw wonderful things which I am wholly unable to explain. The phenomena,
manifestations, or things that occur in the medium's presence are not only
interesting, but marvelous. I went possessed of something like eight or
ten slips of paper, on each of which I had previously written (at my
office) a name of some person I had known--some living, some dead. Not a
soul ever saw the slips, for I was alone when I wrote the names.
Furthermore, they were so folded that no one could possibly have read a
single name. Dr. Schlesinger at once picked out the names of living and
dead persons, while the slips were held between my fingers and when I did
not know what person's name was on the particular slip that I held. He
pronounced every name correctly while I held the pellet, or as it lay
untouched on his table.

"To say that what he did was by the aid of wires or batteries would be to
impart to wires and batteries more intelligence than the greatest
philosophers have ever possessed. This is no explanation; nor has any one
ever been able to explain to me how these things were done. I do not
believe it was mind-reading (a term that conveys no intelligent idea to me
anyhow), for I did not know the name on the slip under question--not until
I afterwards unfolded it and corroborated the Doctor's readings. You
understand that the entire bunch had been thoroughly shuffled in a hat
before any slip was picked up.

"To come to specific instances, let me give a few cases as they occurred.
On one slip I had written my mother's maiden name, which was not known to
anybody in San Francisco. It was placed among eight or ten other names of
women--some married, some unmarried, some wholly fictitious. All slips
were folded alike and placed in a hat under the table, which I held in my
hands. Dr. Schlesinger asked me to pick out the pellets, one at a time and
hold them between my finger and thumb. He would say, 'That is not the
name, throw it aside;' and so on, until he hesitated at one pellet and
said, 'That is your mother's maiden name; it is Emily J. Laumann.'

"The answer was correct, and in a similar manner he read other names and
told me all about the persons. I had written the name of Dick Foster on
one slip. Foster had died of consumption at the old Bella Union Theater,
on June 21st. The medium did not read his name, but wrote a message
backwards--that is, from left to right--very rapidly, and when I held it
up to the light with the written surface from me, I could read the
following:--

     _I am glad to be here, and if I can obtain the appropriate conditions
     I will show my identity._

     _DICK FOSTER._

"This was a puzzling thing, and I should like for some one to explain how
it was done, if there was not communication with some invisible
intelligence. In regard to Foster's name it should be said that the medium
had not seen nor heard it, and that his hand flew over the paper very fast
while he wrote the backward message. So far as I could see, Dr.
Schlesinger was quite deaf and near-sighted. He was an old man of heavy
weight and clumsy fingers. His manner was that of a devout believer in the
genuineness of his theory. If any one can explain to me how these things
were done, he will interest me far more than Dr. Schlesinger did, and it
should be said that my attention to what he did was held without
interruption from the start. There were several other like tests wherein
he read for me other names by a process equally startling, making one feel
that he had marvelous powers.

        "R. E. BUNKER, M. D."


WHAT MR. BONNET SAW.

Theodore F. Bonnet, who was a reporter for the _Daily Report_ at the time
of the seance at the Mayor's office, was a guest of the author during the
seance. Mr. Bonnet, who is now editor and owner of _Town Talk_, an
influential weekly newspaper, wrote the following account of what he saw
and handed it to the author just after the seance:--

"After witnessing the efforts of Dr. Schlesinger as a medium, one cannot
but be impressed by his marvelous powers of divination. They are
impossible of explanation on any hypothesis calculated to reduce his work
to the vulgar plane of legerdemain. Yet the manifestations, as he is
pleased to call his marvelous, puzzling and apparently supernatural
revelations concerning matters with which he could not become familiar
under ordinary circumstances, are after all, unsatisfactory to the person
engaged in testing his power. I must give him credit, however, for having
startled me by one message. I had written on small slips of paper, which
were then carefully folded--all this an hour or more before the meeting.
One of the names was Joseph Touhill, an Oakland burglar, who had been
killed by a policeman who caught him robbing a saloon. I had known
Touhill, and had been quite friendly with him in late years, but had never
suspected that he was of the Jekyll and Hyde species. The medium did not
at once direct me to the piece of paper on which Touhill's name was
written, but afterwards he suddenly said: 'The spirit of the man with
whom you wish to communicate is here now.'


[Illustration: EDITOR THEODORE F. BONNET.]


"I signified my willingness to hear from the spirit, whereupon the Doctor
said, 'Old boy, I'm not quite as dead as you think.' Then he mentioned the
name of Joseph Touhill. Now, this circumstance deeply impressed me,
because the language was so characteristic of the dead burglar, it having
been customary with him to address me as 'Old boy.' Mind-reading will have
to be rejected as an explanation, because the Doctor subsequently read a
name that was on a pellet that I had not opened, and knew nothing about
until I subsequently read it. I picked up the pellet from the desk where I
had put it with a number of others, and handed it to Mayor Ellert, who,
without examining it, deposited it in his vest-pocket. Then came rappings
on the table, and the medium said: 'Behind you stands the spirit of the
man whose name is on that paper. He was an eminent person, and he died
far away from here. He is waving a flag over your head, and on it is
written the name of Victor Hugo.'

"The name was correct. Subsequently the Doctor correctly read the name of
William Cullen Bryant, which I had also written. The Doctor quoted the
spirit of the poet as saying that he was delighted that I was interested
in demonstrating that there was a world of spirits. Dr. Schlesinger's
feats are bewildering to the human mind. If he is a mere trickster he
possesses in a marvelous way the skill to disguise his character, for his
appearance and demeanor are those peculiar to fanaticism or strong faith
in a cause.

        "THEO. F. BONNET."


MR. M'CLOSKEY'S VERSION.

The following is the narrative of Mr. H. H. McCloskey, a resident of
Merced at the time of the seance, but now a San Francisco lawyer:--

"I did not attend the little seance at the Mayor's office by appointment.
I was on my way to finish up some business and catch the 4-o'clock boat,
when District Attorney Barnes suggested that I drop in and see the fun.
Intending to remain but a few moments, I accepted the invitation, and have
no reason to regret having done so. As to what happened there, while I
remember perfectly well what was done, and kept careful note of all that I
saw, I am unable to account for it on any other hypothesis than that the
Doctor was, as he claims to be, a spiritual medium. At the same time I am
not prepared to admit that much.

"What I saw I saw clearly; it was real and devoid of illusion. There being
no one present but the Mayor and thoroughly reputable gentlemen, collusion
by which a portion of the events of that afternoon might be accounted for
is, of course, out of the question; and neither collusion, mind-reading,
nor anything else could account for all that occurred.

"The Doctor requested me to write on seven slips of paper, one on each
slip, the names of six acquaintances, five of whom were living and the
sixth dead. On the seventh my own name was to be written. I had never seen
the Doctor before, and have no reason to suppose that he had ever seen me.
I used my own pencil in writing the names, and wrote upon paper furnished
by the city and county for the use of his Honor the Mayor. When writing
the names I was twenty feet away from the Doctor, and as I wrote upon each
slip I folded it up carefully, so that I myself could not see anything of
the writing, nor tell one of the seven slips from the others. Five of the
names were those of intimate personal friends, the sixth of a man whom I
knew in a business way, but for whom, while I was not at all intimate with
him, I had always a great regard. This man is dead, and has been so for a
couple of years.

"In obedience to the Doctor's request, I placed the seven slips on the
table. Taking the hand of Mr. Barnes, I holding the hand of the latter,
the Doctor proceeded to take the slips one by one from the table. The
first he held a second and dropped. The second he handed to me saying,
'This contains your name.' Upon opening it I found the Doctor to be
correct, and asking him what my name was he promptly told us.

"I confess I was a little mystified, but the Doctor didn't stop there.
Continuing, he picked up the other slips until the fifth one had been
reached. 'This is the name of your dead friend. His name is V. C. W.
Hooker--not exactly, but a name very similar. I can't quite make it out.
He says he will talk to you at another time.' As you saw when I opened the
slip it showed as I had written it the name of V. C. W. Hooper, a man who
was quite prominent in Merced during his lifetime. Just how the Doctor
found that out I leave to others who were there to explain when they have
time after accounting for the mysterious things that happened to
themselves. I cannot and will not pretend to. It was not mind-reading,
however. Of that I am satisfied. For as he picked up the fifth slip and
said, 'This is the name of the dead man,' he did not get that information
by reading my mind, for there were two more slips remaining, and I
couldn't say which was which. That is beyond any explanation. Mind-reading
will not fit it at all.

"One of the party--I think it was Mr. Barnes--wrote the name of _two_ dead
men in his list. Leaving out the first problem--the picking up of the
right slip--putting that aside, how is it to be explained that the Doctor
chose the right name of the two dead ones? Mr. Barnes did not know. He
had not opened the slip; therefore the Doctor could not read his mind. For
myself, I give up the conundrum.

        "Very truly.
            "H. H. MCCLOSKEY."




CHAPTER IV.

CHARACTER OF THE NARRATORS.


To any one who has a fair knowledge of human nature, a glance at the line
pictures of the gentlemen who participated in the events with which this
book deals will tell that they are men of character and keen observation.
In San Francisco and throughout the West many of them are as well known as
the Governor of the State.

Their names need no introduction, and since they have been representative
men for many years it is not necessary to say much about them. For the
benefit of persons who know nothing concerning them, however, the
following information is submitted:--

PATRICK CROWLEY, Chief of Police, was born in Albany County, New York, on
March 17, 1831. When quite young he went to New York and worked in
different printing-offices. He came to San Francisco in 1850, and worked
in the mining-camps for two or three years. He was engaged in the boating
business here, when in 1854 he was elected to the office of Town Constable
on the Democratic ticket. He was re-elected on the same ticket in 1855,
and from 1856 he was re-elected every two years on the old People's Party
ticket till 1866, when he was elected Chief of Police. He held that office
by election for six years, when he quit the force and went into the
brokerage business. In 1878, by an act of the Legislature, the Board of
Police Commissioners received the power to appoint the Chief of Police.
The office was tendered him, and after considerable pressure he
reluctantly accepted it, as he was making an excellent living at his
business. He held the office by election or appointment for twenty-four
successive years. His wide experience with criminals, bunko-men, and all
sorts of tricksters gave him excellent training and amply fitted him for a
thorough inspection of all that was done during the seances. In fact, it
was his boast at the beginning of his sitting with Dr. Schlesinger that he
had helped to trap the Eddies and other disreputable mediums, and that he
would soon expose the fraud in the case in hand.

WILLIAM S. BARNES, son of the eloquent and famous General W. H. L. Barnes
(known all over America as the greatest living after-dinner orator, and
known all over the United States as a Republican orator), is a graduate of
Harvard and a man of fine legal attainments. He is one of the most
prominent Native Sons, and is famous for his shrewdness as Prosecuting
Attorney for the great City and County of San Francisco. It was he who
prosecuted and convicted Theodore Durrant in one of the most marvelous
criminal cases of the century. He was also the star lawyer in the
prosecution of the great Sydney Bell footpad case. Mr. Barnes was the
organizer and president of the Association of District Attorneys of
California; is an active member of California Lodge No. 1, F. & A. M., a
member of the Pacific-Union Club, also of the Union League, of which he is
one of a committee on political action, of the Juarez Manufacturing
Company, of which he is President. Thus his mastery in the legal
profession is no less equaled in his social and business associations.

Attorney CHARLES L. PATTON is Grand Master of California Masonic
fraternity, and is a gentleman of the highest personal and professional
character. He was a strong competitor against Mayor Phelan, and was
chosen by the Republican party a few years ago as the best candidate
against the present (1900) Mayor of the city. Mr. Patton is a man of much
erudition and wide experience with men and books. He, like all his
associates, and like the writer of this book, was and is a skeptic
regarding the truth of so-called spiritual phenomena. His account speaks
for itself.

Mayor L. R. ELLERT is a man of legal attainments and of wide business
interests. He was a popular reform Mayor, and was in office at the time of
the occurrences narrated. He is to-day one of the best-known and most
highly respected lawyers and business men of San Francisco. For many years
he was a skillful pharmacist, and his wide knowledge of drugs and
physiology was useful in the attempted solution of the various problems
presented by the medium.

Judge ROBERT FERRAL is the warhorse of Democracy, and one of the Nestors
of the California bar. He made some of the most spirited races ever
entered upon for Congress, and polled the largest vote ever known for an
unpopular political party in the old days. As a judge and criminal lawyer
of wide experience, as well as by reason of his unexcelled literary
attainments and extended experience in the science of hypnotism and
kindred phenomena, the Judge was an invaluable spectator and participant,
especially as his native wit usually enables him to see through many
things that puzzle other men. Here, however, he stood dumbfounded.

Dr. R. E. BUNKER is a regular physician of high reputation and personal
standing. He was at the time of the matters recorded in charge of the City
Receiving Hospital, and was considered one of the most careful and
competent observers at the seance. Like all others named, Dr. Bunker's
word is absolutely above reproach, and there is not a more competent man
in the country.

THEODORE F. BONNET was at the time of the seance a reporter for the _Daily
Report_. He was afterwards elected to the important position of License
Collector, and is now editor and owner of _Town Talk_. This is one of the
best weekly papers in the United States, and its success dates from its
purchase by the gentleman named. Mr. Bonnet is an Elk of high standing,
and a man of good family and social position. In addition to all these
facts, it should be borne in mind that his long training as a reporter
fitted him in a peculiarly advantageous way for the duties of trying to
detect what was done by the medium.

H. H. MCCLOSKEY was a casual visitor at the seance, being the guest of
District Attorney Barnes. Mr. McCloskey was at the time a resident of
Merced, and was a prominent lawyer and politician. He was also a
Republican State Central Committeeman and was considered one of the ablest
of the party. He is to-day a well-known San Francisco attorney. His
account of the seance explains just what occurred.

These facts, with some of the pictures, will give the reader an idea of
the men whose narratives he has doubtless read with pleasure.

In conclusion, it should be remembered that this book is sold by the
publishers only. It will be sent to any address for fifty cents. If you
have enjoyed reading it, recommend it to the next friend you meet.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Do the Dead Return?, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DO THE DEAD RETURN? ***

***** This file should be named 35537.txt or 35537.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/3/35537/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
