The Project Gutenberg EBook of My Little Boy, by Carl Ewald

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: My Little Boy

Author: Carl Ewald

Commentator: Alexander Woollcott

Translator: Alexandrer Texeira de Mattos

Release Date: March 11, 2011 [EBook #35543]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY LITTLE BOY ***




Produced by Barbara Watson, Mark Akrigg and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net









                                   MY
                               LITTLE BOY

                                  _by
                               CARL EWALD_

                       TRANSLATED FROM THE DANISH
                                   BY
                      ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS




                             MY LITTLE BOY
               COPYRIGHT 1906 BY CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
                      SOLE AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION

     REPRINTED BY ARRANGEMENT WITH THE PUBLISHERS. NO PART OF THIS
     WORK MAY BE REPRODUCED IN ANY FORM WITHOUT THE PERMISSION OF
                        CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS




_MY LITTLE BOY_




I


My little boy is beginning to live.

Carefully, stumbling now and then on his little knock-kneed legs, he
makes his way over the paving-stones, looks at everything that there is
to look at and bites at every apple, both those which are his due and
those which are forbidden him.

He is not a pretty child and is the more likely to grow into a fine lad.
But he is charming.

His face can light up suddenly and become radiant; he can look at you
with quite cold eyes. He has a strong intuition and he is incorruptible.
He has never yet bartered a kiss for barley-sugar. There are people whom
he likes and people whom he dislikes. There is one who has long courted
his favour indefatigably and in vain; and, the other day, he formed a
close friendship with another who had not so much as said "Good day" to
him before he had crept into her lap and nestled there with glowing
resolution.

He has a habit which I love.

When we are walking together and there is anything that impresses him,
he lets go my hand for a moment. Then, when he has investigated the
phenomenon and arrived at a result, I feel his little fist in mine
again.

He has bad habits too.

He is apt, for instance, suddenly and without the slightest reason, to
go up to people whom he meets in the street and hit them with his little
stick. What is in his mind, when he does so, I do not know; and, so long
as he does not hit me, it remains a matter between himself and the
people concerned.

He has an odd trick of seizing big words in a grown-up conversation,
storing them up for a while and then asking me for an explanation:

"Father," he says, "what is life?"

I give him a tap in his little stomach, roll him over on the carpet and
conceal my emotion under a mighty romp. Then, when we sit breathless and
tired, I answer, gravely:

"Life is delightful, my little boy. Don't you be afraid of it!"




II


Today my little boy gave me my first lesson.

It was in the garden.

I was writing in the shade of the big chestnut-tree, close to where the
brook flows past. He was sitting a little way off, on the grass, in the
sun, with Hans Christian Andersen in his lap.

Of course, he does not know how to read, but he lets you read to him,
likes to hear the same tales over and over again. The better he knows
them, the better he is pleased. He follows the story page by page, knows
exactly where everything comes and catches you up immediately should you
skip a line.

There are two tales which he loves more than anything in the world.

These are Grimm's _Faithful John_ and Andersen's _The Little Mermaid_.
When anyone comes whom he likes, he fetches the big Grimm, with those
heaps of pictures, and asks for _Faithful John_. Then, if the reader
stops, because it is so terribly sad, with all those little dead
children, a bright smile lights up his small, long face and he says,
reassuringly and pleased at "knowing better":

"Yes, but they come to life again."

Today, however, it is _The Little Mermaid_.

"Is that the sort of stories you write?" he asks.

"Yes," I say, "but I am afraid mine will not be so pretty."

"You must take pains," he says.

And I promise.

For a time he makes no sound. I go on writing and forget about him.

"Is there a little mermaid down there, in the water?" he asks.

"Yes, she swims up to the top in the summer."

He nods and looks out across the brook, which ripples so softly and
smoothly that one can hardly see the water flow. On the opposite side,
the rushes grow green and thick and there is also a bird, hidden in the
rushes, which sings. The dragon-flies are whirling and humming. I am
sitting with my head in my hand, absorbed in my work.

Suddenly, I hear a splash.

I jump from my chair, upset the table, dart forward and see that my
little boy is gone. The brook is billowing and foaming; there are wide
circles on the surface.

In a moment, I am in the water and find him and catch hold of him.

He stands on the grass, dripping with wet, spluttering and coughing. His
thin clothes are clinging to his thin body, his face is black with mud.
But out of the mud gleams a pair of angry eyes:

"There was no mermaid," he says.

I do not at once know what to reply and I have no time to think.

"Do you write that sort of stories?" he asks.

"Yes," I say, shamefaced.

"I don't like any of you," he says. "You make fun of a little boy."

He turns his back on me and, proud and wet, goes indoors without once
looking round.

This evening, Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen disappear in a
mysterious manner, which is never explained. He will miss them greatly,
at first; but he will never be fooled again, not if I were to give him
the sun and moon in his hand.




III


My little boy and I have had an exceedingly interesting walk in the
Frederiksberg Park.

There was a mouse, which was irresistible. There were two chaffinches,
husband and wife, which built their nest right before our eyes, and a
snail, which had no secrets for us. And there were flowers, yellow and
white, and there were green leaves, which told us the oddest adventures:
in fact, as much as we can find room for in our little head.

Now we are sitting on a bench and digesting our impressions.

Suddenly the air is shaken by a tremendous roar:

"What was that?" asks my little boy.

"That was the lion in the Zoological Gardens," I reply.

No sooner have I said this than I curse my own stupidity.

I might have said that it was a gunshot announcing the birth of a
prince; or an earthquake; or a china dish falling from the sky and
breaking into pieces: anything whatever, rather than the truth.

For now my little boy wants to know what sort of thing the Zoological
Gardens is.

I tell him.

The Zoological Gardens is a horrid place, where they lock up wild beasts
who have done no wrong and who are accustomed to walk about freely in
the distant foreign countries where they come from. The lion is there,
whom we have just heard roaring. He is so strong that he can kill a
policeman with one blow of his paw; he has great, haughty eyes and
awfully sharp teeth. He lives in Africa and, at night, when he roars,
all the other beasts tremble in their holes for fear. He is called the
king of beasts. They caught him one day in a cunning trap and bound him
and dragged him here and locked him up in a cage with iron bars to it.
The cage is no more than half as big as Petrine's room. And there the
king walks up and down, up and down, and gnashes his teeth with sorrow
and rage and roars so that you can hear him ever so far away. Outside
his cage stand cowardly people and laugh at him, because he can't get
out and eat them up, and poke their sticks through the rails and tease
him.

My little boy stands in front of me and looks at me with wide-open eyes:

"Would he eat them up, if he got out?" he asks.

"In a moment."

"But he can't get out, can he?"

"No. That's awfully sad. He can't get out."

"Father, let us go and look at the lion."

I pretend not to hear and go on to tell him of the strange birds there:
great eagles, which used to fly over every church-steeple and over the
highest trees and mountains and swoop down upon lambs and hares and
carry them up to their young in the nest. Now they are sitting in cages,
on a perch, like canaries, with clipped wings and blind eyes. I tell him
of gulls, which used to fly all day long over the stormy sea: now they
splash about in a puddle of water, screaming pitifully. I tell him of
wonderful blue and red birds, which, in their youth, used to live among
wonderful blue and red flowers, in balmy forests a thousand times bigger
than the Frederiksberg Park, where it was as dark as night under the
trees with the brightest sun shining down upon the tree-tops: now they
sit there in very small cages and hang their beaks while they stare at
tiresome boys in dark-blue suits and black stockings and waterproof
boots and sailor-hats.

"Are those birds really blue?" asks my little boy.

"Sky-blue," I answer. "And utterly broken-hearted."

"Father, can't we go and look at the birds?"

I take my little boy's hands in mine:

"I don't think we will," I say. "Why should still more silly boys do so?
You can't imagine how it goes to one's heart to look at those poor
captive beasts."

"Father, I should so much like to go."

"Take my advice and don't. The animals there are not the real animals,
you see. They are ill and ugly and angry because of their captivity and
their longing and their pain."

"I should so much like to see them."

"Now let me tell you something. To go to the Zoological Gardens costs
five cents for you and ten cents for me. That makes fifteen cents
altogether, which is an awful lot of money. We won't go there now, but
we'll buy the biggest money-box we can find: one of those money-boxes
shaped like a pig. Then we'll put fifteen cents in it. And every
Thursday we'll put fifteen cents in the pig. By-and-by, that will grow
into quite a fortune: it will make such a lot of money that, when you
are grown up, you can take a trip to Africa and go to the desert and
hear the wild, the real lion roaring and tremble just like the people
tremble down there. And you can go to the great, dark forests and see
the real blue birds flying proud and free among the flowers. You can't
think how glad you will be, how beautiful they will look and how they
will sing to you. . . ."

"Father, I would rather go to the Zoological Gardens now."

My little boy does not understand a word of what I say. And I am at my
wits' end.

"Shall we go and have some cakes at Josty's?" I ask.

"I would rather go to the Zoological Gardens."

I can read in his eyes that he is thinking of the captive lion. Ugly
human instincts are waking up in his soul. The mouse is forgotten and
the snail; and the chaffinches have built their nest to no purpose.

At last I get up and say, bluntly, without any further explanation:

"You are _not_ going to the Zoological Gardens. Now we'll go home."

And home we go. But we are not in a good temper.

Of course, I get over it and I buy an enormous money-box pig. Also we
put the money into it and he thinks that most interesting.

But, later in the afternoon, I find him in the bed-room engaged in a
piteous game.

He has built a cage, in which he has imprisoned the pig. He is teasing
it and hitting it with his whip, while he keeps shouting to it:

"You can't get out and bite me, you stupid pig! You can't get out!"




IV


We have beer-soup and Aunt Anna to dinner. Now beer-soup is a nasty dish
and Aunt Anna is not very nice either.

She has yellow teeth and a little hump and very severe eyes, which are
not even both equally severe. She is nearly always scolding us and, when
she sees a chance, she pinches us.

The worst of all, however, is that she is constantly setting us a good
example, which can easily end by gradually and inevitably driving us to
embrace wickedness.

Aunt Anna does not like beer-soup any more than we do. But of course she
eats it with a voluptuous expression on her face and looks angrily at my
little boy, who does not even make an attempt to behave nicely:

"Why doesn't the little boy eat his delicious beer-soup?" she asks.

A scornful silence.

"Such delicious beer-soup! I know a poor, wretched boy who would be
awfully glad to have such delicious beer-soup."

My little boy looks with great interest at Auntie, who is swallowing her
soup with eyes full of ecstatic bliss:

"Where is he?" he asks.

Aunt Anna pretends not to hear.

"Where is the poor boy?" he asks again.

"Yes, where is he?" I ask. "What's his name?"

Aunt Anna gives me a furious glance.

"What's his name, Aunt Anna?" asks my little boy. "Where does he live?
He can have my beer-soup with pleasure."

"Mine too," I say, resolutely, and I push my plate from me.

My little boy never takes his great eyes off Aunt Anna's face.
Meanwhile, she has recovered herself:

"There are many poor boys who would thank God if they could get such
delicious beer-soup," she says. "Very many. Everywhere."

"Yes, but tell us of one, Auntie," I say.

My little boy has slipped down from his chair. He stands with his chin
just above the table and both his hands round his plate, ready to march
off with the beer-soup to the poor boy, if only he can get his address.

But Aunt Anna does not allow herself to be played with:

"Heaps of poor boys," she says again. "Hun-dreds! And therefore another
little boy, whom I will not name, but who is in this room, ought to be
ashamed that he is not thankful for his beer-soup."

My little boy stares at Aunt Anna like the bird fascinated by the snake.


"Such delicious beer-soup!" she says. "I must really ask for another
little helping."

Aunt Anna revels in her martyrdom. My little boy stands speechless, with
open mouth and round eyes.

I push my chair back and say, with genuine exasperation:

"Now, look here, Aunt Anna, this is really too bad! Here we are, with a
whole lot of beer-soup, which we don't care about in the least and which
we would be very glad to get rid of, if we only knew someone who would
have it. You are the only one that knows of anybody. You know a poor boy
who would dance for joy if he got some beer-soup. You know hundreds. But
you won't tell us their names or where they live."

"Why, what do you mean?"

"And you yourself sit quite calmly eating two whole helpings, though you
know quite well that you're going to have an omelette to follow. That's
really very naughty of you, Aunt Anna."

Aunt Anna chokes with annoyance. My little boy locks his teeth with a
snap and looks with every mark of disgust at that wicked old woman.

And I turn with calm earnestness to his mother and say:

"After this, it would be most improper for us ever to have beer-soup
here again. We don't care for it and there are hundreds of little boys
who love it. If it must be made, then Aunt Anna must come every Saturday
and fetch it. She knows where the boys live."

The omelette is eaten in silence, after which Aunt Anna shakes the dust
from her shoes. She won't have any coffee today.

While she is standing in the hall and putting on her endless wraps, a
last doubt arises in my little boy's soul. He opens his green eyes wide
before her face and whispers:

"Aunt Anna, where do the boys live?"

Aunt Anna pinches him and is shocked and goes off, having suffered a
greater defeat than she can ever repair.




V


My little boy comes into my room and tells me, with a very long face,
that Jean is dead. And we put all nonsense on one side and hurry away to
the Klampenborg train, to go where Jean is.

For Jean is the biggest dog that has lived for some time.

He once bit a boy so hard that the boy still walks lame. He once bit his
own master. He could give such a look out of his eyes and open such a
mouth that there was no more horrible sight in the world. And then he
would be the mildest of the mild: my little boy could put his hand in
his mouth and ride on his back and pull his tail.

When we get there, we hear that Jean is already buried.

We look at each other in dismay, to think how quickly that happens! And
we go to the grave, which is in the grounds of the factory, where the
tall chimneys stand.

We sit down and can't understand it.

We tell each other all the stories that we know of Jean's wonderful size
and strength. The one remembers this, the other that. And, as each story
is told, the whole thing becomes only more awful and obscure.

At last we go home by train.

Besides ourselves, there is a kind old gentleman in the compartment, who
would like to make friends with my little boy. But the boy has nothing
to talk about to the kind old gentleman. He stands at the window, which
comes just under his chin, and stares out.

His eyes light upon some tall chimneys:

"That's where Jean is buried," he says.

"Yes."

The landscape flies past. He can think only of _that_ and see only
_that_ and, when some more chimneys appear, he says again:

"That's where Jean is buried."

"No, my little friend," says the kind old gentleman. "That was over
there."

The boy looks at him with surprise. I hasten to reassure him:

"Those _are_ Jean's chimneys," I say.

And, while he is looking out again, I take the old gentleman to the
further corner of the compartment and tell him the state of the case.

I tell him that, if I live, I hope, in years to come, to explain to the
boy the difference between Petersen's and Hansen's factories and, should
I die, I will confidently leave that part of his education to others.
Yes, even if he should never learn this difference, I would still be
resigned. Today it is a question of other and more important matters.
The strongest, the most living thing he knew is dead. . . .

"Really?" says the old gentleman, sympathetically. "A relation,
perhaps?"

"Yes," I say. "Jean is dead, a dog. . . ."

"A dog?"

"It is not because of the _dog_--don't you understand?--but of _death_,
which he sees for the first time: death, with all its might, its
mystery. . . ."

"Father," says my little boy and turns his head towards us. "When do we
die?"

"When we grow old," says the kind old gentleman.

"No," says the boy. "Einar has a brother, at home, in the courtyard, and
he is dead. And he was only a little boy."

"Then Einar's brother was so good and learnt such a lot that he was
already fit to go to Heaven," says the old gentleman.

"Mind you don't become too good," I say and laugh and tap my little boy
in the stomach.

And my little boy laughs too and goes back to his window, where new
chimneys rise over Jean's grave.

But I take the old gentleman by the shoulders and forbid him most
strictly to talk to my little boy again. I give up trying to make him
understand me. I just shake him. He eyes the communication-cord and,
when we reach the station, hurries away.

I go with my little boy, holding his hand, through the streets full of
live people. In the evening, I sit on the edge of his bed and talk with
him about that incomprehensible thing: Jean, who is dead; Jean, who was
so much alive, so strong, so big. . . .




VI


Our courtyard is full of children and my little boy has picked a
bosom-friend out of the band: his name is Einar and he can be as good as
another.

My little boy admires him and Einar allows himself to be admired, so
that the friendship is established on the only proper basis.

"Einar says . . . Einar thinks . . . Einar does," is the daily refrain;
and we arrange our little life accordingly.

"I can't see anything out of the way in Einar," says the mother of my
little boy.

"Nor can I," say I. "But our little boy can and that is enough. I once
had a friend who could see nothing at all charming in you. And you
yourself, if I remember right, had three friends who thought _your_
taste inexcusable. Luckily for our little boy. . . ."

"Luckily!"

"It is the feeling that counts," I go on lecturing, "and not the
object."

"Thanks!" she says.

Now something big and unusual takes place in our courtyard and makes an
extraordinary impression on the children and gives their small brains
heaps to struggle with for many a long day.

The scarlatina comes.

And scarlatina is not like a pain in your stomach, when you have eaten
too many pears, or like a cold, when you have forgotten to put on your
jacket. Scarlatina is something quite different, something powerful and
terrible. It comes at night and takes a little boy who was playing quite
happily that same evening. And then the little boy is gone.

Perhaps a funny carriage comes driving in through the gate, with two
horses and a coachman and two men with bright brass buttons on their
coats. The two men take out of the carriage a basket, with a red
blanket and white sheets, and carry it up to where the boy lives.
Presently, they carry the basket down again and then the boy is inside.
But nobody can see him, because the sheet is over his face. The basket
is shoved into the carriage, which is shut with a bang, and away goes
the carriage with the boy, while his mother dries her eyes and goes up
to the others.

Perhaps no carriage comes. But then the sick boy is shut up in his room
and no one may go to him for a long time, because he is infectious. And
anyone can understand that this must be terribly sad.

The children in the courtyard talk of nothing else.

They talk with soft voices and faces full of mystery, because they know
nothing for certain. They hear that one of them, who rode away in the
carriage, is dead; but that makes no more impression on them than when
one of them falls ill and disappears.

Day by day, the little band is being thinned out and not one of them has
yet come back.

I stand at my open window and look at my little boy, who is sitting on
the steps below with his friend. They have their arms around each
other's necks and see no one except each other; that is to say, Einar
sees himself and my little boy sees Einar.

"If you fall ill, I will come and see you," says my little boy.

"No, you won't!"

"I will come and see you."

His eyes beam at this important promise. Einar cries as though he were
already ill.

And the next day he is ill.

He lies in a little room all by himself. No one is allowed to go to him.
A red curtain hangs before the window.

My little boy sits alone on the steps outside and stares up at the
curtain. His hands are thrust deep into his pockets. He does not care to
play and he speaks to nobody.

And I walk up and down the room, uneasy as to what will come next.

"You are anxious about our little boy," says his mother. "And it will be
a miracle if he escapes."

"It's not that. We've all had a touch of scarlatina."

But just as I want to talk to her about it, I hear a fumbling with the
door-handle which there is no mistaking and then he stands before us in
the room.

I know you so well, my little boy, when you come in sideways like that,
with a long face, and go and sit in a corner and look at the two people
who owe so much happiness to you--look from one to the other. Your eyes
are greener than usual. You can't find your words and you sit huddled up
and you are ever so good.

"Mother, is Einar ill?"

"Yes. But he will soon be better again. The doctor says that he is not
so bad."

"Is he infectious, Mother?"

"Yes, he is. His little sister has been sent to the country, so that she
may not fall ill too. No one is allowed to go to him except his mother,
who gives him his milk and his medicine and makes his bed."

A silence.

The mother of my little boy looks down at her book and suspects nothing.
The father of my little boy looks in great suspense from the window.

"Mother, I want to go to Einar."

"You can't go there, my little man. You hear, he's infectious. Just
think, if you should fall ill yourself! Einar isn't bothering at all
about chatting with you. He sleeps the whole day long."

"But when he wakes, Mother?"

"You can't go up there."

This tells upon him and he is nearly crying. I see that the time has
come for me to come to his rescue:

"Have you promised Einar to go and see him?" I ask.

"Yes, Father. . . ."

He is over his trouble. His eyes beam. He stands erect and glad beside
me and puts his little hand in mine.

"Then of course you must do so," I say, calmly. "So soon as he wakes."

Our mother closes her book with a bang:

"Go down to the courtyard and play, while Father and I have a talk."

The boy runs away.

And she comes up to me and lays her hand on my shoulder and says,
earnestly:

"I _daren't_ do that, do you hear?"

And I take her hand and kiss it and say, quite as earnestly:

"And I _daren't refuse_!"

We look at each other, we two, who share the empire, the power and the
glory.

"I heard our little boy make his promise," I say, "I saw him. Sir
Galahad himself was not more in earnest when swearing his knightly oath.
You see, we have no choice here. He can catch the scarlatina in any case
and it is not even certain that he will catch it. . . ."

"If it was diphtheria, you wouldn't talk like that!"

"You may be right. But am I to become a thief for the sake of a nickel,
because I am not sure that I could resist the temptation to steal a
kingdom?"

"You would not find a living being to agree with you."

"Except yourself. And that is all I want. The infection is really only a
side matter. It can come this way or that way. We can't safeguard him,
come what may. . . ."

"But are we to send him straight to where it is?"

"We're not doing that; it's not we who are doing that."

She is very much excited. I put my arm round her waist and we walk up
and down the room together:

"Darling, today our little boy may meet with a great misfortune. He may
receive a shock from which he will never recover. . . ."

"That is true," she says.

"If he doesn't keep his promise, the misfortune has occurred. It would
already be a misfortune if he could ever think that it was possible for
him to break it, if it appeared to him that there was anything great or
remarkable about keeping it."

"Yes, but . . ."

"Darling, the world is full of careful persons. One step more and
they become mere paltry people. Shall we turn that into a likely thing,
into a virtue, for our little boy? His promise was stupid: let that
pass. . . ."

"He is so little."

"Yes, that he is; and God be praised for it! Think what good luck it is
that he did not know the danger, when he made his promise, that he does
not understand it now, when he is keeping it. What a lucky beggar! He is
learning to keep his word, just as he has learnt to be clean. By the
time that he is big enough to know his danger, it will be an
indispensable habit with him. And he gains all that at the risk of a
little scarlatina."

She lays her head on my shoulder and says nothing more.

That afternoon, she takes our little boy by the hand and goes up with
him to Einar. They stand on the threshold of his room, bid him good-day
and ask him how he is.

Einar is not at all well and does not look up and does not answer.

But that does not matter in the least.




VII


My little boy is given a cent by Petrine with instructions to go to the
baker's and buy some biscuits.

By that which fools call an accident, but which is really a divine
miracle, if miracles there be, I overhear this instruction. Then I stand
at my window and see him cross the street in his slow way and with bent
head; only, he goes slower than usual and with his head bent more deeply
between his small shoulders.

He stands long outside the baker's window, where there is a confused
heap of lollipops and chocolates and sugar-sticks and other things
created for a small boy's delight. Then he lifts his young hand, opens
the door, disappears and presently returns with a great paper bag,
eating with all his might.

And I, who, Heaven be praised, have myself been a thief in my time, run
all over the house and give my orders.

My little boy enters the kitchen.

"Put the biscuits on the table," says Petrine.

He stands still for a moment and looks at her and at the table and at
the floor. Then he goes silently to his mother.

"You're quite a big boy now, that you can buy biscuits for Petrine,"
says she, without looking up from her work.

His face is very long, but he says nothing. He comes quietly in to me
and sits down on the edge of a chair.

"You have been over the way, at the baker's."

He comes up to me, where I am sitting and reading, and presses himself
against me. I do not look at him, but I can perceive what is going on
inside him.

"What did you buy at the baker's?"

"Lollipops."

"Well, I never! What fun! Why, you had some lollipops this morning. Who
gave you the money this time?"

"Petrine."

"Really! Well, Petrine is certainly very fond of you. Do you remember
the lovely ball she gave you on your birthday?"

"Father, Petrine told me to buy a cent's worth of biscuits."

"Oh, dear!"

It is very quiet in the room. My little boy cries bitterly and I look
anxiously before me, stroking his hair the while.

"Now you have fooled Petrine badly. She wants those biscuits, of course,
for her cooking. She thinks they're on the kitchen-table and, when she
goes to look, she won't find any. Mother gave her a cent for biscuits.
Petrine gave you a cent for biscuits and you go and spend it on
lollipops. What are we to do?"

He looks at me in despair, holds me tight, says a thousand things
without speaking a word.

"If only we had a cent," I say. "Then you could rush over the way and
fetch the biscuits."

"Father. . . ." His eyes open very wide and he speaks so softly that I
can hardly hear him. "There is a cent on mother's writing-table."

"Is there?" I cry with delight. But, at the same moment, I shake my head
and my face is overcast again. "That is no use to us, my little boy.
That cent belongs to mother. The other was Petrine's. People are so
terribly fond of their money and get so angry when you take it from
them. I can understand that, for you can buy such an awful lot of things
with money. You can get biscuits and lollipops and clothes and toys and
half the things in the world. And it is not so easy either to make
money. Most people have to drudge all day long to earn as much as they
want. So it is no wonder that they get angry when you take it.
Especially when it is only for lollipops. Now Petrine . . . she has to
spend the whole day cleaning rooms and cooking dinner and washing up
before she gets her wages. And out of that she has to buy clothes and
shoes . . . and you know that she has a little girl whom she has to pay
for at Madam Olsen's. She must certainly have saved very cleverly before
she managed to buy you that ball."

We walk up and down the room, hand in hand. He keeps on falling over his
legs, for he can't take his eyes from my face.

"Father . . . haven't you got a cent?"

I shake my head and give him my purse:

"Look for yourself," I say. "There's not a cent in it. I spent the last
this morning."

We walk up and down. We sit down and get up and walk about again. We are
very gloomy. We are bowed down with sorrow and look at each other in
great perplexity.

"There might be one hidden away in a drawer somewhere," I say.

We fly to the drawers.

We pull out thirty drawers and rummage through them. We fling papers in
disorder, higgledy-piggledy, on the floor: what do we care? If only, if
only we find a cent. . . .

Hurrah!

We both, at last, grasp at a cent, as though we would fight for it . . .
we have found a beautiful, large cent. Our eyes gleam and we laugh
through our tears.

"Hurry now," I whisper. "You can go this way . . . through my door. Then
run back quickly up the kitchen stairs, with the biscuits, and put them
on the table. I shall call Petrine, so that she doesn't see. And we
won't tell anybody."

He is down the stairs before I have done speaking. I run after him and
call to him:

"Wasn't it a splendid thing that we found that cent?" I say.

"Yes," he answers, earnestly.

And he laughs for happiness and I laugh too and his legs go like
drumsticks across to the baker's.

From my window, I see him come back, at the same pace, with red cheeks
and glad eyes. He has committed his first crime. He has understood it.
And he has not the sting of remorse in his soul nor the black cockade of
forgiveness in his cap.

The mother of my little boy and I sit until late at night talking about
money, which seems to us the most difficult matter of all.

For our little boy must learn to know the power of money and the glamour
of money and the joy of money. He must earn much money and spend much
money. . . .

Yet there were two people, yesterday, who killed a man to rob him of
four dollars and thirty-seven cents. . . .




VIII


It has been decreed in the privy council that my little boy shall have a
weekly income of one cent. Every Sunday morning, that sum shall be paid
to him, free of income-tax, out of the treasury and he has leave to
dispose of it entirely at his own pleasure.

He receives this announcement with composure and sits apart for a while
and ponders on it.

"Every Sunday?" he asks.

"Every Sunday."

"All the time till the summer holidays?"

"All the time till the summer holidays."

In the summer holidays, he is to go to the country, to stay with his
godmother, in whose house he was pleased to allow himself to be born.
The summer holidays are, consequently, the limits of his calculation of
time: beyond them lies, for the moment, his Nirvana.

And we employ this restricted horizon of ours to further our true
happiness.

That is to say, we calculate, with the aid of the almanac, that, if
everything goes as heretofore, there will be fifteen Sundays before the
summer holidays. We arrange a drawer with fifteen compartments and in
each compartment we put one cent. Thus we know exactly what we have and
are able at any time to survey our financial status.

And, when he sees that great lot of cents lying there, my little boy's
breast is filled with mad delight. He feels endlessly rich, safe for a
long time. The courtyard rings with his bragging, with all that he is
going to do with his money. His special favourites are invited to come
up and view his treasure.

The first Sunday passes in a normal fashion, as was to be expected.

He takes his cent and turns it straightway into a stick of chocolate of
the best sort, with almonds on it and sugar, in short, an ideal stick in
every way. The whole performance is over in five minutes: by that time,
the stick of chocolate is gone, with the sole exception of a remnant in
the corners of our mouth, which our ruthless mother wipes away, and a
stain on our collar, which annoys us.

He sits by me, with a vacant little face, and swings his legs. I open
the drawer and look at the empty space and at the fourteen others:

"So _that's_ gone," I say.

My accent betrays a certain melancholy, which finds an echo in his
breast. But he does not deliver himself of it at once.

"Father . . . is it long till next Sunday?"

"Very long, my boy; ever so many days."

We sit a little, steeped in our own thoughts. Then I say, pensively:

"Now, if you had bought a top, you would perhaps have had more pleasure
out of it. I know a place where there is a lovely top: red, with a green
ring round it. It is just over the way, in the toy-shop. I saw it
yesterday. I should be greatly mistaken if the toy-man was not willing
to sell it for a cent. And you've got a whip, you know."

We go over the way and look at the top in the shop-window. It is really
a splendid top.

"The shop's shut," says my little boy, despondently.

I look at him with surprise:

"Yes, but what does that matter to us? Anyway, we can't buy the top
before next Sunday. You see, you've spent your cent on chocolate. Give
me your handkerchief: there's still a bit on your cheek."

There is no more to be said. Crestfallen and pensively, we go home. We
sit a long time at the dining-room window, from which we can see the
window of the shop.

During the course of the week, we look at the top daily, for it does not
do to let one's love grow cold. One might so easily forget it. And the
top shines always more seductively. We go in and make sure that the
price is really in keeping with our means. We make the shop-keeper take
a solemn oath to keep the top for us till Sunday morning, even if boys
should come and bid him much higher sums for it.

On Sunday morning, we are on the spot before nine o'clock and acquire
our treasure with trembling hands. And we play with it all day and sleep
with it at night, until, on Wednesday morning, it disappears without a
trace, after the nasty manner which tops have.

When the turn comes of the next cent, something remarkable happens.

There is a boy in the courtyard who has a skipping-rope and my little
boy, therefore, wants to have a skipping-rope too. But this is a
difficult matter. Careful enquiries establish the fact that a
skipping-rope of the sort used by the upper classes is nowhere to be
obtained for less than five cents.

The business is discussed as early as Saturday:

"It's the simplest thing in the world," I say. "You must not spend your
cent tomorrow. Next Sunday you must do the same and the next and the
next. On the Sunday after that, you will have saved your five cents and
can buy your skipping-rope at once."

"When shall I get my skipping-rope then?"

"In five Sundays from now."

He says nothing, but I can see that he does not think my idea very
brilliant. In the course of the day, he derives, from sources unknown
to me, an acquaintance with financial circumstances which he serves up
to me on Sunday morning in the following words:

"Father, you must lend me five cents for the skipping-rope. If you will
lend me five cents for the skipping-rope, I'll give you _forty_ cents
back. . . ."

He stands close to me, very red in the face and quite confused. I
perceive that he is ripe for falling into the claws of the usurers:

"I don't do that sort of business, my boy," I say. "It wouldn't do you
any good either. And you're not even in a position to do it, for you
have only thirteen cents, as you know."

He collapses like one whose last hope is gone.

"Let us just see," I say.

And we go to our drawer and stare at it long and deeply.

"We might perhaps manage it this way, that I give you five cents now.
And then I should have your cent and the next four cents. . . ."

He interrupts me with a loud shout. I take out my purse, give him five
cents and take one cent out of the drawer:

"That won't be pleasant next Sunday," I say, "and the next and the next
and the next. . . ."

But the thoughtless youth is gone.

Of course, the instalments of his debt are paid off with great ceremony.
He is always on the spot himself when the drawer is opened and sees how
the requisite cent is removed and finds its way into my pocket instead
of his.

The first time, all goes well. It is simply an amusing thing that I
should have the cent; and the skipping-rope is still fresh in his
memory, because of the pangs which he underwent before its purchase.
Next Sunday, already the thing is not _quite_ so pleasant and, when the
fourth instalment falls due, my little boy's face looks very gloomy:

"Is anything the matter?" I ask.

"I should so much like a stick of chocolate," he says, without looking
at me.

"Is that all? You can get one in a fortnight. By that time, you will
have paid for the skipping-rope and the cent will be your own again."

"I should so much like to have the stick of chocolate now."

Of course, I am full of the sincerest compassion, but I can't help it.
What's gone is gone. We saw it with our own eyes and we know exactly
where it has gone to. And, that Sunday morning, we part in a dejected
mood.

Later in the day, however, I find him standing over the drawer with
raised eyebrows and a pursed-up mouth. I sit down quietly and wait. And
I do not have to wait long before I learn that his development as an
economist is taking quite its normal course.

"Father, suppose we moved the cent now from here into this Sunday's
place and I took it and bought the chocolate-stick. . . ."

"Why, then you won't have your cent for the other Sunday."

"I don't mind that, Father. . . ."

We talk about it, and then we do it. And, with that, as a matter of
course, we enter upon the most reckless peculations.

The very next Sunday, he is clever enough to take the furthest cent,
which lies just before the summer holidays. He pursues the path of vice
without a scruple, until, at last, the blow falls and five long Sundays
come in a row without the least chance of a cent.

Where should they come from? They were there. We know that. They are
gone. We have spent them ourselves.

But, during those drab days of poverty, we sit every morning over the
empty drawer and talk long and profoundly about that painful phenomenon,
which is so simple and so easy to understand and which one must needs
make the best of.

And we hope and trust that our experience will do us good, when, after
our trip, we start a new set of cents.




IX


My little boy is engaged to be married.

She is a big, large-limbed young woman, three years his senior, and no
doubt belongs to the minor aristocracy. Her name is Gertie. By a
misunderstanding, however, which is pardonable at his age and moreover
quite explained by Gertie's appearance, he calls her Dirty--little
Dirty--and by this name she will be handed down to history.

He met her on the boulevard, where he was playing, in the fine spring
weather, with other children. His reason for the engagement is good
enough:

"I wanted a girl for myself," he says.

Either I know very little of mankind or he has made a fortunate choice.
No one is likely to take Dirty from him.

Like the gentleman that he is, he at once brings the girl home to us and
introduces her. In consequence of the formality of the occasion, he does
not go in by the kitchen way, as usual, but rings the front-door bell. I
open the door myself. There he stands on the mat, hand in hand with
Dirty, his bride, and, with radiant eyes:

"Father," he says, "this is little Dirty. She is my sweetheart. We are
going to be married."

"That is what people usually do with their sweethearts," I answer,
philosophically. "Pray, Dirty, come in and be welcomed by the family."

"Wipe your feet, Dirty," says my little boy.

The mother of my little boy does not think much of the match. She has
even spoken of forbidding Dirty the house.

"We can't do that," I say. "I am not in ecstasies over it either, but it
is not at all certain that it will last."

"Yes, but . . ."

"Do you remember what little use it was when your mother forbade me the
house? We used to meet in the most incredible places and kiss each other
terribly. I can quite understand that you have forgotten, but you ought
to bear it in mind now that your son's beginning. And you ought to value
the loyalty of his behaviour towards his aged parents."

"My dear! . . ."

"And then I must remind you that it is spring. The trees are budding.
You can't see it, perhaps, from the kitchen-window or from your
work-table, but I, who go about all day, have noticed it. You know what
Byron says:

     March has its hares, and May must have its heroine."

And so Dirty is accepted.

But, when she calls, she has first to undergo a short quarantine, while
the mother of my little boy washes her and combs her hair thoroughly.

Dirty does not like this, but the boy does. He looks on with
extraordinary interest and at once complains if there is a place that
has escaped the sponge. I can't make out what goes on within him on
these occasions. There is a good deal of cruelty in love; and he himself
hates to be washed. Perhaps he is rapt in fancies and wants to see his
sweetheart rise daily from the waves, like Venus Anadyomene. Perhaps it
is merely his sense of duty: last Friday, in cold blood, he allowed
Dirty to wait outside, on the step, for half an hour, until his mother
came home.

Another of his joys is to see Dirty eat.

I can quite understand that. Here, as at her toilet, there is something
worth looking at. The mother of my little boy and I would be glad too to
watch her, if there were any chance of giving Dirty her fill. But there
is none. At least, not with my income.

When I see all that food disappear, without as much as a shade of
satisfaction coming into her eyes, I tremble for the young couple's
future. But he is cheerful and unconcerned.

Of course, there are also clouds in their sky.

A few days ago, they were sitting quietly together in the dining-room
and talking of their wedding. My little boy described what the house
would be like and the garden and the horses. Dirty made no remarks and
she had no grounds for doing so, for everything was particularly nice.
But, after that, things went wrong:

"We shall have fourteen children," said the boy.

"No," said Dirty. "We shall only have two: a boy and a girl."

"I want to have fourteen."

"I won't have more than two."

"Fourteen."

"Two."

There was no coming to an agreement. My little boy was speechless at
Dirty's meanness. And Dirty pinched her lips together and nodded her
head defiantly. Then he burst into tears.

I could have explained to him that Dirty, who sits down every day as the
seventh at the children's table at home, cannot look upon children with
his eyes, as things forming an essential part of every well-regulated
family, but must regard them rather as bandits who eat up other people's
food. But I did not feel entitled to discuss the young lady's domestic
circumstances unasked.

One good thing about Dirty is that she is not dependent upon her family
nor they upon her. It has not yet happened that any inquiries have been
made after her, however long she remained with us. We know just where
she lives and what her father's name is. Nothing more.

However, we notice in another way that our daughter-in-law is not
without relations.

Whenever, for instance, we give her a pair of stockings or some other
article of clothing, it is always gone the next day; and so on until all
the six brothers and sisters have been supplied. Not till then do we
have the pleasure of seeing Dirty look neat. She has been so long
accustomed to going shares that she does so in every conceivable
circumstance.

And I console the mother of my little boy by saying that, should he fall
out with Dirty, he can take one of the sisters and that, in this way,
nothing would be lost.




X


My little boy confides to me that he would like a pear.

Now pears fall within his mother's province and I am sure that he has
had as many as he is entitled to. And so we are at once agreed that what
he wants is a wholly irrelevant, uncalled-for, delightful extra pear.

Unfortunately, it also appears that the request has already been laid
before Mamma and met with a positive refusal.

The situation is serious, but not hopeless. For I am a man who knows how
mean is the supply of pears to us poor wretched children of men and how
wonderful an extra pear tastes.

And I am glad that my little boy did not give up all hope of the pear at
the first obstacle. I can see by the longing in his green eyes how big
the pear is and I reflect with lawful paternal pride that he will win
his girl and his position in life when their time comes.

We now discuss the matter carefully.

First comes the prospect of stomach-ache:

"Never mind about that," says he.

I quite agree with his view.

Then perhaps Mother will be angry.

No, Mother is never angry. She is sorry; and that is not nice. But then
we must see and make it up to her in another way.

So we slink in and steal the pear.

I put it to him whether, perhaps--when we have eaten the pear--we ought
to tell Mother. But that does not appeal to him:

"Then I shan't get one this evening," he says.

And when I suggest that, possibly, Mother might be impressed with such
audacious candour, he shakes his head decisively:

"You don't know Mother," he says.

So I, of course, have nothing to say.

Shortly after this, the mother of my little boy and I are standing at
the window laughing at the story.

We catch sight of him below, in the courtyard.

He is sitting on the steps with his arm round little Dirty's neck. They
have shared the pear. Now they are both singing, marvellously out of
tune and with a disgustingly sentimental expression on their faces, a
song which Dirty knows:

    For riches are only a lo-oan from Heaven
    And poverty is a reward.

And we are overcome with a great sense of desolation.

We want to make life green and pleasant for our little boy, to make his
eyes open wide to see it, his hands strong to grasp it. But we feel
powerless in the face of all the contentment and patience and
resignation that are preached from cellar to garret, in church and in
school: all those second-rate virtues, which may lighten an old man's
last few steps as he stumbles on towards the grave, but which are only
so many shabby lies for the young.




XI


Dirty is paying us a visit and my little boy is sitting at her feet.

She has buried her fingers in her hair and is reading, reading
reading. . . .

She is learning the Ten Commandments by heart. She stammers and repeats
herself, with eyes fixed in her head and a despairing mouth:

"Thou shalt . . . Thou shalt not . . . Thou shalt . . ."

The boy watches her with tender compassion.

He has already learnt a couple of the commandments by listening to her
and helps her, now and then, with a word. Then he comes to me and asks,
anxiously:

"Father, must Dirty do all that the Ten Commandments say?"

"Yes."

He sits down by her again. His heart is overflowing with pity, his eyes
are moist. She does not look at him, but plods on bravely:

"Thou shalt . . . Thou shalt not . . ."

"Father, when I grow big, must I also do all that the Ten Commandments
say?"

"Ye-es."

He looks at me in utter despair. Then he goes back to Dirty and listens,
but now he keeps his thoughts to himself.

Suddenly, something seems to flash across his mind.

He comes to me again, puts his arms on my knee and looks with his green
eyes firmly into mine:

"Father, do you do all that the Ten Commandments say?"

"Ye-e-es."

He looks like a person whose last hope has escaped him. I would so much
like to help him; but what, in Heaven's name, can I do?

Then he collects himself, shakes his head a little and says, with great
tears in his eyes:

"Father, I don't believe that I can do all those things that the Ten
Commandments say."

And I draw him to me and we cry together because life is so difficult,
while Dirty plods away like a good girl.




XII


This we all know, that sin came into the world by the law.

Dirty's Ten Commandments have brought it to us.

When she comes, she now always has Luther's terrible Little Catechism[1]
and Balslev's equally objectionable work with her. Her parents evidently
look upon it as most natural that she should also cultivate her soul at
our house.

[Footnote 1: _Luther's Lille Katekismus_, the Lutheran catechism in
general use in Denmark.--A. T. de M.]

Her copies of these two classics were not published yesterday. They are
probably heirlooms in Dirty's family. They are covered in thick brown
paper, which again is protected by a heavy layer of dirt against any
touch of clean fingers. They can be smelt at a distance.

But my little boy is no snob.

When Dirty has finished her studies--she always reads out aloud--he asks
her permission to turn over the pages of the works in which she finds
those strange words. He stares respectfully at the letters which he
cannot read. And then he asks questions.

He asks Dirty, he asks the servant, he asks us. Before anyone suspects
it, he is at home in the whole field of theology.

He knows that God is in Heaven, where all good people go to Him, while
the wicked are put down below in Hell. That God created the world in six
days and said that we must not do anything on Sundays. That God can do
everything and knows everything and sees everything.

He often prays, creeps upstairs as high as he can go, so as to be nearer
Heaven, and shouts as loud as he can. The other day I found him at the
top of the folding-steps:

"Dear God! You must please give us fine weather tomorrow, for we are
going to the wood."

He says _Du_ to everybody except God and the grocer.

He never compromises.

The servant is laying the table; we have guests coming and we call her
attention to a little hole in the cloth:

"I must lay it so that no one can see it," she says.

"God will see it."

"He is not coming this evening," says the blasphemous hussy.

"Yes, He is everywhere," answers my little boy, severely.

He looks after me in particular:

"You mustn't say 'gad,' Father. Dirty's teacher says that people who say
'gad' go to Hell."

"I shan't say it again," I reply, humbly.

One Sunday morning, he finds me writing and upbraids me seriously.

"My little boy," I say, distressfully, "I must work every day. If I do
nothing on Sunday, I do nothing on Monday either. If I do nothing on
Monday, I am idle on Tuesday too. And so on."

He ponders; and I continue, with the courage of despair:

"You must have noticed that Dirty wants a new catechism? The one she has
is dirty and old."

He agrees to this.

"She will never have one, you see," I say, emphatically. "Her father
rests so tremendously on Sunday that he is hardly able to do anything on
the other days. He never earns enough to buy a new catechism."

I have won--this engagement. But the war is continued without cessation
of hostilities.

The mother of my little boy and I are sitting in the twilight by his
bedside and softly talking about this.

"What are we to do?" she asks.

"We can do nothing?" I reply. "Dirty is right: God is everywhere. We
can't keep Him out. And if we could, for a time: what then? A day would
come perhaps when our little boy was ill or sad and the priests would
come to him with their God as a new and untried miraculous remedy and
bewilder his mind and his senses. Our little boy too will have to go
through Luther and Balslev and Assens and confirmation and all the rest
of it. Then this will become a commonplace to him; and one day he will
form his own views, as we have done."

But, when he comes and asks how big God is, whether He is bigger than
the Round Tower, how far it is to Heaven, why the weather was not fine
on the day when he prayed so hard for it: then we fly from the face of
the Lord and hide like Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden.

And we leave Dirty to explain.




XIII


My little boy has got a rival, whose name is Henrik, a popinjay who not
only is six years old, but has an unlimited supply of liquorice at his
disposal. And, to fill the measure of my little boy's bitterness, Henrik
is to go to the dancing-school; and I am, therefore, not surprised when
my little boy asks to be taught to dance, so that he may not be left
quite behind in the contest.

"I don't advise you to do that," I say. "The dancing which you learn at
school is not pretty and does not play so great a part in love as you
imagine. I don't know how to dance; and many charming ladies used to
prefer me to the most accomplished ornaments of the ball-room. Besides,
you know, you are knock-kneed."

And, to cheer him up, I sing a little song which we composed when we
were small and had a dog and did not think about women:

    See, my son, that little basset,
      Running with his knock-kneed legs!
    His own puppy, he can't catch it:
      He'll fall down as sure as eggs!
          Knock-kneed Billy!
          Isn't he silly?
    Silly Billy!


But poetry fails to comfort him. Dark is his face and desperate his
glance. And, when I see that the case is serious, I resolve to resort to
serious measures.

I take him with me to a ball, a real ball, where people who have learnt
to dance go to enjoy themselves. It is difficult to keep him in a more
or less waking condition, but I succeed.

We sit quietly in a corner and watch the merry throng. I say not a word,
but look at his wide-open eyes.

"Father, why does that man jump like that, when he is so awfully hot?"

"Yes; can you understand it?"

"Why does that lady with her head on one side look so tired? . . . Why
does that fat woman hop about so funnily, Father? . . . Father, what
queer legs that man there has!"

It rains questions and observations. We make jokes and laugh till the
tears come to our eyes. We whisper naughty things to each other and go
into a side-room and mimic a pair of crooked legs till we can't hold
ourselves for laughter. We sit and wait till a steam thrashing-machine
on its round comes past us; and we are fit to die when we hear it puff
and blow.

We enjoy ourselves beyond measure.

And we make a hit.

The steam thrashing-machine and the crooked legs and the fat woman and
the hot gentleman and others crowd round us and admire the dear little
boy. We accept their praises, for we have agreed not to say what we
think to anybody, except to Mother, when we come home, and then, of
course, to Dirty.

And we wink our eyes and enjoy our delightful fun until we fall asleep
and are driven home and put to bed.

And then we have done with the dancing-school.

My little boy paints in strong colours, for his Dirty's benefit, what
Henrik will look like when he dances. It is no use for that young man to
deny all that my little boy says and to execute different elegant steps.
I was prepared for this; and my little boy tells exultantly that this is
only something with which they lure stupid people at the start and that
it will certainly end with Henrik's getting very hot and hopping round
on crooked legs with a fat woman and a face of despair.

In the meantime, of course, I do not forget that, if we pull down
without building up we shall end by landing ourselves in an unwholesome
scepticism.

We therefore invent various dances, which my little boy executes in the
courtyard to Dirty's joy and to Henrik's most jealous envy. We point
emphatically to the fact that the dances are our own, that they are
composed only for the woman we love and performed only for her.

There is, for instance, a dance with a stick, which my little boy
wields, while Henrik draws back. Another with a pair of new mittens for
Dirty. And, lastly, the liquorice dance, which expresses an
extraordinary contempt for that foodstuff.

That Dirty should suck a stick of liquorice, which she has received from
Henrik, while enjoying her other admirer's satire, naturally staggers my
little boy. But I explain to him that that is because she is a woman and
that _that_ is a thing which can't be helped.

What Bournonville[2] would say, if he could look down upon us from his
place in Heaven, I do not know.

But I don't believe that he can.

If he, up there, could see how people dance down here, he really would
not stay there.

[Footnote 2: A famous French ballet-master who figured at the Copenhagen
Opera House in the eighteenth century.--A. T. de M.]




XIV


There is a battle royal and a great hullabaloo among the children in the
courtyard.

I hear them shouting "Jew!" and I go to the window and see my little boy
in the front rank of the bandits, screaming, fighting with clenched
fists and without his cap.

I sit down quietly to my work again, certain that he will appear before
long and ease his heart.

And he comes directly after.

He stands still, as is his way, by my side and says nothing. I steal a
glance at him: he is greatly excited and proud and glad, like one who
has fearlessly done his duty.

"What fun you've been having down there!"

"Oh," he says, modestly, "it was only a Jew boy whom we were licking."

I jump up so quickly that I upset my chair:

"A Jew boy? Were you licking him? What had he done?"

"Nothing. . . ."

His voice is not very certain, for I look so queer.

And that is only the beginning. For now I snatch my hat and run out of
the door as fast as I can and shout:

"Come . . . come . . . we must find him and beg his pardon!"

My little boy hurries after me. He does not understand a word of it, but
he is terribly in earnest. We look in the courtyard, we shout and call.
We rush into the street and round the corner, so eager are we to come up
with him. Breathlessly, we ask three passers-by if they have not seen a
poor, ill-used Jew boy.

All in vain: the Jew boy and all his persecutors are blown away into
space.

So we go and sit up in my room again, the laboratory where our soul is
crystallized out of the big events of our little life. My forehead is
wrinkled and I drum disconsolately with my fingers on the table. The boy
has both his hands in his pockets and does not take his eyes from my
face.

"Well," I say, decidedly, "there is nothing more to be done. I hope you
will meet that Jew boy one day, so that you can give him your hand and
ask him to forgive you. You must tell him that you did that only because
you were stupid. But if, another time, anyone does him any harm, I hope
you will help him and lick the other one as long as you can stir a
limb."

I can see by my little boy's face that he is ready to do what I wish.
For he is still a mercenary, who does not ask under which flag, so long
as there is a battle and booty to follow. It is my duty to train him to
be a brave recruit, who will defend his fair mother-land, and so I
continue:

"Let me tell you, the Jews are by way of being quite wonderful people.
You remember David, about whom Dirty reads at school: he was a Jew boy.
And the Child Jesus, Whom everybody worships and loves, although He died
two thousand years ago: He was a little Jew also."

My little boy stands with his arms on my knee and I go on with my story.

The old Hebrews rise before our eyes in all their splendour and power,
quite different from Dirty's Balslev. They ride on their camels in coats
of many colours and with long beards: Moses and Joseph and his brethren
and Samson and David and Saul. We hear wonderful stories. The walls of
Jericho fall at the sound of the trumpet.

"And what next?" says my little boy, using the expression which he
employed when he was much smaller and which still comes to his lips
whenever he is carried away.

We hear of the destruction of Jerusalem and how the Jews took their
little boys by the hand and wandered from place to place, scoffed at,
despised and ill-treated. How they were allowed to own neither house nor
land, but could only be merchants, and how the Christian robbers took
all the money which they had got together. How, nevertheless, they
remained true to their God and kept up their old sacred customs in the
midst of the strangers who hated and persecuted them.

The whole day is devoted to the Jews.

We look at old books on the shelves which I love best to read and which
are written by a Jew with a wonderful name, which a little boy can't
remember at all. We learn that the most famous man now living in Denmark
is a Jew.

And, when evening comes and Mother sits down at the piano and sings the
song which Father loves above all other songs, it appears that the words
were written by one Jew and the melody composed by another.

My little boy is hot and red when he falls to sleep that night. He turns
restlessly in bed and talks in his sleep.

"He is a little feverish," says his mother.

And I bend down and kiss his forehead and answer, calmly:

"That is not surprising. Today I have vaccinated him against the meanest
of all mean and vulgar diseases."




XV


We are staying in the country, a long way out, where the real country
is.

Cows and horses, pigs and sheep, a beautiful dog and hens and ducks form
our circle of acquaintances. In addition to these, there are of course
the two-legged beings who own and look after the four-legged ones and
who, in my little boy's eyes, belong to quite the same kind.

The great sea lies at the foot of the slope. Ships float in the distance
and have nothing to say to us. The sun burns us and bronzes us. We eat
like thrashers, sleep like guinea-pigs and wake like larks. The only
real sorrow that we have suffered is that we were not allowed to have
our breeches made with a flap at the side, like the old wood-cutter's.

Presently, it happens that, for better or worse, we get neighbours.

They are regular Copenhageners. They were prepared not to find electric
light in the farm-house; but, if they had known that there was no water
in the kitchen, God knows they would not have come. They trudge through
the clover as though it were mire and are sorry to find so few
cornflowers in the rye. A cow going loose along the roads fills them
with a terror which might easily have satisfied a royal tiger.

The pearl of the family is Erna.

Erna is five years old; her very small face is pale green, with watery
blue eyes and yellow curls. She is richly and gaily dressed in a broad
and slovenly sash, daintily-embroidered pantalets, short open-work socks
and patent-leather shoes. She falls if she but moves a foot, for she is
used only to gliding over polished floors or asphalt.

I at once perceive that my little boy's eyes have seen a woman.

He has seen the woman that comes to us all at one time or another and
turns our heads with her rustling silks and her glossy hair and wears
her soul in her skirts and our poor hearts under her heel.

"Now comes the perilous moment for Dirty," I say to the mother of my
little boy.

This time it is my little boy's turn to be superior.

He knows the business thoroughly and explains it all to Erna. When he
worries the horse, she trembles, impressed with his courage and
manliness. When she has a fit of terror at the sight of a hen, he is
charmed with her delicacy. He knows the way to the smith's, he dares to
roll down the high slope, he chivalrously carries her ridiculous little
cape.

Altogether, there is no doubt as to the condition of his heart. And,
while Erna's family apparently favour the position--for which may the
devil take them!--I must needs wait with resignation like one who knows
that love is every man's master.

One morning he proposes.

He is sitting with his beloved on the lawn. Close to them, her aunt is
nursing her chlorosis under a red parasol and with a novel in her bony
lap. Up in the balcony above sit I, as Providence, and see everything,
myself unseen.

"You shall be my sweetheart," says my little boy.

"Yes," says Erna.

"I have a sweetheart already in Copenhagen," he says, proudly.

This communication naturally by no means lowers Erna's suitor in her
eyes. But it immediately arouses all Auntie's moral instincts:

"If you have a sweetheart, you must be true to her."

"Erna shall be my sweetheart."

Auntie turns her eyes up to Heaven:

"Listen, child," she says. "You're a very naughty boy. If you have given
Dir--Dir----"

"Dirty," says the boy.

"Well, that's an extraordinary name! But, if you have given her your
word, you must keep it till you die. Else you'll never, never be happy."

My little boy understands not a word and answers not a word. Erna
begins to cry at the prospect that this good match may not come off.
But I bend down over the baluster and raise my hat:

"I beg your pardon, Froeken. Was it not you who jilted Hr. Petersen? . . ."

"Good heavens! . . ."

She packs up her chlorosis and disappears with Erna, mumbling something
about like father, like son, and goodness knows what.

Presently, my little boy comes up to me and stands and hangs about.

"Where has Erna gone to?" I ask my little boy.

"She mustn't go out," he says, dejectedly.

He puts his hands in his pockets and looks straight before him.

"Father," he says, "can't you have two sweethearts?"

The question comes quite unexpectedly and, at the moment, I don't know
what to answer.

"Well?" says the mother of my little boy, amiably, and looks up from her
newspaper.

And I pull my waistcoat down and my collar up:

"Yes," I say, firmly. "You can. But it is wrong. It leads to more fuss
and unpleasantness than you can possibly conceive."

A silence.

"Are you so fond of Erna?" asks our mother.

"Yes."

"Do you want to marry her?"

"Yes."

I get up and rub my hands:

"Then the thing is settled," I say. "We'll write to Dirty and give her
notice. There's nothing else to be done. I will write now and you can
give the letter yourself to the postman, when he comes this afternoon.
If you take my advice, you will make her a present of your ball. Then
she will not be so much upset."

"She can have my gold-fish too, if she likes," says the boy.

"Excellent, excellent. We will give her the gold-fish. Then she will
really have nothing in the world to complain of."

My little boy goes away. But, presently, he returns:

"Father, have you written the letter to Dirty?"

"Not yet, my boy. There is time enough. I sha'n't forget it."

"Father, I am so fond of Dirty."

"She was certainly a dear little girl."

A silence.

"Father, I am also so fond of Erna."

We look at each other. This is no joke:

"Perhaps we had better wait with the letter till tomorrow," I say. "Or
perhaps it would be best if we talked to Dirty ourselves, when we get
back to town."

We both ponder over the matter and really don't know what to do.

Then my eyes surprise an indescribable smile on our mother's face. All a
woman's incapacity to understand man's honesty is contained within that
smile and I resent it greatly:

"Come," I say and give my hand to my little boy. "Let us go."

And we go to a place we know of, far away behind the hedge, where we lie
on our backs and look up at the blue sky and talk together sensibly, as
two gentlemen should.




XVI


My little boy is to go to school.

We can't keep him at home any longer, says his mother. He himself is
glad to go, of course, because he does not know what school is.

I know what it is and I know also that there is no escape for him, that
he must go. But I am sick at heart. All that is good within me revolts
against the inevitable.

So we go for our last morning walk, along the road where something
wonderful has always happened to us. It looks to me as if the trees have
crape wound round their tops and the birds sing in a minor key and the
people stare at me with earnest and sympathetic eyes.

But my little boy sees nothing. He is only excited at the prospect. He
talks and asks questions without stopping.

We sit down by the edge of our usual ditch--alas, that ditch!

And suddenly my heart triumphs over my understanding. The voice of my
clear conscience penetrates through the whole well-trained and
harmonious choir which is to give the concert; and it sings its solo in
the ears of my little boy:

"I just want to tell you that school is a horrid place," I say. "You can
have no conception of what you will have to put up with there. They will
tell you that two and two are four. . . ."

"Mother has taught me that already," says he, blithely.

"Yes, but that is wrong, you poor wretch!" I cry. "Two and two are never
four, or only very seldom. And that's not all. They will try to make you
believe that Teheran is the capital of Persia and that Mont Blanc is
15,781 feet high and you will take them at their word. But I tell you
that both Teheran and Persia are nothing at all, an empty sound, a
stupid joke. And Mont Blanc is not half as big as the mound in the
tallow-chandler's back-garden. And listen: you will never have any more
time to play in the courtyard with Einar. When he shouts to you to come
out, you'll have to sit and read about a lot of horrible old kings who
have been dead for hundreds and hundreds of years, if they ever existed
at all, which I, for my part, simply don't believe."

My little boy does not understand me. But he sees that I am sad and puts
his hand in mine:

"Mother says that you must go to school to become a clever boy," he
says. "Mother says that Einar is ever so much too small and stupid to go
to school."

I bow my head and nod and say nothing.

That is past.

And I take him to school and see how he storms up the steps without so
much as turning his head to look back at me.




XVII


Here ends this book about my little boy.

What more can there be to tell?

He is no longer mine. I have handed him over to society. Hr. Petersen,
candidate in letters, Hr. Nielsen, student of theology, and Froeken
Hansen, certificated teacher, will now set their distinguished example
before him for five hours daily. He will form himself in their likeness.
Their spirit hovers over him at school: he brings it home with him, it
overshadows him when he is learning the lessons which they zealously
mete out to him.

I don't know these people. But I pay them.

I, who have had a hard fight to keep my thoughts free and my limbs
unrestrained and who have not retired from the fight without deep wounds
of which I am reminded when the weather changes, I have, of my own free
will, brought him to the institution for maiming human beings. I, who at
times have soared to peaks that were my own, because the other birds
dared not follow me, have myself brought him to the place where wings
are clipped for flying respectably, with the flock.

"There was nothing else to be done," says the mother of my little boy.

"Really?" I reply, bitterly. "Was there nothing else to be done? But
suppose that I had put by some money, so that I could have saved Messrs.
Petersen and Nielsen and Froeken Hansen their trouble and employed my day
in myself opening out lands for that little traveller whom I myself have
brought into the land? Suppose that I had looked round the world for
people with small boys who think as I do and that we had taken upon us
to bring up these young animals so that they kept sight of horns and
tails and fairy-tales?"

"Yes," she says.

"Small boys have a bad time of it, you know."

"They had a worse time of it in the old days."

"That is a poor comfort. And it can become worse again. The world is
full of parents and teachers who shake their foolish heads and turn up
their old eyes and cross their flat chests with horror at the depravity
of youth: children are so disobedient, so naughty, so self-willed and
talk so disrespectfully to their elders! . . . And what do we do, we who
know better?"

"We do what we can."

But I walk about the room, more and more indignant and ashamed of the
pitiful part which I am playing:

"Do you remember, a little while ago, he came to me and said that he
longed so for the country and asked if we couldn't go there for a
little? There were horses and cows and green fields to be read in his
eyes. Well, I couldn't leave my work. And I couldn't afford it. So I
treated him to a shabby and high-class sermon about the tailor to whom I
owed money. Don't you understand that I let my little boy do _my_ work,
that I let him pay _my_ debt? . . ." I bend down over her and say
earnestly, "You must know; do please tell me--God help me, I do not
know--if I ought not rather to have paid my debt to the boy and cheated
the other?"

"You know quite well," she says.

She says it in such a way and looks at me with two such sensible eyes
and is so strong and so true that I suddenly think things look quite
well for our little boy; and I become restful and cheerful like herself:

"Let Petersen and Nielsen and Hansen look out!" I say. "My little boy,
for what I care, may take from them all the English and geography and
history that he can. But they shall throw no dust in his eyes. I shall
keep him awake and we shall have great fun and find them out."

"And I shall help him with his English and geography and history," says
she.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

Minor variations in spelling and punctuation have been preserved.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of My Little Boy, by Carl Ewald

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY LITTLE BOY ***

***** This file should be named 35543.txt or 35543.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/4/35543/

Produced by Barbara Watson, Mark Akrigg and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
